NASA awarded three-year, $20,126,224 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. for maintenance and operation of Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) facilities at GSFC; Fort Myers, Fla.; Lima, Peru; Tananarive, Malagasy Republic; Mojave, Calif.; Quito, Ecuador; and Santiago, Chile. NASA also awarded $27.6 million cost-plus-incentive-award-fee contract to TRW systems group for work on mission trajectory control program and Apollo spacecraft systems analysis program for msc. (nasa Releases 68—113, 68—115)
Sen. Mark 0. Hatfield (R-Ore.), addressing ieee Region Six Conference in Portland, criticized order of priorities by which “survival” was superseded by “our desire to explore new technological frontiers. . . . We must rationally decide if our goal of promoting the well-being of man is better served through huge expenditures to beat the Russians to the moon or through developing methods to feed a hungry world. It is a very black mark on our sense of values and a contradiction of man’s quest for progress when one part of the world competes for the moon while the other part competes for a loaf of bread.” (Text)
Spacecraft for first manned Apollo mission would use 60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen cabin atmosphere while on launch pad and pure oxygen in orbit, NASA announced. Astronauts would continue to breathe pure oxygen in their spacesuits before and during launch phase, at higher pressure than that of cabin to avoid leakage into suits. Spacecraft environmental control system in orbit would gradually replace mixed cabin atmosphere with pure oxygen. Since October 1967, more than 140 flammability tests on full-scale simulated spacecraft at MSC had shown that spacecraft modifications and installation of fire extinguisher and new quick-opening hatch for crew egress had drastically reduced fire hazards. Detailed physiological review of new mixed gas atmosphere had included considerations of operational characteristics of spacecraft and life support equipment. Astronauts would be adequately protected physiologically during all phases of atmosphere change. Crew procedures during period when diluted oxygen atmosphere would be in cabin were only slightly affected, (nasa Release 68—47; O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/68, 1; upi, NYT, 3/15/68, 41)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart successfully completed checkout of Apollo spacecraft cabin flight equipment provisions under simulated mission conditions at North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., facility, (nar Skywriter, 7/26/68,1)
nasa announced first successful orbital operation of two low-thrust space engines during five separate tests in two-month lifetime of Ats IV spacecraft. Ion, or electrical engines, producing thrust of less than 20 micropounds, had been fired for total 23 hr and performed perfectly. Ion engines for future spacecraft were ideal systems for countering gravitational attraction between spacecraft, moon and sun, and elliptical equatorial section—to keep satellite stationary for conducting communications, meteorological, and navigational experiments. They had controllable thrust level and direction, higher fuel efficiency, and longer fuel life than Chemically propelled engines. Reservoir of 1/io lb cesium could keep synchronous satellite stationary for more than three years. Before test, propulsion experts had expected ion engine firings might create radio frequency interference. Test showed no interference. Two more ion engines were planned for testing aboard ATS—E, scheduled for August 1969 launch, (nasa Release 68-205)
The seven fat years of the space effort are ended, and the seven lean years have begun,” William Hines wrote in Washington Sunday Star. During FYs 1962—1968 Congress had granted nasa more than $30 billion. In FY 1969 agency would be limited to slightly under $4 billion. Transition from fat to lean was “completely understandable.” NASA had received favored treatment because it had high-priority goal, but with attainment now in sight, NASA was no longer in priority position. “Beginning of the end” came in FY 1967 when funding fell nearly $250 million from 1966 level. Budget for FY 1968 was down $400 million from FY 1967, and cut from FY 1968 to 1969 probably would be close to half billion dollars. With current inflation added, NASA “will be lucky to have $4 billion,” he said. Agency would be operating in 1969 “at an economic level lower than that of six years ago when the moon program—and the fat years—were just getting started.” (W Star, 6/9/68, E7)
dod announced usn had selected Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. to continue to contract definition phase for F—14A aircraft, formerly called YFX—1. Selection of contractor was scheduled for January 1969. (dod Release 1109-68; WSJ, 12/18/68; VPI, W Star, 12/18/68, A6) elliptical transfer orbit with 22,590-mi (36,355.1-km) apogee, 161.9-mi (260.5-km) perigee, 642.9-min period, and 28.8° inclination. All systems were functioning normally. On Dec. 20 apogee motor was fired to kick satellite into planned near-synchronous orbit over Atlantic at 51° west longitude with 22,328.2-mi (35,933.8-km) apogee, 21,833.4mi (33,137.5-km) perigee, 0.79° inclination, and 3.25° per day eastward orbital drift. Intelsatr-III F—2, first successful launch in Intelsat III series, was backup to Intelsat—III F—1 (Intelsat III—A) which had been destroyed minutes after launch Sept. 18 when launch vehicle began to break up. Satellite was scheduled to begin commercial service Jan. 2, 1969 [see Dec. 28], handling up to 1,200 voice circuits or four TV channels. By Jan. 29, 1969, all Atlantic area service except NASA Apollo traffic would be transferred to Intelsat—III F—2 from other Atlantic comsats. Intelsat I (Early Bird) and Intelsat—II F—3 (Atlantic II). Etam, W. Va., earth station would become prime East Coast terminal and Andover, Me., station would be removed from service preparatory to its use as prime terminal for Intelsat—III F-^1. NASA Apollo communications would be maintained through Intelsat—II F—3 with 42-ft terminal antenna at Andover, (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Release 68-69; Stevens, NYT, 12/19/68, 1; AP, W Post, 12/19/68, A3)
Apollo 7 spacecraft and launch vehicle were electrically mated at ksc Launch Complex 34. (NASA Apollo Status Summary, 9/4/68)
Apollo 7 editorial comment: Washington Post: “. . . as the men in the space program go over the data on Apollo 7 and consider the alternatives of manned or unmanned flight on Apollo 8, they must not allow anyone’s desire to heat the Russians, or to get around the moon by the end of 1968, or to fan public interest in the future of space exploration to enter into their calculations. Only if they are convinced that our knowledge is sufficient, our spacecraft is totally adequate, and our men are ready should they give the go to Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders for a Christmas trip into space.”(IF Post, 10/23/68, A24) Washington Evening Star: “To those who have made a close study of the space program, [Walter M.] Schirra is the astronaut’s astronaut; the man whose ability stands out in that company of the superable. To those in the know, Schirra is the mischievous perfectionist, the naval officer who lives by the book w'hen he isn’t too busy carrying out an elaborate practical joke. But Schirra will surely be remembered by the public as the astronaut who caught cold, who growled when the alarm clock rang, and who blew up when he was pushed too far. And it may be that Schirra’s greatest contribution to the space program is that he, the most superlative of the supermen, forcefully demonstrated to the world that his is completely and refreshingly human.” (W Star, 10/23/68, A20) Baltimore Sun: “The toting up and analysis of all the information brought home this time must be left to the teams of experts. So must the decisions as to what comes next, and the planning such decisions call for. The public is content to know that three men in a spaceship have added another brave and brilliant chapter to a history of which all of us are unreservedly proud.” (B Sun, 10/23/68, A6)
nasa announced personnel changes: Samuel H. Hubbard, omsf Special Assistant, Gemini Program, moved to Apollo Applications Program Office as Special Assistant for Programs, responsible for ensuring adequate communications and documentation were provided by AAP in support of organizations with program interfaces. Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), Director, msf Program Control, was named Director of msf Management Operations. Jerald K. Kubat of Apollo Program Control would succeed him. (NASA Ann)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, in statement before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, stressed urgency of funding Apollo Applications and advanced missions programs in continuing “this country’s position as a space pioneer.” These programs, he said, “are an investment in our national posture and the future of manned space flight . . . [and provide] the opportunity to stabilize the manned space flight program so that it can effectively and efficiently respond to the challenges of the next decade. We have the resources, the facilities, the people, and the knowledge of Apollo upon which to build, and the crucial question posed by this minimum request for Apollo Applications is whether we are going to pursue the manned exploration of space. . . . Man will prevail in space. On that there can be no serious question. The only question is whether they will be Americans.” (Testimony)
jpl scientists Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren, using tracking data from Lunar Orbiter V, had discovered mass concentrations of dense material beneath moon’s surface, centered below all five circular seas on moon’s near face. They had caused acceleration in speed of Lunar Orbiter V spacecraft, while irregular seas had only small effects on satellite’s orbital velocity. Source and nature of concentrations were not known, but their presence under circular seas indicated relationship to these seas. Further analysis was expected to yield more positive information on size and depth of masses, which might aid Apollo navigation and shed light on moon’s origin and evolution. (NASA Release 68—143; JPL Release 486; Sullivan, NYT, 8/16/68, 42; Cohn, W Post, 8/16/68, A3)
In This Week, Erik Bergaust discussed improvements in safety made by nasa since Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire. Though nasa leaders in Washington and at MSC believed this was “doing the job, other experts in and out of NASA privately are expressing their doubts,” he said. They felt “NASA had been slow to correct [and] ... its solutions have been more political than practical.” Experts insisted, “that while progress has been made, there have been very few significant improvements in NASA’s own management. . . . reports circulating in Washington [since] the accident indicated the conditions that led to the Apollo fire may not have been corrected.” (This Week, W Star, 9/22/68, 7)
The Economist: “What did they think, those three men of Apollo 8 who risked their lives and their sanity to fly to the moon only to report that it looked like grey plaster of paris? What should we earthbound ones think? In New York City, there are at least 2,000 people who would rather have watched a football game and were sufficiently incensed to telephone the television networks and tell them so. The blame is not the astronauts’. A whole series of photographs, some taken from instruments actually on the moon’s surface, some in black-and-white, some in colour, had already warned them what to expect. The buck lies on the desks of the men who for the past 13 years have directed the United States’ $32 billion space programme, and spent 70% of it on getting men into space without planning anything constructive for them to do when they got there. . . . The cost of a manned moonshot is put at around $1 billion, and for that sum you could get a whole programme of unmanned moon launches. . . . “But man does not live by science alone. . . . the greatest achievements of men in space have so far been in the realm of the human spirit. . . . Apollo 8 is part of the unceasing restlessness, invention and ambition of our kind. Have we really any reason to believe that man’s evolution has come to a stop after a bare half million years on earth? It requires arrogance, a closed mind and absolutely no sense of history ... to say that sending men into space is an utter waste of time.” [The Economist, 12/28/68, 112)
Dr. Dinsmore Alter, astronomer, first to provide evidence that moon was not as inactive as had been thought, died in Oakland, Calif., at age 80. He had been director of Griffith Planetarium in Los Angeles from 1935 until his retirement in 1958. On Oct. 26, 1956, from Mt. Wilson, Calif., he had seen apparent mistiness at bottom of crater which later led to re-evaluation of concepts of moon. (NYT, 9/24/68, 47)
While Soviet scientists believed in use of some drugs to help man adapt to long space flights, U.S. medical experts wanted to avoid use of medication in orbit because of unpredictable side effects they sometimes produced, Associated Press reported. U.S. astronauts had carried only nonbromide, antimotion sickness pills and these had been used only once, by Gemini VIII pilots Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott when stuck thruster caused spacecraft to roll and forced emergency landing. Soviet representatives at Vienna U.N. Conference on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space had indicated most U.S.S.R. cosmonauts had used depressants for sleeping in orbit and stimulants to counteract fatigue. To avoid need for drugs, NASA selected only highly qualified astronaut candidates and trained them to cope with situations they might find in space. (B Sun, 9/16/68, 8)
X—15 No. 1, flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 3,545 mph (mach 4.96) and 214,000-ft altitude to measure earth’s horizon at 40-mi altitude. Data obtained would be used to redefine horizon as navigational reference for Apollo spacecraft on return flight from moon. (X-15 Proj Off; nasa Release 68-105; SBD, 6/17/68, 229)
In New York Times John N. Wilford said some NASA Hq. officials were “hesitant to approve a lunar orbit mission out of fear of being criticized for taking undue risks by skipping preliminary test flights. They are worried about the spacecraft’s electrical system, which developed some minor ‘bugs’ during Apollo 7, and the propulsion system, even though the on-board rocket apparently performed well in eight firings during Apollo 7.” If lunar mission was decided on, it would probably be launched Dec. 21 when moon’s position to earth would require minimum midcourse rocket firing maneuvers for landing and light conditions would give good view of potential lunar landing site. First astronauts on moon were expected to stay less than 24 hr, to demonstrate it could be done. In time astronauts would make many return trips and would roam moon’s surface in “moon buggies.” Day might come when people would establish lunar colonies. (NYT, 10/28/68, 12E)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V automatic space station [see Sept. 15—21] had carried first living organisms—wine flies, turtles, meal worms, plants, bacteria, and seeds—around moon and returned them safely to earth, Pravda announced. Turtles had lost about 10% of their body weight but remained very active and showed no loss of appetite. Preliminary blood tests indicated no substantial deviation from laboratory control animals, but analysis of test turtles 21 days after flight revealed excess glycogen and iron in their livers. (AP, W Star, 11/15/68, A4; B Sun, 11/16/68, A4)	.
U.S.S.R. would probably launch several spacecraft, possibly containing dogs, on circumlunar missions and return them to earth before launching manned lunar spacecraft, Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky said in Hungarian Army newspaper interview. Quoted in Nephadsreg, he said that first Soviet passengers around moon might be offspring of space dog Laika. Manned spacecraft would not be launched until necessary experience had been gained. (AP, B Sun, 2/26/68, A3)
New observations from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station indicated distance estimates to pulsars had been 30 times too short. Observations from Australia’s Molonglo Radio Observatory had identified pulsar PSR 1749—28, believed to be three times more distant than 10 others observed to date. Despite great distance, its pulses were more powerful than those of all but one other. From these observations, Jodrell’s Dr. Graham Smith believed pulsars lay in distant halo, not in Milky Way. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/68, 74) Dr. Welsh said: “I would place high on the list of benefits those which flow from increased international cooperation in the field of space. . . . stimulated by the universal desire for knowledge [it] has brought somewhat closer together the peoples of the world. ... as the practical applications of space become more evident in the form of weather predictions, communications, and increased knowledge of the world’s limited natural resources, additional strength is added to the foundation for peace.” (Text) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of $1,000, made annually by International Academy of Astronautics in recognition of outstanding contribution to progress of space research and exploration over five-year period, was presented Oct. 18 at iaf Congress banquet to Dr. Zdenek Svestaka of Astronomical Institute of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. He was Chairman of Commission on Solar Activity of the International Astronomical Union, (iaf iaa Release 34; aiaa Release 10/13/68)	, Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov in news conference said U.S.S.R. was not in race to moon with U.S. “The question of sending astronauts to the moon at this time is not an item on our agenda. The exploration of the moon is possible, but it is not a priority.” Prof. Sedov said Soviet timetable for manned expeditions would depend on next series of flight tests using Zond rocket. Zond V was successful, he said, “because the capsule returned safely, which was the purpose of the flight.” Regarding U.S.—U.S.S.R. scientific cooperation, “its successful implementation is very much dependent on international relations.” At present, he said, close relations did not exist. (NYT, 10/15/68, 48) Informal meeting of international space scientists, organized by Northwestern Univ. ufo expert, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, in conjunction with iaf Congress, discussed advisability of world cooperation on UFOs. Several speakers urged international cooperation such as uniform ufo report forms, but it was agreed that no action should be taken until after appearance of Univ. of Colorado report expected later in year. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/16/68,12)	_ Dr. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey astrogeologist, reported to iaf analysis of data from spacecraft that had orbited and crashed into or landed intact on moon had shown side facing earth was largely a basin similar to that of Pacific Ocean. It seemed more like earth than had been previously believed. Lunar interior had been molten. Deep cracks in its crust were lined with craters where molten material had erupted from below. Study of remains of giant crater in western Texas had shown features analogous to lunar craters with mountain in center. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/68,19)
NASA announced it would conduct 29 major launches from ETR and WTR during 1968. Surveyor-G launch, last in Surveyor series, was scheduled for Jan. 7. Launch of OGO—E would include last scheduled flight of Atlas-Agena launch vehicle from ETR; future unmanned interplanetary probes and high-altitude earth-orbital launches would use hydrogen-fueled Centaur. Two unmanned tests of Apollo lunar module and first manned test of Apollo spacecraft would use new Saturn IB vehicle. Three Apollo tests employing Saturn V would be launched from new spaceport complex at ksc. In addition to OGO and Surveyor, 11 scientific satellites would be launched from ETR—four Intelsats, ats—d, oao, oso, Biosatellite-D, heos (launched for esro), Pioneer-D and Skynet eomsat (launched for U.K.). Another 10 scientific satellites would he launched from wtr—four tos spacecraft (launched for ESSA), ogo—f, geos—b, Nimbus-B, imp—g, Radio Astronomy Explorer-A, and International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (joint American and Canadian program). About 250 sounding rockets and scientific probes of upper atmosphere would be launched from NASA Wallops Station. (NASA Release 67—315; ksc Release 451—67)
nasa announced it had selected North American Rockwell Corp, Rocketdyne Div. to provide injector for Apollo lunar module ascent engine under $10-million subcontract with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. Bell Aerosystems Co., also under subcontract to Grumman, would continue to provide engine hardware for assembly with the injector. (nasa Release 68—164; msc Release 68-71; WSJ, 9/26/68, 3)
nasa awarded Allis-Chalmers $3,500,000 contract to flight-qualify Multimission Fuel Cell Assembly, an improved fuel cell electrical power system for Apollo Applications (aa) program. System had been developed under three previous NASA contracts since 1962. Allis-Chalmers would produce two assemblies for use in qualification program and two for delivery to msc. (NASA Procurement Off; MCS Roundup, 12/6/68,
nasa successfully launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from WSMR. First rocket carried Naval Research Laboratory and Univ. of Maryland payload to 111.3-mi (179-km) altitude to flight-test flight design verification unit (fdvu) of high-resolution spectroheliograph planned for use on Apollo Telescope Mount-A. Second rocket carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 93.7-mi (151-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution x-ray pictures of active region of sun during solar flare and general x-ray emission of solar corona. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but payload of first rocket failed to separate, preventing functioning of parachute recovery system, (nasa Rpts srl)
Effects of manned space flight program on communities surrounding NASA space flight centers were discussed in Monthly Labor Review. South had gained most from 1967 decision to proceed with Apollo Program. Total civil service and contractor employment increase of 66,000 in five states bordering Gulf of Mexico was about 5% of area’s increase in total nonagricultural employment. However, economic significance of program had not been uniform. Employment at Mississippi Test Facility exceeded half of total employment in Hancock County in 1966, while space employment in Houston, Texas, was less than 2% of total employment. Space employment accounted for slightly more than 7% of total employment growth in Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi since 1961. Employment growth brought population growth, caused expansion of school facilities and faculties, raised per capita income, and increased retail sales. Beginning decline of employment in program in 1966 had moderated economic growth, and if funding continued to decline after 1968 communities would have to adjust to sharply contracting employment. (Holman, Konkel, Monthly Labor Review, 3/68, 30—6)
Unexpected solar flares could cause serious radiation damage to sst passengers and lead to aircraft navigation errors, according to Dr. Adolph Razdow, President of Yardney Electric Corp., Razdow Laboratories Div. Global solar watch, he said, could provide 10-min warning of strong solar flares, enabling pilot to descend to safer altitude. NASA’s Solar Particle Alert Network (span) could give 20-min flare warning to unprotected astronauts on moon, who could then take shelter or take antiradiation drugs. Peak year in solar flare cycle would be 1969. (upi, NYT, 5/25/68, 59)
Commercial irradiation of foods by gamma rays for protection against spoilage had begun, at Nuclear Materials Equipment Corp. (numec), Apollo, Pa. Bacon would be processed initially, although FDA had also approved irradiation for potatoes, wheat, and wheat flour. Bacon would be treated by exposure to 4.5 million rads of gamma rays to destroy all bacteria; product could be stored indefinitely without refrigeration. Neither texture nor wholesomeness would be affected, according to aec and Army tests conducted over past 15 yr. (NYT, 1/2/67, 58)
NASA said one mile of coaxial cable had been laid in two-foot-deep trench across Ascension Island in South Atlantic Ocean to link two antennas—30-ft-dia parabolic reflector for contact with Apollo spacecraft and 42-ft-dia dish to link with Intelsat 11—C—as part of chain of Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) tracking, telemetry, and voice communications facilities. Also integrated in NASA communications circuits were Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan) facilities for scientific satellites and Deep Space Network (dsn) facilities to support .lunar and planetary probes. Ascension Island cable was “final link” in two million miles of NASA Communications (nascom). (nasa Release 68—1)
Washington Sunday Star commented on resignation of NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The abrupt announcement, which was notably lacking in the customary ceremonial niceties, was the final confirmation that NASA’s honeymoon is definitely over. The relationship between the space agency and Congress must rank as perhaps the longest, and in many ways the happiest, official honeymoon on record. For six years, hardly a frown or a cross word came between the blossoming agency and the guardians of the nation’s treasure. The amiable and loquacious Webb proved himself an able administrator who knew his way around in the bureaucratic jungle. Through Mercury and Gemini programs, NASA virtually had only to ask, and Congress was ready to give. Then came the Apollo tragedy.” But Jan. 27, 1967, fire did not cause the change of heart. “It was ... a catalyst that speeded the process. But a growing coolness was bound to develop . . . for the basic economic fact is that America simply cannot continue to meet NASA’s ever-expanding economic demands—not, at least, without a critical weighing of those demands against the nation’s existing domestic, diplomatic and military obligations. . . . “Long before the tragedy that threw the timetable into a shambles, the conflict between America’s technical ability to move men into space and America’s ability to pay the freight could be seen by those who cared to look ahead. . . . Congressional reluctance to commit the nation to further, open-ended expenditures in manned space flight is therefore inevitable. But equally inevitable is the dismay—and in some cases the bitterness—of NASA officials. Webb and his lieutenants can take justifiable pride in what has been accomplished in the brief span of the space age. . . . They have solved problems quickly and accurately that men have never faced before. In the process, they pulled together a scientific and technical team unequalled in the peacetime history of this country. Now they are watching that massive army disband. . . . “Man will someday go to the planets and beyond. But that day must wait until the breakdown of nationalistic barriers makes possible a truly united world space program. Meanwhile, the United States should concentrate on the development of more sophisticated machines, less costly rocket systems and closer cooperation between the military and civilian space programs to avoid wasteful duplication. America’s space effort must not end with the Apollo program. It must be diverted into equally exciting and frequently more rewarding channels of unmanned space exploration.” (W Star, 9/22/68, Cl)
Apollo 7 prime crew successfully completed water egress training in Gulf of Mexico, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 8/7/68)
House unanimously accepted $4.013-billion Senate version of nasa FY 1969 authorization bill (H.R. 15856) [see June 10] without conference and sent to President Johnson for signature. Final bill, $357,027 million less than nasa request, reduced funds asked for Apollo program by $13.8 million, to $2,025 billion; cut Apollo Applications from requested $439.6 million to $253.2 million; and halved advanced missions funds, to $2.5 million. It increased House figure of $11.7 million for nerva program to $55 million, still $5 million under request. Lunar and planetary exploration funds were cut from requested $107.3 million to $92.3 million, and space applications from $112.2 to $98.7 million. Final authorization figures were $3.37 billion for total r&d, $603,173 million for administrative operations ($45,027-million reduction), and $39.6 million for construction of facilities. All items were subject to appropriations bills, not yet passed. (CR, 6/18/68, H5052-3; Lannan, W Star, 6/19/68, D9; SBD, 6/19/68, 239; Science, 6/28/68, 1432)
NASA outlined six steps which would lead to final decision during week of Nov. 11 on next Apollo manned mission. Apollo 8, scheduled for December, was planned as manned earth-orbital mission on Saturn V vehicle. Because of Apollo 7 success, nasa was considering alternative mission possibilities: earth-orbital mission deeper into space, circumlunar flyby, and lunar orbit. Steps—laid out by Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, and Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips—were: detailed analysis and review of Apollo 7 results to determine any necessary spacecraft changes; final certification of solutions to Apollo 6 problems; certification of strengthened Saturn V 2nd and 3rd stage fuel lines and elimination of pogo in 1st stage; completion of ground tests before Apollo 8 command and service module (csm) certification for lunar flight; completion of flight computer programs for deep space and lunar missions; rehearsal of CSM operations tests with mathematical models and delivery of Apollo 8 cm computer program; and completion of design certification reviews of launch vehicle and spacecraft subsystems. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, said, “The final decision on whether to send Apollo 8 around the Moon will be made after a thorough assessment of the total risks involved and the total gains to be realized in this next step toward a manned lunar landing. We will fly the most advanced mission for which we are fully prepared that does not unduly risk the safety of the crew.” (NASA Release 68-190; upi, NYT, 10/29/68,14)
Charles W. Mathews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, addressed Society of Automotive Engineers Space Technology Conference in Washington, D.C.: “A major goal of the Apollo Applications Program is to accelerate the evolution of the utility of space flight using the very major capability that has been developed in the Apollo Program. . . . First, our experience to date leads to the conclusion that the utility of space flight will be greatly enhanced by the participation of men onboard the spacecraft. Second, in manned space flight our ability to maintain operations for durations considerably in excess of those now obtained is necessary for efficient operations. . . . The initial step in this approach is the establishment of a workshop in earth orbit.” Saturn IB orbiting workshop, manned after launch by three-man crew, would be followed by manned Apollo Telescope Mount, which would dock with workshop for 56-day mission to study solar phenomena—“first application of man in space to conduct advanced scientific experiments.” Features and operating modes of Saturn V workshop, to follow, would be based on information gained from Saturn IB workshop. (Text)
MSFC announced award to Harvard Univ. of $1,942,300 supplementary contract for development of UV scanning spectrometer to be flown as solar experiment on first launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. Award increased total value to $6,458,544 for experiments for use with manned solar observatories, (msfc Release 68-68; SBD, 4/8/68, 210)
NASA announced appointment of William C. Schneider, Apollo Mission Director, as Director of Apollo Applications, succeeding late Harold T. Luskin, who died Nov. 25. George H. Hage, Deputy Director of Apollo Program, would be Acting Apollo Mission Director in addition to his present duties, (nasa Release 68-217)
Dr. Kurt Debus, Director of ksc, said Saturn IB Launch Complexes 34 and 37 would be put on standby basis until beginning of Apollo Applications program in late 1970, with reduction of 1,315 personnel. Shutdown, forced by space budget cuts, would save nasa $20 million. Some 10% of 2,400 contract work force would be affected, with 1,000 engineers and technicians continuing to work in other areas. Complexes were to have been maintained in event Saturn V launch vehicle encountered serious development problems, but Dr. Debus said this insurance was no longer needed, (ksc Release 463-68; AP, B Sun, 10/16/68, A7)
Five ellipse-shaped, three- by five-mile lunar landing areas were selected for astronaut safety considerations by nasa Apollo Site Selection Board. First two sites were in Sea of Tranquility, third was in Central Bay, and fourth and fifth were in Ocean of Storms. Sites contained features of scientific, interest, including small craters, raw material ejected from craters, ridges, and faults. Criteria for selection were area smoothness, approach path, propellant conservation, countdown recycling time, free-retum trajectory, optimum lighting, and slope. Board had studied Lunar Orbiter high-resolution photos and Surveyor close-up photos and surface data. (NASA Release 68-25; AP, NYT, 2/5/68, 13) .
nasa and dod would spend estimated $1,406 billion during next decade for parachutes, aerodynamic decelerators, aerial recovery systems, planetary landing devices, and spacecraft escape systems, according to Frank A. Burnham in Aerospace Technology. Technology was marked by rapid growth and widespread applications, including drogue chutes for supersonic aircraft; personnel parachutes capable of being “flown” to spot landings; recovery systems for Apollo, mol, military spacecraft, drones, and test missiles; systems to drop cargo from altitude and deposit it on ground from aircraft in flight; and air “snatch” rescue systems. (Aero Tech, 6/3/68, 26)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, discussing implications of FY 1969 budget reductions at AAS Symposium in Denver, Colo., said he did not find public support for space program declining. Rather, “many people who in the years following 1961 ascribed to the space program a separate, special, top priority status are now realizing, as the national leadership in the space program has understood all along, that the space program must be regarded as only one of a number of essential activities of high priority to which the country must devote substantial resources. . . . The investments made in NASA may well add greatly to the value of investments we will have to make in these other fields.” NASA was “very much in business, and it will stay in business. We are accepting the challenge of the time and will continue a hard-hitting, technically sound program aimed at the most important objectives of the future.” But he described cutbacks as well as elements of strength. “We are doing all we can to avoid terminating completely such important activities as the unmanned planetary exploratory program, but it is not likely that we will be able to proceed with the Titan/Mars 1973 missions.” Saturn I Workshop would be delayed and, “for a number of years to come, missions to use the manned space flight capabilities developed in the Apollo program will be very limited.” Reductions to a budget already “sharply reduced will have many very serious effects on the U.S. position in aeronautics and space. They are only the most recent in a series of cutbacks and, in effect, constitute something like final ratification of a decision . . . that the United States will not, at this time, take the steps necessary to continue the advances of the recent years.” Outlining NASA’s program, Webb said two flyby missions to Mars in 1969 were largely paid for. “Even at our reduced levels, I believe we can follow the 1969 missions with two orbiter missions in 1971, but will probably have to postpone for another year the start of work on the two Titan-launched orbiter and lander missions which we had hoped to fly in 1973.” The 1969 missions “were initiated three or more years ago. We are approaching the end of our approved flight programs. The number of new projects started each year has sharply dwindled since 1966 and we will soon see years go by when we will have very few flights. We may see a gap of 2 years in our manned flight program after the landing on the moon, and a second gap, equally long, after the Saturn I Workshop. “Perhaps the most fundamental decisions ahead lie in the field of large launch vehicles. Can we gap the production of Saturn V or will we have to terminate it?” Question required reexamination of uses of Titan III and of possible development of new, less costly launch vehicles. “Especially important” in this period was continuation of broad program of advanced research for future national needs, including broad university program. (Text) Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.) told aas Symposium: “. . . in the thirty minutes I spend talking about the space program this morning four Tiros satellites . . . will have monitored 10 cloud covers above 40 million square miles of the earth’s surface. . . . During this same period, the Goddard Space Flight Center . . . will have received 340 minutes of data from 37 active satellites; and the NASA communications network around the globe will have sent and received over 750 messages dealing with information obtained from these satellites. . . . “Already the beneficial changes wrought by man’s incredible inventive genius have made their mark. When NASA launched Early Bird for Comsat three years ago, for example, it boosted the capacity of the transatlantic telephone system by 50%. The AIAA has already estimated that this new industry will be grossing $200 million by 1975. . . . “Obviously, this is not all. Too often, it seems, those interested in giving an accounting of the $30 billion invested in the space program stop once they have demonstrated technological spin-off or . . . unmanned communication and weather satellites. The crowning achievement of the space program has really been what man himself, in space, has accomplished during this past decade. For man has ventured into the hostile, mysterious world of space.” (CR, 7/18/68, S8901—3) Martin Marietta Corp. planetary scientist Allan R. Barger, who was doing theoretical work on balloon-borne Venus probe, told AAS that U.S.S.R. data released after Oct. 18, 1967, Venus probe was incorrect. Soviet report had set planet’s surface temperature at about 520° F and surface pressure at about 18 times that on earth. Barger said his conclusions, based on analysis of Soviet report and on data gathered by NASAS’s Mariner V space probe as it flew by Venus’ upper atmosphere, set planet’s surface temperature at about 890° F and pressure at 100 or more times that on earth. (Denver Post, 7/15/68)
Ten years ago NASA officially came into being. In photo, President Dwight D. Eisenhower hands commissions to heads of new agency after Sept. 8, 1958, swearing in ceremonies. At President’s left Is Dr. T. Keith Glenrtan, first NASA A d m in is! tutor. Accepting commission is first Deputy Administrator, the late Hugh L. Dry den. stone of this rewarding effort, we renew our dedication to the guiding principle we expressed 10 years ago at nasa’s launching: that our further mastery of space may continue to be ‘for the benefit of all mankind.’ ” {PD, 10/7/68,1435-1436) During its first 10 yr NASA had completed 234 major U.S. and international launches plus thousands of sounding rocket launches. Of 234 major launches, 189 were launch-vehicle successes and 174 were spacecraft or mission successes, with two missions still under evaluation. For these launches NASA had developed rockets ranging from 88,000-lb thrust to Saturn V with 7.5-million-lb thrust capable of sending nearly 100,000-lb payload to moon. First phase of manned flight program, Project Mercury, had begun seven days after NASA was established. Six manned Mercury flights had proved man could go into space and function as pilot-engineer-experimenter for up to 34 hr weightless flight before returning to earth. Gemini program announced in 1961 had demonstrated work could be performed in orbit outside spacecraft in more than 12 hr extravehicular activity. Gemini included 52 experiments, among them 17 scientific—in astronomy, biology, geology, meteorology, and physics. Seven rendezvous techniques and nine dockings had been accomplished during Gemini. More than 2,000 hr manned spaceflight experience gained through Mercury and Gemini had contributed heavily to Apollo, including 16 flights of unmanned Saturn launch vehicle which had confirmed Apollo engineering concepts and qualified all systems for manned missions. Although Apollo fire on Jan. 27, 1967, had delayed manned missions, it had resulted in safer spacecraft and improved suits for astronauts. Ahead were two manned missions for 1968 and possibly five for 1969, culminating in landing of U.S. astronauts on moon. Facilities at NASA installations in U.S. were worth more than $2.5 billion and peak 35,000 staff included some of Nation’s top scientists. Industrial work force had peaked at 400,000 and was dropping to 200,000. NASA had established global tracking network capable of communicating with vehicles as far away as far side of sun. Its aeronautics program conducted R&D on noise abatement, flight safety, supersonic and hypersonic aircraft, lifting-body vehicles, and v/stol aircraft, nasa’s technological advances included development of new electronic parts, alloys, adhesives, lubricants, valves, and pumps, as well as progress in miniaturization. More than 2,500 technical innovations applicable in industry, medicine, and other nonaerospace activities had resulted from 10 yr of nasa progress. In Christian Science Monitor, Neal Stanford said, “It is . . . science satellites and the new technology developed that are counted on to return to the tax-paying public the dividends that some say will make space the best investment man ever made.” (Marshall Star, 9/25/68, 5; Wilford, NYT, 10/1/68; CSM, 10/5/68) In Washington Sunday Star special report, “A Decade in Space,” John Lannan commented on NASA’s 10th anniversary: “. . . the space agency’s real promise for improving the general welfare of mankind as set forth in the Space Act which brought it into being has apparently been too slow in being fulfilled. The fact that the space investment is only now starting to pay off, and at an increasingly rapid pace, is going unnoticed in the glare of present problems, past mishaps and the imminence of the Apollo venture. Where NASA’s real goals lie are in the future—the near future and the near earth. Spin-off, the serendipity of technology, has long been used as a justification for the vast sums poured into space, but little beyond Teflon-coated frying pans have impinged on the tax-payer’s mind.” (W Star, 9/29/68, Al) NASA Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs Jacob E. Smart wrote in Space Digest: “The tenth anniversary . . . marks the end of a decade of concerted effort across a broad front to advance the nation’s capabilities in aeronautics and space. It has been a decade of accomplishment that has few peers in this country’s history. . . . the good working relationships . . . between NASA and DOD have been of immeasurable benefit to them both, and the nation’s space effort is the stronger for it. . . . with the prospect of tighter budgets likely, the maintenance of such relationships—and their improvement—assumes an increasing importance. The need to stretch the appropriations dollars to the maximum may be partly met by fresh efforts to find common ground where cooperation will produce economies as well as mutual benefits.” (Space Digest, 10/68, 68—70) In Space Digest Gen. James Ferguson, Commander of afsc, described “A Decade of Cooperation—The Military-NASA Interface.” afsc’s FY 1969 NASA support expenditures “amounted to millions of dollars and thousands of man-years in effort. The sums of money, and, more important, the human technological resources we are currently expending on the nation’s space programs are of great consequence since they are the foundations of our future benefits. ... we are acutely aware that the fate of future generations lies in space. ... It is a sad commentary to state that technology has provided us with the means to conduct wars. But it is heartening to realize that one day technology will provide us with the means to prevent wars. {Space Digest, 10/68, 71-3)	_
Cal Tech said Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar observatories were keeping close watch for developing sunspots that might threaten Apollo 8 astronauts with dangerous x-ray radiation. (Reuters, W Post, 12/5/68, H9) December 4: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 454-mi (730.6-km) apogee, 94-mi (151.3-km) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 106.2° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 12. (Pres Rpt 68)
Explorer XXXV (imp—e), sixth spacecraft in Interplanetary Explorer series, completed one year of operation in lunar orbit. Seven of eight onboard experiments and all spacecraft systems were 100% operational. Eighth experiment had 5% degradation in performance. Since July 19, 1967 launch, satellite had shown that positive ions from solar wind crashed directly into lunar surface and had verified existence of solar wind void directly behind moon, enabling scientists to deduce information on moon’s electrical conductivity and internal temperature. (nasa Proj Off)
In Paris Match, Raymond Cartier said, “With Apollo 8 the summit is human daring is attained.” (Paris Match, 12/28/68, 37)
Barron’s editorial criticized concentration of space funding on manned lunar program rather than on military: “Congress in its wisdom already has curtailed funds for manned flights after the lunar landing— the so-called Apollo Applications Program—and it could usefully wield an even sharper axe. The money might far better go toward the military exploitation of space, which, for the past seven years, has suffered from dangerous neglect. Thus, out of the vast sums spent on space, at most one dollar in six has had a ^military bearing. In turn, with the possible exception of the Manned Orbital Laboratory . . . nearly every cent of the so-called military budget has gone for hardware with a passive or defensive aim, notably satellites for reconnaissance, communications, navigation and weather forecasting. In striking contrast, the Soviet Union has developed and tested ... a weapon aptly known as Scrag, which can hurl a guided missile carrying a nuclear payload of 15 megatons or more into a partial orbit (hence, fractional) round the earth. To anyone in his right mind, FOBS constitutes a gross violation of the outer space treaty, which prohibits the placing of nuclear warheads in orbit. However, according to the confused legal eagles in the State Department and Pentagon (if not to some future hapless populace which finds itself on ground zero), anything less than a full orbit goes. ... In the interest of survival, here is one balance the U.S must move swiftly to redress. . . . The first duty of government is to protect its people. Neither the Kennedy nor the Johnson Administration has honored that trust.” (Barron’s, 10/14/68, 15)
In Washington Sunday Star, William Hines reported results of query of eight eminent scientists on most important single decision related to science and technology which faced President-elect Richard M. Nixon early in his administration. Consensus was: shaping of long-term science policy. Also cited were need for reexamination of priorities and goals, with firm decision on extent to which science and higher education should receive Government support; creation of Dept, of Science in cabinet or stronger Science-Government communication lines; reassessment of space funding and other “big science” projects, including proton accelerators; greater emphasis on social goals; vigorous antipollution efforts; and more imaginative use of science and technology as instruments of national policy. None of eight scientists advocated abandonment of space program after culmination of Apollo project. Alvin M. Weinberg, Director of Oak Ridge National Lab., said of space program, “This thing takes so very much money that it’s hard to get excited about any other decision in science until this one has been made. What should be its level in the 1970s? We have become accustomed to something like four or five billion dollars a year, but I doubt very much that this is a level the new President is likely to concur in.” (W Star, 12/29/68, C3)
ARC reported that 90 U.S. scientists at ARC working group sessions had agreed electromagnetic systems would provide best data on moon’s interior and recommended three techniques, magnetometer systems, radio-frequency systems, and radar. Magnetometer systems could measure blocking of fluctuating solar magnetic field borne by solar wind by using network of emplacements on moon’s surface. Highly conductive hot lunar core would cut off field completely, while cold core would let most of field pass through. Magnetometer on lunar crawler could make similar measurements to find highly conductive masses of water, lava, or ore. Radio-frequency probes could make inexpensive subsurface surveys through spacecraft radio signals which would penetrate moon’s surface and bounce back to be measured as to wave characteristics. Wave-change data could help define ore, ice deposits, or permafrost. High-frequency radar systems could study lunar surface through radar bounced off moon from earth with return signal received by earth antennas, or beamed from spacecraft in lunar orbit or from lunar crawler at lunar surface, with return signals received by spacecraft or crawler, (arc Release 68—9)
Proposal for four additional basic Block II Apollo spacecraft command and service modules would be made by nar Space Div. in accordance with NASA request. Action would bring total purchase to 19 for flights on Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. Delivery would start in 1970. (nasa Release 68—12)
At press showing in Dover, Del., NASA introduced fireproof Apollo spacesuits developed after Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire to protect astronauts against extreme heat, cold, and flash fires. Beta cloth of glass fiber was nonflammable, with 1,200° F melting point. Former spacesuit fabric would melt at 700° F and would burn if ignited. New 54-lb suits were ,22 lb heavier but more flexible, consisting of inner layer of cotton underwear and cover layer of Beta cloth, nylon, and aluminized Kapton to protect against micrometeoroids and temperatures between 310° F and —250° F. Intermediate garment contained ventilation unit which, for astronauts participating in extravehicular activity, would be cooled with continuous flow of water while wearer was outside capsule and with pure oxygen inside capsule. Suits and cloth helmet to be worn after removal of plastic headwear were manufactured by icl Industries, Inc., and cost $175,000—$200,000 each, nasa had ordered 100. (Lyons, NYT, 8/3/68, 3; Lannan, W Star, 8/3/68, A2)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on “Soviet Spectacular.” U.	S.S.R. had scored impressive advance with “boomerang-style” Zond V.	“Congratulations are in order. But handwringing assertions that the Russians will be indisputable masters of the universe are decidedly premature. The shot demonstrated two major steps forward in the space sciences: A degree of accuracy in the guidance and navigational systems that is new for Russian spacecraft, and a re-entry system capable of withstanding the searing heat of a 25,000-mile-an-hour plunge into the atmosphere. . . . But the essential fact is that neither Russia nor the United States has yet successfully flown its third generation spacecraft ■—the ships that will eventually carry men to the moon. The outcome of the ‘space race’ . . . will depend on what happens in the Apollo missions immediately ahead and the Soviet manned flights still to come.” (W Star, 9/24/68, A12)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, addressing National Capital Area Chapter of American Society for Public Administration, praised U.S. space program for “unequaled competence and unlimited opportunity.” After 10 yr in space, he noted, U.S. had launched 514 spacecraft into earth orbit and 28 to moon and other planets. “The moon has been completely mapped, the composition and texture of its soil analyzed, and sites . . . selected for manned lunar landings. Our scientific knowledge of Mars and Venus . . . has been advanced tremendously by . . . unmanned, instrumented probes. . . . American astronauts, who have a total of almost 2,000 hours in space to their credit in the Mercury and Gemini Projects, will begin the third phase of manned space flight this year with the first manned launches in Project Apollo. These achievements in space, fruits of the advanced science and technology of our times, mark the first decade of the Space Age as one of the finest periods in American history. And they are forerunners of even greater discoveries and widespread applications to come during our second decade in space.” Dr. von Braun credited nasa Administrator James Webb’s direction with adaptation of systems approach to space research without which “we would never be able to go to the moon.” Approach, Dr. von Braun believed, could also be tested on river pollution and satellite communications. (Text; W Post, 3/21/68, H14)
Malfunction in test equipment apparently caused failure of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes during flight test at usn’s aerospace research facility, El Centro, Calif. Test objective to demonstrate structural integrity of parachutes to slow and stabilize spacecraft before main parachute deployment was not realized; MSC announced repeat of flight test would be made Feb. 5. (Aero Tech, 1/29/68,10)
In policy statement on science New York Governor Nelson B. Rockefeller, campaigning for Republican presidential nomination, had recommended that U.S. postpone manned space program after Apollo. He warned against treating space program as contest between U.S. and U.S.S.R. and advocated use of unmanned satellites for direct benefits on earth, to explore planets, and to study sun. Gov. Rockefeller said if he were President he would appoint commission “to review the whole field of government science.” He recommended President make annual report to Congress on science and technology. (SBD, 8/6/68,149)
New York Times commented on Apollo 8 flight: “Space contains more than enough opportunity for fruitful application of the energies that all mankind can devote to its exploration, development and eventual settlement. There is no need here for wasteful rivalry deriving from earthbound nationalistic and political ambitions. In the face of the most breathtaking challenge humanity has ever faced, the only rational response is cooperation to make space an arena of unity and international brotherhood. Man’s hopes and prayers ride with the pre-Christmas voyagers. After them must come ships bearing the United Nations flag, each carrying men of different citizenship, language, political and religious convictions and color.” (NYT, 12/22/68, E10)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had told Apollo project contractors that U.S.S.R. was developing a “large booster, larger by a factor of two, than our Saturn V,” New York Times’ John N. Wilford reported. Wilford said estimate was part of warning to Apollo team that unless they speeded their efforts, U.S.S.R. might beat U.S. to manned lunar landing. With Dr. Mueller in Europe, NASA spokesman had said he did not know basis of information. Previously, there had been no public statement indicating U.S.S.R. might be working on rocket with greater than 10-million-lb thrust. Saturn V had 7.5-million-lb thrust. (NYT, 8/14/68,11)
In Moscow interview with Turin, Italy, newspaper La Stampa, Soviet space scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov said U.S.S.R. was concentrating on perfecting unmanned spaceships for exploration of celestial bodies deeper in space than moon. “There does not exist at present a similar project [to Apollo 8] in our program. In the near future we will not send a man around the moon. We start from the principle that certain problems can he resolved with the use of automatic soundings.” Sedov hailed Apollo 8 mission as “a great scientific conquest.” (upi, W Post, 12/29/68, A4)
Canadian Black Brandt IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreria. do Inferno Range near Natal, Brazil. It carried msc Space Physics Div. 80-lb South Atlantic Anomaly Probe (saap) experiment package containing speedometer, magnetometers, ion chambers, and heavy ion detector to 502-mi (806-km) altitude to provide fast response capability for measuring radiation dose and dose rate at orbital altitude over South Atlantic. Project, cooperative effort of NASA and Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) in support of Apollo program, would use data to study dynamics of inner Van Allen belt and possible radiation hazard to astronauts on low-altitude missions, (nasa Releases 68—94, 68—97K; nasa Rpt SRL; SBD, 6/13/68, 213)
usaf awarded Big Three Industrial Gas and Equipment Co. $1,156,845 fixed-price contract for production of propellant nitrogen to support Project Apollo at ksc. (dod Release 183—68)
Intelsat—III F—2 began carrying segment of coverage of Apollo 8 to Europe. It transmitted moon pictures from capsule and relayed TV coverage of Pacific splashdown to Europe and Puerto Rico. Intelsat II satellites over Atlantic and Pacific each reserved about 100 voice circuits for NASA support communications with Apollo 8. Ats II and III augmented commercial communications coverage and transmitted limited number of weather photos, (ossa; nasa Release 69—6)
nasa Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) told press at nasa Hq. briefing that Apollo 6 mission, in spite of anomalies, was “a safe mission from a crew safety standpoint” as demonstrated by spacecraft’s recovery in excellent condition after performing an alternate mission. He cited three substantial technical problems—J—2 engine failure because of fuel leak, amplitude of oscillations during 1st-stage burn (pogo effect), and apparent separation of large piece of paint or skin from lunar module adapter during ascent—and one procedural problem—premature shutdown of second of two 2nd-stage engines because of wiring error made by North American Rockwell Corp. which was not discovered by nasa in prelaunch tests. He said all could be corrected. From demonstrations of Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and information gained from Apollo 6 Gen. Phillips said he had determined “the course of actioh . . . necessary to correct and demonstrate the correction of the problems and . . . recommended to the Administrator of nasa that we proceed with preparations for the manned flight of 205 with the 101 spacecraft which is planned to be the first manned flight in Apollo, and ... a Saturn IB.” He also recommended that NASA prepare third Saturn V (No. 503) for manned flight in late 1968 with option to revert to unmanned mission if necessary corrections did not meet requirements to ensure crew safety on manned mission. NASA Administrator James E. Webb’s decision on Gen. Phillips’ recommendation was expected shortly. (Transcript; W Post, 4/25/68, A9)
nasa announced award of $4,521,671 contract to Honeywell, Inc., for management and engineering services during 1968 for Centaur launch vehicle guidance system. Atlas-Centaur booster had successfully launched seven Surveyor spacecraft toward the moon and was scheduled to launch oao, ats, and two Mariners. (LeRC Release 68—3) January 12: XB—70 research aircraft, flown by Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Mallick, reached mach 2.55 and 67,000-ft altitude and accomplished 70% of primary test objectives during 1-hr 54-min flight from Edwards afb. Purpose of flight was to take wing tuft photos and check stability, control, and handling qualities; inlet performance; boundary layer noise; friction; fuselage bending. (XB—70 Proj Off)
U.S. patent No. 3,396,921 was issued to Francis M. Rogallo, head of low-speed vehicle branch at LaRC, for control devices to regulate pitch and roll of paraglider planned for Apollo Applications flights. Rogallo and his wife Gertrude had developed paraglider—called Rogallo wing —under NASA contract. It was free-flight vehicle with flexible wings which could be extended upon reentry to carry astronauts to a landing. (Pat Off pio; NYT, 8/17/68, 37)
msfc announced Boeing Co. had been issued $239,000 contract for 10mo study defining two-stage derivative of Saturn V launch vehicle. With 1st (S—IC) and 3rd (S—IVB) stages and instrument unit of Saturn V, vehicle could place up to 158,000 lb in low earth orbit. Varying the number of F—1 engines in S—IC could tailor vehicle to specific missions. Five-engine configuration could put into orbit Saturn I Workshop with airlock and multiple docking adapter, plus Apollo Telescope Mount and Apollo CSM and three-man crew. Three Saturn IB vehicles would be required to do same job. Vehicle could resupply space stations and could be used for synchronous orbits and unmanned lunar and planetary flights at major savings over three-stage Saturn V. Two-stage version was called “Intermediate 20.” With Centaur 3rd stage, vehicle could send about 15,000 lb to Jupiter or Saturn. msfc also had signed $22,826,736 contract modification with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. for continued production support of J—2 engines used on Saturn IB and Saturn V boosters. Modifications would improve engines’ versatility, (msfc Releases 68-264, 68-266)
nasa announced personnel changes effective May 1: Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Edgar M. Cortright would become LaRC Director, replacing Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, who would serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator until his retirement Nov. 25 at age 70 and would then serve as part-time consultant. Cortright would be replaced by Charles W. Mathews, Director of Apollo Applications Program. Harold T. Luskin, who would serve as Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Technical) until May 1, when he would succeed Mathews, would be replaced by LaRC Deputy Director Charles J. Donlan. (NASA Release 68—51)
Washington Post said of Apollo 8: “Above all, perhaps, this Christmas Eve at the moon and Christmas Day on the way home have told us more about our earth than about the moon. One of the astronauts had wondered on his way to the moon whether, if he were a traveller from another planet, he would think that intelligent life existed on Earth. The answer, from Captain Lovell at least, is that our planet is ‘a grand oasis in the great vastness of space.’ That is an awing insight and it reminds us that man has far to go here at home to fulfill the Christmas promise of Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men.” (W Post, 12/26/68, A20)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved $4,151 billion nasa FY 1969 authorization, adding $119,137 million to H.R. 15856, which had authorized $4,031 billion. Figure still was approximately 5% below $4.37 billion requested by President Johnson. Senate voted $350 million for Apollo Applications, against $253.2 million by House, and $55 million for nerva program, as against $11.7— increasing r&d funds to $3,475 billion. Both houses agreed on allocation of $2,025 billion for Apollo program. Senate committee cut construction of facilities funds by $5.4 million to $39.6 million, but increased administrative operations by $32.4 million to $635.6 million. (nasa LAR VII/48; AP, NYT, 5/14/68; Sehlstedt, BSun, 5/14/68)
NASA announced it had assigned Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan as prime crew for Apollo 10 mission, scheduled for second quarter of 1969 as second manned flight of lunar module. Backup crew would be Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper,
Washington Post commented on resignation of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator: “Virtually from scratch, with the country in a swivet over Soviet prowess, James E. Webb took over the Nation’s feeble space program and drove the United States firmly into the space age. ... he created—in the civilian space agency—the largest and most labryrinthine engineering organization in American history. ... In his eight-year stewardship, NASA proceeded under presidential and Congressional flogging toward the goal of a manned lunar landing ‘in this decade.’ It achieved repeated successes and hut a single important failure—the fire that claimed the lives of three astronauts last year. “It is characteristic of this self-effacing, organization-minded man that he should choose to retire now at his 62nd birthday, practically on the eve of the Apollo launching—a career-capping event if ever there was one. His purpose is to hand NASA over to his lieutenants before the change of administration, on the theory that the agency will thereby have a better chance of riding out next year’s power transfer. The country is fortunate that Mr. Webb is in good health and determined to apply himself vigorously to further the Nation’s understanding of the space age. For him this is far more than a matter of projectiles and orbits; it goes to the heart of the necessities and the aspirations of a great modern society. “Whereas Mr. Webb leaves NASA with its current mission adequately funded and its capabilities well formed, he does not leave it with a set mission beyond landing on the moon. This is hardly his fault. The fading American taste for competition with the Russians in space and the rising competition of other claimants for Federal funds explain NASA’s uncertain estate; its budget has been cut $1.4 billion in four years. ... it will be up to the next Administration and the next Congress to chart America’s future in space. That they have a choice is the singular achievement of Jim Webb.” (W Post, 9/18/68, A22)
New Republic reported interview with Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, physicist and assistant laboratory director of World War II Manhattan Project. Dr. Lapp said: “We are pushing our luck, gambling that everything will work perfectly” on Apollo 8 mission. He advised delay in program so that Apollo 9, configured to have relief-capability, would be on pad ready for launch should Apollo 8 “run into trouble.” Asked if U.S. could afford to delay Apollo 8, Dr. Lapp said, “The basic factor is not really technical. We are racing the Russians to the moon. A lot of people in NASA and in industry are hoping that a successful Apollo-8 orbiting of the moon—or even circumnavigation—will build up public support for an invigorated manned space program. It’s just one of the weighty techno-decisions facing Mr. Nixon. He is committed to funding out the Apollo program—but post-Apollo programs await his decision.” (AP, W Star, 12/9/68; W Post, 12/9/68, 3; New Republic, 12/14/68, 16-9)
On nationwide “Meet the Press” TV interview, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., commented on NASA budget cuts: “We’ve built up a fantastic technology [but] talented people are starting to leave. ... We should let it be known that we are in this for the future, not just one flight.” Cost of manned missions was justified in quest for knowledge not only outward, but earthward, too. Astronauts were “looking at portions of the earth that had never been documented before. A crew can see something and respond to it, on earth or the moon.” Fellow Apollo 7 crewman R. Walter Cunningham said never had Soviet crewmen “functioned in the same operational conditions as we.” U.S.S.R. was putting fewer higher trained persons in orbit, “mainly as biological specimens.” (AP, W Post, 11/11/68, A2; AP, B Sun, 11/11/68, A5)
Apollo 6 (launched April 4) was adjudged unsuccessful by nasa. Although three of five primary mission objectives had been fully accomplished and two partially accomplished, overall mission was not a success. Apollo 6 had entered elliptical parking orbit instead of planned circular orbit when 2nd stage engines shut down prematurely and 3rd stage failed to reignite on command. (NASA Proj Off)
msfc issued report on preliminary results of April 4 Apollo 6 flight. Although “basic source of the difficulties” had not yet been determined, scientists and engineers speculated that wires carrying cutoff commands to the malfunctioning engines were interchanged. First stage had performed as planned and stage thrust was near predicted during first portion of flight. Second stage had performed satisfactorily through 1st-stage boost, 2nd-stage ignition, and early portion of 2nd-stage powered flight. First indications of anomaly were decreasing temperatures on main oxidizer valve and its control line on fifth engine and steady decrease in second engine’s yaw actuator pressure. Third stage performed satisfactorily through first bum and orbital coast. Although engine and stage prestart conditions appeared normal, engine received start signal, and valves opened properly, engine did not restart. Initial data suggested that leak in one of two propellant lines to engine’s augmented spark igniter might have caused insufficient or inadequately mixed propellant for proper start condition. Investigations were continuing on longitudinal oscillation of vehicle. Guidance and other instrumentation functions, telemetry performance, and onboard TV camera operation were satisfactory, (msfc Release 68—74; AP, NYT, 4/12/68, 20)
Apollo 8 launch crew began lengthy countdown on time at ksc at 7:00 pm est, for launch scheduled for 7:51 am est Dec. 21. (W Post, 12/16/68, A12; W Star, 12/16/68, A5; W News, 12/16/68, 3)
Press conference on preliminary scientific results from NASA’s Surveyor VII, which landed on moon Jan. 9, revealed spacecraft could make safe landing in highland area with “major ejecta blanket” (rim of debris ejected from center of crater). Data indicated Tycho region of moon’s surface contained larger rocks, fewer craters, and thinner debris layer than did maria. Fine particles and rocks near Tycho crater had higher albedo, or lighter color. Iron content was lower, accounting for lower density. In Tycho region, where iron group of elements was less concentrated, reflection of light from moon’s surface was greater than from area where iron group elements existed in greater concentration. Low iron content was “probably strongest direct evidence” that moon had undergone chemical fractionation, suggesting it “has been hot, has been melted at least partially, and has been differentiated into different types of rock.” (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 2/29/68, A8; W News, 3/21/68)
Post-launch investigations at msfc and at Rocketdyne Div. of North American Rockwell Corp,, J—2 manufacturer, had revealed J—2 rocket engine malfunctions on April 4 Apollo 6 mission had been caused by ruptures of small-diameter fuel lines feeding engine igniters. Improved designs for lines had been completed and new lines were being manufactured for extensive testing before use in next Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. (Marshall Star, 5/22/68,1)
MSFC announced it had requested proposals from 11 aerospace companies for six-month design and definition study for dual mode lunar roving vehicle (lrv) capable of transporting astronauts on lunar surface and of performing automated, long-range scientific traverses across moon under remote control from earth. Vehicle was to permit manned sorties of up to 6 mi from landed spacecraft, with total round trip of more than 18 mi. After astronauts left moon, lrv would be placed in remote control mode for automated long-range (600 or more mi) geological and geophysical trips for one year. It would collect up to 200 lb of lunar samples and measure terrain, then rendezvous with manned spacecraft for return of samples to earth, (msfc Release 68—274; SBDf 12/3/68, 134; Marshall Star, 12/4/68, 1)
NASA had completed tests to find solution to “longitudinal oscillations” of Saturn V booster which had occurred during April 4 Apollo 6 mission. Tests revealed that natural frequency of vehicle structure and propulsion system frequently had coincided, multiplying amplitude of oscillations. Problem would be corrected by using accumulators, small gas reservoirs, in lst-stage liquid-oxygen prevalves to change propulsion system frequency. Minor modifications necessary to allow helium injection into prevalves were being made on 1st stages of third and sixth Saturn Vs. (nasa Release 68—128; msfc Release 68—158)
nasa announced award to Bendix Corp. of $1,567,550 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for development, test, and delivery of one prototype and five flight-model atm star trackers in 15-mo period, atm, part of Apollo Applications program, would be launched into earth orbit and docked with Saturn I Workshop being developed by msfc for 28- to 56-day astronaut stays in space. Astronauts would use atm to study sun from above earth’s atmosphere, (msfc Release 68—196) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, asserted U.S. could afford multibillion dollar space program; “at least as much as President Johnson proposed this year—nearly $7,000,000,000—and perhaps an appreciable amount more.” (Figure included all Government spending, not just NASA funds.) Persons advocating big cuts in space program were “doing this country a disservice.” Much of high U.S. gross national product was result of prior investment in r&d. “This Nation invests more per capita in research than any other nation in the world and that is a major reason why we have a higher standard of living. The space program is the most active, economical, and productive stimulus to research and development in history. We cannot afford to slow it down . . . unless we think we can afford less investment in the elimination of poverty, less expenditure for health improvement, less income for an expanding population, and less readiness in the realm of national security.” Space program cost, though large, was “not really so expensive when we figure that we are spending less than 1% of our Gross National Product for a technological capability that increases the rate at which this Nation becomes wealthier and more powerful by many times 1%.” (Text; B Sun, 8/29/68, A5; AP, LA Times, 8/29/68) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Library of Congress Research Specialist, said U.S.S.R. was launching more military espionage satellites than any other spacecraft and therefore had softened complaints about U.S. espionage satellite activity. Tracing political and social implications of Soviet space program, Dr. Sheldon said U.S.S.R. accepted “importance of basic research on the cosmic scale” and vigorous exploitation of space applications for civil purposes was definite goal. In long-term outlook, U.S.S.R. talked of “future automated, cybernetics-aided industrial state ... in which space applications, space travel, and use of extraterrestrial resources play a vital part.” He also credited NASA program of international cooperation with some influence on recent Soviet shift toward increased cooperation within and without Soviet bloc, though joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. program for space exploration would probably prove inoperable even if it could be established. (AIAA Paper 68-900; AP, NYT, 8/30/68, 7) m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf) , director of faa sst development, said cost of designing and developing two prototype commercial SSTs would amount to $1,587 billion. Government share in total spending from 1963 through 1972 would be $1,239 billion, or 78%. Contractors, Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., would pay $287.8 million, or 18%, and customer airlines would contribute $59.5 million, or 4%. Principal problem in financing, he said, was protection of manufacturers against catastrophic failure. This would require “some limitation of recourse of creditors ... in event of program failure.” In addition, Gen. Maxwell forecast $2.5-billion to $5-billion market risk for period starting in 1972 and $15 billion commercial risk for period between start of sales and end of century. (AIAA Paper 68—916; AP, NYT, 9/1/68,22)
aec and U.S. Geological Survey experiments had shown that neutrons from man-made californium-252 hitting gold and silver atoms excited atoms to radioactive state; atoms then emitted characteristic gamma rays by which they were identified. With californium, irradiation equipment for technique already known could he reduced about 200,000 times, making it ideal for sea bottom probes and for devices to analyze materials on moon’s surface as well as for mining and industrial purposes. Geological Survey was working with GSFC on use for study of moon, (nea, W News, 8/8/68)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
Finnish professor Arrno Niini said photos of earth brought back by Apollo 8 astronauts might show tiny ring of small dust particles 200 to 350 mi above earth. It would be discernible only in pictures taken with sun behind camera and with sufficiently sensitive film, (upi, NYT, 12/30/68, 2)
Lee B. James, Deputy Director of Apollo Program in omsf, returned to msfc’s Industrial Operations as Deputy Director for Special Activities, msfc Director of Industrial Operations b/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) announced. Before assignment with omsf, James had been manager of Saturn I and Saturn IB programs at msfc. (msfc Release 68-16; Marshall Star, 2/7/68, 4)
House passed, by 262-to-105 vote, NASA FY 1969 authorization bill (H.R. 15856) of $4,031 billion, including $3,383 billion for r&d, $45 million for construction of facilities, and $602 million for administrative operat-i.ons. NASA had requested $4.37 billion. House cut $142.4 million from Apollo Applications program—leaving $252.2 million, $186.4 million less than nasa had requested for orbiting workshop and lunar exploration. Administrative operations allocation was cut by $43.5 million, making total of almost $186-million reduction in $4,217-billion authorization recommended by House Committee on Science and Astronautics. During floor debate Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, answered Apollo Applications program critics’ charge that nasa’s Orbiting Workshop would duplicate usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, explaining that projects differed in nature and purpose, mol objectives were to develop, operate and evaluate specialized experiments and military equipment requiring manned space operations, and DOD would draw on NASA experience in systems involved in Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, mol was “example of utilization by another department ... of NASA-developed space technology.” (CR, 5/2/68, H3229—661; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/3/68, 1; Lannan, W Star, 5/3/68; Griffin, H Chron, 5/3/68; SBD, 5/3/68, 15; Aero Daily, 5/7/68)
Washington Daily News editorial commented on statement by physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp warning of possible dangers in Apollo 8 mission [see Dec. 14] : “There are perhaps sound reasons involving national prestige for trying to be the first nation to send men into a moon orbit. But surely no such reasons are compelling enough to cut corners on safety. The technical arguments advanced by Dr. Lapp are far too complex to be resolved by laymen. But after the tragic fire that took the lives of three of our Apollo spacemen two years ago it should not be necessary to urge that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration exercise all due prudence—even at the risk of losing the race around the moon.” (W News, 12/10/68, 24)
Apollo 7 spacecraft had been mechanically mated to Saturn IB launch vehicle at Complex 34, NASA announced. Apollo 7 prime or backup crew, or both, would participate in 10-hr network simulation of first six revolutions of mission and 8-hr launch simulations during week. Spacecraft 2TV—1 command and service modules successfully completed manned checkout Aug. 9 and 10 in preparation for five-day manned thermal-vacuum test at MSC in September to help verify spacecraft in simulated space environment for Apollo earth-orbital and lunar missions. Two-minute captive firing of 6th Saturn V booster stage at MTF Aug. 13 would try out “fix” for Saturn V longitudinal oscillations —conversion of liquid oxygen prevalves into gas-filled shock absorbers. (Text; C Trib, 8/13/68)
In Apollo/Saturn 503 program, Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages were being modified to correct radar lock-on problem in rendezvous radar subsystem. Saturn V launch vehicle 1st and 2nd stages were mated, with pogo suppressor modification kits on 1st stage being verified. Third-stage propulsion subsystem checks were in progress. In South Atlantic Anomaly Probe, computer analysis had confirmed radiation levels presented no hazard to low-altitude manned Apollo orbital flights. (Text)
July 4: Explorer XXVIII, Interplanetary Monitoring Platform launched by NASA May 29, 1965, to investigate earth’s magnetosphere and study earth-sun relationships, reentered atmosphere as had been predicted at gsfc August 1967. Mrs. Barbara Lowrey of gsfc Laboratory for Theoretical Studies had found in analysis of satellite’s orbit that—during perigee pass on July 4 (actually early next day in Indian Ocean reentry area)—joint effect of sun and moon would alter orbit and cause Explorer XXVIII to make high-angle reentry and burn up in earth’s atmosphere. Computer tests had verified analysis, (gsfc SSR, 7/15/68; NASA Release 68—117; Marshall Star, 3/6/68)
Recorded aircraft highjackings had totaled 14 in past year, with 13 U.S. airliners over southern U.S. forced to land in Cuba, Andrew Wilson of London Observer reported. (IP Post, 8/14/68, A3) August 14^-27: At U.N. Conference on Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held in Vienna and attended by 500 delegates from 74 nations, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin announced U.S.S.R. and “other Socialist countries” would establish comsat network “Intersputnik” to compete with Intelsat. Draft agreement had been submitted in New York to U.N. Secretary-General U Thant by U.S.S.R., Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Mongolia, and Cuba. Vladimir Minashin, head of comsat div. of Soviet Ministry of Communications, said Intersputnik satellite would have same synchronous orbit used by the four U.S.-provided Intelsat satellites. U.S. Dept, spokesman said U.S. had no need to join U.S.S.R.-sponsored system; Intelsat, with 62 member nations, was already operating successfully, handling 95% of total international telecommunications traffic. U.S. was not opposed to Soviet proposal for political reasons, but on grounds there would be economic problems in creation of two worldwide comsat systems. (W Post, 8/14/68, 12; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, A21; Hamilton, NYT, 8/15/68, 18; 8/20/68, 18; WSJ, 8/15/68, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/15/68, 1) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at Vienna conference discussed three results of U.S. manned space flight program to illustrate contributions to space exploration. Program had proved man could live in space and man could do useful work in space and it had created technology to make these possible. In first category, nasa, nas—nrc Space Science Board, nsf, arpa, dod groups, universities, and others had conquered problems of weightlessness in space, heavy acceleration and deceleration forces, air supply and pressure required for breathing in space, psychological problems presented by isolation, and problem of radiation. Successful termination of Mercury and Gemini programs had proved man capable of existing in space. His capability to do useful work in space had been proved by successful rendezvous and docking of spacecraft, by space photography, and by extravehicular activity. Pervasiveness of space technology had been demonstrated by range and variety of thousands of products, including Saturn V launch vehicle, world’s largest flight vehicle, and integrated circuit, one of world’s smallest manufactured items. Dr. Mueller said: “Our civilization has been built upon our accumulated knowledge of the natural laws of our environment. All of our inventions have been the result of the application of these natural laws. Advances in our civilization have always followed after discovery of some one of the missing links in our chain of knowledge. ... We know that many of the missing links . . . will he supplied ... as we move man with his accumulation of experience and his sophisticated equipment for exploration, into a new laboratory . . . the laboratory of the moon and outward to our solar system. ... If all of us, from all nations, are sufficiently creative, abundantly inventive, and freely adaptive, we have it within our power to improve the lives of every man, woman, and child.” (Text) U.S.S.R. Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov at Vienna conference proposed Aug. 15 that Ocean of Storms, prominent feature of lunar landscape, be renamed Ocean of Gagarin in honor of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gargarin, who made first manned earth orbit April 12, 1961. Leonov, who took man’s first walk in space in 1965, read Gagarin paper which emphasized similarity between experience of Soviet astronauts and that of crews of deep-sea exploratory craft. He said all actions taken in Soviet space vehicles were tried first in underwater craft. Large Soviet exhibit at conference showed full-scale model of original Soviet spacecraft and listed Soviet space firsts. U.S. exhibit, small because of cut in nasa funds, depicted benefits space exploration would produce for developing countries. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/16/68) J. L. Blondstein of British National Industrial Space Committee told group meeting at conference Aug. 20 that production of U.S. military satellites capable of direct TV broadcasts to military units was “imminent.” He said U.S. had spent between $80 million and $100 million on development but denied information was being withheld for military security reasons. DOD spokesman in Washington had said he knew of no plans for direct TV broadcasts by military satellites. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/21/68, 3) W. T. Pecora, Director, U.S. Geological Survey, said Aug. 23 that worldwide volcano and earthquake monitoring network might be provided within a few years by space satellites carrying cameras and sensing devices to give up to one hour advance notice of strong earth shocks. (AP, C Trib, 8/23/68)
Ray Cromley commented in Washington Daily News: “It is one of the tragedies of the moon race that earth satellite programs which could revolutionize certain aspects of agriculture, mineral exploration, TV broadcasting, navigation, weather forecasting and flood control are being squeezed unmercifully by Apollo. It is now clear that these unpublicized, unromantic programs promise unbelievably large payoffs. The U.S. return . . . has been conservatively estimated at $400 million to $1 billion for every $100 million invested after feasibility research is completed. The investments could be private, public or a mixture of both.” (W News, 10/16/68, 31)
Solar Wind Composition Experiment, developed by Swiss scientific team headed by Univ. of Berne’s Dr. Johannes Geiss, was first foreign experiment accepted for NASA’s Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) . Swiss experiment would require astronaut to deploy on lunar surface aluminum foil sheet oriented toward sun to entrap solar wind ions; foil sheet would be packaged for return to earth by astronauts, providing in this one-pound experiment first opportunity to capture ions for earth analysis. Swiss National Committee for Space Research had already built prototype. NASA would provide qualification tests for prototype and construction and acceptance tests for flight hardware. (NASA Release 68—55; Marshall Star, 3/27/68,10)
Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on Senate floor presented General Accounting Office review of source selection and award of major subcontract by NASA and its prime contractor, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., for development of landing and rendezvous radar equipment for Apollo lunar module, compiled at her request. Sen. Smith explained that although another electronics firm had expressed interest in performing under fixed-price contract, rca had received contract because of agreement between Grumman and RCA “before the requirements and specifications for the radar components had been defined.” Noting that rca estimated cost of $23.4 million had now increased to about $112 million, she suggested that if Grumman radar subcontract was illustrative of how NASA “maintains surveillance over its appropriated funds, it would appear that substantial savings could be realized merely by strengthening the agency’s contracting practices.” (nasa LAR VII/36; CR, 4/17/68, S4138-46; AP, B Sun, 4/23/68, A5)
nasa was stopping work on Saturn IB vehicles 215 and 216 “to the extent possible without involving uneconomical terminations.” Contractors had been instructed to terminate work on long-lead-time items being procured for Saturn V vehicles 516 and 517; halt would cause time gap should decision be reached later to resume production. Boosters August 2; NASA introduced new fireproof Apollo spacesuits at press showing in Doner, Del. In earlier photo, test subject Ronald C. Woods wears integrated thermal micrometeorite garment (tmg) to be worn by astronauts during extravehicular activities, ilc Industries suit has back-pack life-support system developed by United Aircraft Corp. had been requested in NASA FY 1969 budget for follow-on utilization of Apollo capacity beyond manned lunar landing. Steps were taken after Congressional cuts in budget, in anticipation of final decisions on future production, (nasa Release 68—139; W Post, 8/3/68, A2)
Yomiuri of Tokyo said of Apollo 8: “This splendid voyage is hailed around the world as ‘mankind’s greatest feat’ and ‘a symbol of hope for the future’. ... For the U.S. and the Soviet Union, it may be a matter of serious concern as to which puts men on the moon first. . . . This aspect is not important for mankind in general. The two superpowers should regard space exploration as a project of the human race and not a narrow issue of national prestige.” (Yomiuri, 12/29/68, 2) .
Washington Post editorial praised “magnificent achievement” of U.S.S.R.’s Zond V: “In its own way, Zond-5 should serve to shake this Nation’s complacency once again. Our national goals in space exploration are fuzzy, our hopes have been out of line with our commitments. From President Kennedy’s glowing picture of Americans in space we have slipped into a program put together in fits and starts—fits brought about by a realization of how much it would cost to do it right and starts caused by a basic desire never to be second to anybody. Because of this, there is no use in seizing upon Zond-5 as a reason to go all-out to beat the Russians in a race for men on the moon. Our program . . . ought to move at its own pace. If that pace is sufficiently rapid to bring American astronauts to the moon first, fine. If it is not, so be it. The Russians will deserve the honor and praise they will win if their men make the first landing. In space exploration, it is more important to do things right than to do them first.” (W Post, 9/24/68, A16)
NASA and Univ. of Texas dedicated world’s third largest telescope, 107in, 150-ton instrument at McDonald Observatory, Mount Locke, Tex. Observatory Director, Dr. Harlan J. Smith, said it had been booked a year in advance. The $5-million observatory would emphasize studies of moon and other planets. Government scientists hoped for information to help them design planetary spacecraft, (upi, NYT, 11/27/68, 26)
Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said in TV program to viewers in Texas, New Mexico, Arkansas, and Oklahoma, Republican administration would strive to make U.S. “first in space.” “I don’t want the Soviet Union or any other nation to be ahead of the United States. . . . Let’s emphasize the moon shot and others where we can make a direct break-through.” (W Star, 10/12/68, Al)
House Committee on Government Operations’ Special Studies Subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Porter Hardy, Jr. (D-Va.), ordered NASA to make every effort to cut escalating costs of its June 16, 1967, contract with Boeing Co. for technical integration and evaluation in assembly of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle. Contract, negotiated by NASA in drive to improve safety after Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, had been listed tentatively as costing $20 million; NASA officials now placed cost of carrying work through 1968 at $73.4 million. (Transcript; UPI, W Post, 7/16/68, A6)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Integrated Systems Test had been completed on Apollo 7 command and service module (csm), Apollo 8 CSM would undergo combined systems tests at KSC early in week. Saturn 503 had been erected on mobile launcher. (Text)
Neither Peking Radio nor New China News Agency covered Apollo 8 Mission. (N Va Sun, 12/28/68, 1)
NASA’s Apollo 6 (AS—502) was successfully launched from ksc Complex 39A at 7:00 am est on mission to qualify Saturn V launch vehicle for future manned space flights. Primary objectives were to demonstrate structural and thermal integrity and compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft; confirm launch loads and dynamic characteristics; demonstrate S—II/S—IC and S—IVB/S—II stage separations; verify operation of propulsion (including S—IVB restart), guidance and control (optimum injection), and electrical systems; evaluate performance of emergency detection system (eds) in closed-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and command module (cm) recovery. Launch Vehicle lst-stage performance was near nominal, but two of five 2nd-stage J2 engines shut down prematurely, causing remaining 2nd-stage engines and 3rd-stage engine to burn longer than planned. As result, spacecraft and 3rd stage entered elliptical parking orbit with 223.1-mi (395.1-km) apogee, 107-mi (172.1-km) perigee, and 89.8-min period instead of planned circular orbit of 115-mi (175-km) altitude. When 3rd stage failed to reignite on command after two orbits as planned, NASA switched to alternate mission, firing service propulsion system (sps) to place spacecraft into trajectory with 13,823-mi (22,225.4-km) apogee. Since insufficient propellant remained after extended burn, second sps bum was not attempted and cm reentered at 22,376 mph, just under planned 25,000-mph rate. Spacecraft splashed down 50 mi off target in Pacific 9 hr 50 min after launch and was recovered in good condition by U.S.S. Okinawa. Preliminary assessment indicated four of five primary objectives were attained, even though launch vehicle performance and S—IVB restart and guidance control (optimum injection) were not fully successful [see April 11 and 24], Apollo 6 was second flight for Saturn V launch vehicle and boilerplate lunar module (lm) and fourth for operational Block I command/serv-ice module (csm). Spacecraft had been modified to include Block II heatshield and instrumentation for unmanned configuration, delete crew provisions, incorporate new unified quick-operating hatch and movie camera to record launch escape system (les) jettison and reentry conditions, and relocate sequence camera for earth landmark photography. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn launch vehicle development, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—54K; W Post, 4/5/68, A18; upi, W Star, 4/5/68, A3)
Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle began 177-hr simulated space journey with Apollo 2TV—1 model spacecraft inside giant vacuum chamber at msc, to prove spacecraft structure and inner pressure vessel and verify Apollo’s environmental control system in temperature and vacuum extremes. (West, H Chron, 6/17/68; H Post, 6/18/68, 2; nar Skywriter, 6/21/68,1)
William E. Stoney, Jr., former Chief of msc’s Advanced Spacecraft Technology Div., became NASA Deputy Director (Engineering) of Apollo program, (nasa Release 68—151)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 crew was participating in verification test of electrically mated spacecraft and launch vehicle. For Apollo 8 mission, combined systems test on Command and Service Module 103 and checkout of Apollo Saturn 503 launch vehicle would continue through week at KSC. (Text)
NASA announced “interim operating plan” for FY 1969 designed to achieve $3.85-billion budget. Agency would reduce staff by 1,600 and contract employees by 2,000. Purchase or construction of four Saturn boosters had been canceled [see Aug. 2], plans for 1973 instrument payloads on Mars had been substantially reduced, lunar exploration programs had been halted, and development of nerva nuclear rocket engine would be put back until next fiscal year, at least. Apollo Applications program would be reduced $300 million from budget request of $440 million and would include only two spacecraft—Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount—with boosters and backup equipment. “Work toward post-Apollo lunar exploration and toward Saturn V Workshop will be limited to studies.” (nasa Release 68—141)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced personnel changes for new Apollo Lunar Exploration Office [establishment announced Dec. 19, 1967]: Capt. Lee R. Scherer (usn, Ret.), Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and Lunar Orbiter Program Manager, ossa, would transfer to omsf to direct new office; Capt. William T. O’Bryant (usn, Ret.), Program Manager for Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package, ossa, would head Flight Systems Development Div.; and Dr. Richard J. Allenby, Jr., Deputy Director of Manned Flight Experiments, ossa, would head Lunar Science Div. (nasa Release 68—5)
In National Observer, Peter T. Chew criticized Americans as “uncertain, timid farers in space.” During “19-month interregnum in manned space flight” occasioned by Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, “Americans have become obsessed with the race question at home and the Vietnam Wai abroad. ... If some doomsayers are to be believed, the vast U.S. space science and technology establishment put together during the last decade will be systematically dismantled once the manned Apollo landing has been accomplished because nasa has ‘no clear mandate’ to go on; cornfields will reclaim the great rocket and spacecraft-testing sites . . .; the solar system will become the exclusive playground 'of Soviet cosmonauts.” Yet NASA’s mandate to explore space “for the benefit of all mankind” had been set down in legislation establishing the agency and did not end with the moon. If anything, “the moon is the first stepping stone.” Dr. Wernher von Braun “stands almost alone among the country’s leaders in his ability to express in understandable terms just why we are going to the moon—and beyond. ... To critics of the space program he replies, ‘Man was born with an insatiable nosiness about his natural environment. ... it seems to pay off handsomely, but often in the most unexpected way, to keep satisfying his curiosity about the world around him.” (Natl Obs, 10/7/68)
New York Times editorial on Apollo 6 mission: “What was illustrated . . . was the extraordinary difficulty of assuring that every one of the literally millions of components in such an extremely complicated system as the Saturn 5 works perfectly. But the complexity of the total Apollo mechanism for the planned manned voyage to the moon ... is even greater. . . . This fact argues for a slow but sure approach to future Apollo tests, rather than an adventuresome policy aimed primarily at completing the job by the end of 1969. “Regrettable as were Saturn 5’s deficiencies as demonstrated in this week’s test, they provide a useful warning against renewed overconfidence and the costs it could again impose.” (NYT, 4/6/68, 36)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) attempt to place 550-lb Italian eldo F—7 into polar orbit failed when technicians lost contact with payload shortly after launch. Satellite launched from Woomera Rocket Range by booster with U.K. Blue Streak 1st stage, French Coralie 2nd stage, and West German Astris 3rd stage stopped transmitting after abbreviated seven-second 3rd-stage burn and could not be tracked. (Reuters, NYT, 12/1/68, 11) During November: Milton Alberstadt reviewed 25-yr history of msfc’s Michoud Assembly Facility. U.S. Government built plant (dedicated Oct. 24, 1943) on Michoud sugar mill site during World War II to assemble Curtiss C—46 Caravan transports. After C-46 contract was canceled, “Flying Dutchman,” air-sea rescue boat carried under belly of Boeing B—17 bomber, was developed. Michoud plant was reactivated during Korean War by Chrysler Corp. to produce 810-hp engines for Patton tanks. It was selected by NASA in 1961 as site to build Saturn rocket to put man on moon. (Boeing Magazine, 11/68, 8—9)
Flammability characteristics of mixed gas atmosphere (60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen at 16 psi) in Apollo command module had been evaluated by msc in 24 “enriched air” tests, with “all but two ignition points” showing self-extinguishing characteristics. Two ignition points on circuit breaker panels exhibited what msc termed “moderate fire propagation” because fire spread “beyond the point of self extinguishment.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, retained three major options for “mixed gas” for Apollo launch phase: regular air, enriched air using oxygen and nitrogen, or pure oxygen. (Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 10)
Surveyor VII, launched Jan. 7 for softlanding on moon. Jan. 9, photographed crescent earth from lunar surface Jan. 20 and recorded two laser beams (.arrow) aimed toward landing site from earth. Spacecraft kies last in NASA’s Surveyor prograjn. cording to utc manager Douglas D. Ordahl, engine had performed well during five-minute flight over Eglin AFB, Fla., aerial test range and “proved for the first time that hybrids are practical and can fly.” {W Post, 1/7/68, A7; Wilford, NYT, 1/8/68,3)
NASA awarded $73-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. for technical integration and evaluation in support of Apollo program. Agreement was an addition to Boeing’s previously contracted Saturn V work and could be extended as necessary, (nasa Release 68—85)
NASA Apollo Program Mission Director William C. Schneider told news conference astronaut training for possible manned moon-orbiting mission later in 1968 was under way. “We will do the maximum the systems will allow,” he said, “and the maximum you could foresee would be lunar orbit.” Decision in November, after evaluation of Apollo 7 data, would determine if Apollo 8 crew—Astronauts Frank Borman, William A. Anders, and James A. Lovell, Jr.—were to attempt lunar orbit in December, nasa Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, pointed out that plans for possible manned lunar mission had been made long before U.S.S.R.’s Zond V circumlunar flight. In Oct. 11 Apollo 7 launch, Schneider said, earth orbital flight was set to run up to 10 days 19 hr at altitudes from 120 to 150 mi. Primary objectives were tests of command and service modules with crew, tests of ground control facilities, demonstration of capability for rendezvous with spent rocket section, and eight firings of service propulsion system. Schneider said he would rate Apollo 7 a success if “we get rendezvous and stay up three days to accomplish our main objectives.” Discussing plans to follow Apollo program with lunar exploration program Dr. Paine said, if forced to choose between Apollo Applications program in earth orbit or lunar exploration, NASA “would be most reluctant to give up manned lunar exploration,” as an area “man is uniquely qualified to contribute to” and one “of enormous scientific interest and importance.” (Transcript; Wilford, NYT, 9/24/68, 26; Cohn, W Post, 9/24/68, Al)
President Johnson transmitted NASA’s 15th, 16th, and 17th Semiannual Reports to Congress covering July 1, 1966, to Dec. 31, 1967. President wrote, “I commend these reports to your attention. They contain, I believe, concrete evidence that NASA is moving forward, and that America is contributing mightily in the worldwide effort to conquer space for the benefit of all mankind.” In letter accompanying 17th report, NASA Administrator James E. Webb wrote, “This period was overshadowed by the Apollo fire which took the lives of three of our astronauts. The thorough investigation of the accident and the steps that were initiated to improve safety by changes in design and procedures have previously been made matters of public record. This report shows that the same period was also one of progress in aeronautics and space as evidenced, for example, by the successful flights of Surveyor, Lunar Orbiter, and many other spacecraft. It was a difficult time for NASA, but one in which the agency showed, I believe, that it could react maturely to failure as well as success, and continue to deserve the confidence and support of the nation.” (Text; nasa LAR VII/III)
Apollo 8 astronauts were pronounced in perfect health by NASA Director of Medical Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, after three-hour physical examination as countdown proceeded toward Dec. 21 launch for moon flight. “The crew is in real fine spirits,” he added. (AP, B Sun, 12/17/68; AP, W Star, 12/17/68)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V could be precursor to next step in flying complex unmanned missions to Venus or Mars as well as to carrying men to moon, rand Corp. Scientist Merton E. Davies and Cal Tech scientist Bruce C. Murray wrote in Science. Soviet descriptions of Zond V suggested U.S.S.R. might plan to send pair of spacecraft to Mars in late February or early March. One might land on Mars and cast off satellite to orbit it and relay signals to earth; other might fly by Mars and return to earth with film of Mars surface. Speculations were based on Pravda and Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) articles by Soviet Prof. A. Dmitriyev, which said “information from space” must be delivered “directly to the scientists’ laboratory” free of “encumbrances and distortions of radioed signals.” He said Zond V had successfully completed assignment of developing means and methods for returning space devices. Also, U.S.S.R. had previously sent pair of spacecraft on planetary mission and might repeat mission to take advantage of favorable Mars or Venus positions for flyby or landing attempts. (Science, 10/11/68, 245-6; Cohn, W Post, 10/11/68, A9)
NASA issued request for quotations for design, development, fabrication, test, qualification, and delivery of actuator system for Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), calling for completion within nine months. System, expected to weigh 20 lb, would be contained in cylinder 18 in long and 1 ft in dia. It would be used to deploy solar panels of ATM which would be placed in orbit and docked with Saturn I workshop, (msfc Release 68-178)
Second stage of vehicle expected to be first manned Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle was shipped from Kennedy Space Center launch site to Mississippi Test Facility for cryogenic proof pressure test by North American Rockwell Corp. personnel. Test, scheduled for June, would further certify integrity of stage’s liquid-hydrogen tank and would be conducted on all 2nd stages for manned Apollo Saturn missions. Stage would be reshipped to ksc about July 1. (msfc Release 68—93)
msfc reported “all mission objectives were met” by Saturn IB launch vehicle used in first unmanned Bight test of Apollo lunar module, Jan. 22, Flight was fourth consecutive success for Saturn IB and 15th out of 15 for msfc-developed Saturn launch vehicles. Flight events had been “exactly on time or within a few hundredths of a second until second stage but still within tolerance limits.’’ Trajectories of both stages had been within expected tolerances, and orbit insertion conditions had been met satisfactorily, (msfc Release 68-17)
Workmen loading super-cold oxygen into Apollo 8 service module discovered gas had been contaminated, apparently by nitrogen used to flush tanks. Oxygen would be changed and tanks reflushed and launch was expected to take place on schedule (Lannan, W Star, 12/20/68, A5)
NASA Honor Awards ceremony was held at Washington, D.C., with Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting Administrator, making presentations. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Research and Development) , was main speaker. ' Distinguished Service Medal, nasa’s highest honor, was presented to Secretary Flax; Edmond C. Buckley, former NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; Paul G. Dembling, NASA General Counsel; and Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal went to LeRC’s G. Mervin Ault, Edmond E. Bisson, and John C. Evvard; Jpl’s Richard M. Goldstein, Alan Rembaum, Lewis D. Kaplan, and Conway W. Snyder; msfc’s Otto A. Hoberg and Hans H. Hosenthien; LaRc’s Mark R. Nichols; and arc’s William A. Page and John A. Parker. Exceptional Service Medal recipients were: Mac C. Adams, Walter Boone, Richard L. Callaghan, Arnold W. Frutkin, Alfred S. Hodgson, Mildred V. Morris, and Boyd C. Myers, NASA Hq.; Robert M. Crane (posthumous), William R. Schindlar, and Michael J. Vaccaro, arc; Robert J. Darcey, Herman E. LaGow, and Robert J. McCaffery, gsfc ; Philip Donely, Paul F. Fuhrmeister, and Harry H. Hamilton, LaRC; Robert C. Duncan, erc; Fred H. Felberg and Alvin R. Luedecke, JPL; Arthur Rudolph, msfc; and Hubert Ray Stanley, Wallops Station. Group Achievement Award went to Apollo 7 Flight Operations Team, Instrumentation Ships Team, Mariner Occultation Experiment Team, ogo Project Team, Sonic Boom Investigating Team, and Surveyor Team. (Program; msfc Release 68—267; Marshall Star, 11/13/68, 1; Pasadena Independent, 11/15/68; arc Astrogram, 11/21/68, 1)
NASA’s Surveyor VII (Surveyor G), last spacecraft in NASA’s Surveyor Program to analyze lunar surface, was successfully launched from ETR by Atlas-Centaur (AC—15) booster on 67-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for 2,293-lb (at launch) spacecraft was to softland on the moon and obtain postlanding TV pictures of lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would determine relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar soil with alpha-scattering instrument; manipulate lunar material with surface sampler in view of TV camera; and obtain touchdown dynamics, thermal, and radar reflectivity data [see Jan. 9—22]. Surveyor VII—which also carried magnets attached to landing pads, mirrors for viewing beneath spacecraft and for stereo photography, and seven special dust-detection mirrors—was first in Surveyor series to carry both alpha-scattering instrument and surface sampler. Launch sequence for Surveyor VII was flawless, and spacecraft performed nominally. First of two scheduled midcourse maneuvers was so precise that second correction was not necessary; maneuver directed spacecraft toward a point 1.6 mi from center of target area. Surveyor VII was seventh in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar softlanding, obtain postlanding TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed by LeRC; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-316K; AP, NYT, 1/8/68,14; upi, W Star, 1/8/68,1; AP, B Sun, 1/8/68, A3)
nasa awarded $25,847,000 one-year, cost-plus-fee contract to Ben-dix Field Engineering Corp. for continued maintenance and operation of major portion of NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network, including 11 facilities of 14-station unified 8-band network for Apollo. Contract extended original two-year agreement containing three options. (NASA Release 68-82)
Soviet Prof. Georgy I. Petrov in Izvestia said successful recovery of Zond VI opened way “for creation of spacecraft able to get to the moon, Mars, Venus, and other planets and return to earth.” Such experiments, he said, “will allow us in the near future to create long-lasting orbital stations, moon laboratories manned by scientific personnel. . . . The passenger ships will differ from the present spacecraft, but now we are witnessing their birth.” In another dispatch Tass said basic problem of reentry by spacecraft at “second cosmic speed,” about 25,000 mph, had been solved by Zond VI. (upi, W Star, 11/20/68, Bll)
Aerospace industry sales in 1967 totaled $27.3 billion, 13% increase over 1966 sales, Aerospace Industries Assn, reported. (W News, 1/9/68, 38) Landing sequence began when Surveyor VII shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar, main ret-romotor slowed spacecraft to 3y2 mph; retromotor then ejected. Vernier engines cut off at 13 ft above lunar surface and spacecraft landed. First photos transmitted showed Surveyor VII was resting in rock-strewn area. Later photos consisted of wide and narrow angle surveys, panoramas, and special area surveys of spacecraft and landing area, including closeups of rocky debris on rim of Tycho crater and rugged landscape with prominences and boulders estimated to be three stories high. Stereo pictures were obtained with special mirrors; polarization pictures were taken of lunar surface, geologically interesting rocks, and earth; and photos of Jupiter and earth were obtained. Camera also photographed laser beams directed at spacecraft from Table Mountain, Calif., and Kitt Peak, Ariz., observatories, two of six U.S. stations which directed laser beams. Test, first use of light to communicate over such great distance, was considered highly significant for future use of lasers in communications and measurements in space and on earth and was expected to permit distance between points on moon and on earth to be measured with accuracy of six inches. Special surveys of dust-detection mirrors showed no accumulation of dust. Footpad magnets did not show a significant adherence to particles, but material did accumulate on surface sampler scoop magnet. Only flaw in mission occurred Jan. 10 when alpha-scattering instrument failed to contact lunar surface after command to deploy had been issued. Photos revealed that although release squib had fired, instrument had remained in background count position. Efforts to dislodge it by rocking solar panel were unsuccessful. After satisfactory bearing-strength data had been obtained, engineers positioned surface sampler on top of alpha-scattering instrument, applied downward force, and successfully released instrument without damage. Alpha-scattering instrument, moved by surface sampler to its initial position over soil, to second position' over rock, and to third position over one-half-inch-deep trench, obtained data for 63 hr 2 min. Surface sampler conducted six bearing-strength tests; excavated several trenches, including one 16 in long and over 6 in deep; turned over large rock for examination by TV camera; and attracted gravel-size rock with its magnet. On Jan. 22, communications with spacecraft were halted to preserve battery power during cold of lunar night. Performance of Surveyor VII, final mission in NASA’s Surveyor program to analyze lunar surface, was excellent. Surveyor I (launched May 30, 1966), Surveyor III (launched April 17,-^1967), Surveyor V (launched Sept. 8, 1967), and Surveyor VI (laynehed Nov. 7, 1967) had all softlanded successfully and transmitted'I'pfiptos to earth. Surveyor II (launched Sept. 20, 1966) had failed to softland because of an ignition failure. Communications with Surveyor IV (launched July 14, 1967) were lost seconds before spacecraft was scheduled to softland, and its condition could not be determined, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-316K; AP, W Post, 1/10/68, Al; upi, W Star, 1/10/68, A3; AP, B Sun, 1/11/68, Al; SBD, 1/11/68, 56; Hill, NYT, 1/12/68, 4; W Post, 1/13/68, A5; Clark, NYT, 1/22/68, 17).
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator, announced elimination of lunar module (lm) operations from first manned Apollo/ Saturn V flight, Apollo 8. msf would begin planning and training for alternate, low-earth-orbit, manned command and service module (csm) mission for December launch but no final decision on precise mission plan would be made until after Oct. 11 Apollo 7 flight results were evaluated. LM 3, delayed in checkout, would be flown in 1969 on fourth Saturn V with CSM 104 since preliminary studies had indicated many Apollo objectives scheduled for later flights could be obtained by using Apollo 8 csm mission. Two problems in Saturn Apollo systems—vertical oscillation, or pogo effect, in 1st stage of Saturn V and rupture of small propellant lines in upper stages—had been corrected and solutions verified in extensive ground tests. Plans and changes were discussed in detail at NASA Hq. news conference by Apollo Program Director l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), who blamed checkout problems for six-week delay in Apollo schedule. “It is our view,” he said, “. . . that the probable flight readiness of lm 3 is perhaps in February, but it is in the February-March time period.” He said important advantage of flying Apollo 8 in 1968 was opportunity for earlier experience in operation of Saturn V and CSM than could otherwise be obtained. In response to questions Gen. Phillips said lunar landing next year was “clearly possible.” He also announced reassignment of crews: redefined Apollo 8 mission would have crew of Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders; crew originally assigned to this mission—James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart—would fly on Apollo 9 with lm. New backup crew for Apollo 8 was Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (Text; NASA Release 68—148; AP, C Trib, 8/20/68; O’Toole, W Post, 8/20/68, A3; Wilford, NYT, 8/20/68, 19; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/20/68,1; msc Roundup, 8/30/68,1)
One out of every four persons on earth—nearly one billion people in 64 countries-—heard Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by moon orbiting Apollo 8 crew either on radio or TV, according to TV Guide. Delayed broadcasts same day reached 30 additional countries. “The fantastic success of TV on that flight echoed around the world.” {TV Guide, 5/10-16/69, 9)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCII entered orbit with 456-km (283.3-mi) apogee, 211-km (131.1-mi) perigee, 91.2min period, and 48.4° inclination and reentered March 24. Cosmos CCIII entered orbit with 1,203-km (747.5-mi) apogee, 1,186-km (736.9-mi) perigee, 109.2-min period, and 74° inclination. Both satellites performed satisfactorily, (upi, P Inq, 2/21/68; SBD, 2/21/68, 294; 2/23/68, 300; gsfc SSR, 2/29/68; 3/31/68) *	NASA announced Apollo 6 would be launched no earlier than March 21 in second unmanned test flight of command and service modules on Saturn V. First Saturn V had been launched successfully Nov. 9, 1967. Ten-hour, earth-orbital mission would include (1) 5y2-Jnin second burn of 3rd-stage engine to provide 279,000-mi flight into space on 16-day elliptical earth orbit; (2) separation and flight of Apollo spacecraft to 13,824-mi altitude, using 4-min retro-burn of spacecraft’s main propulsion system; and (3) high-speed spacecraft reentry into earth’s atmosphere simulating lunar mission return, (nasa Release 68—37) *	Surveyor VII, on the moon, stopped operating 22 hr before nominal sunset time. Spacecraft, launched Jan. 7, had responded to turn-on commands Feb. 12, transmitted 45 200-line TV pictures, and obtained 22 hr of useful data from alpha-scattering instrument, but performance before signal loss indicated that appreciable functional degradation had occurred during preceding lunar night, (nasa Proj Off; AP, B Sun, 2/22/68, A5) *	Explorer XXXVI (Geos II), launched Jan. 11, became fully operational, having achieved orbit well within specifications. With launch of this spacecraft, Thrust-Augmented Delta had accomplished record 23rd consecutive, successful launch. Spacecraft would support 128 global observation stations which used both electronic and optical geodetic instrumentation. (nasa Proj Off)
White House announced from Johnson City, Tex., that President Johnson would present NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders during “Astronaut Day” ceremonies in Washington, D.C., Jan. 9, 1969. (AP, W Star, 12/31/68, A5; upi, NYT, 1/1/69, 10; W Post, 1/1/69, 2)
nasa Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented NASA FY 1969 interim operating plan to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Although President Johnson had not yet signed appropriations bill, Bureau of the Budget had indicated nasa’s share of $6 billion .expenditure reduction might amount to $350 million. This meant limitation of use of FY 1969 appropriations to $3.85 billion, Dr. Paine said. “Our actions also have had to be constrained by our current instructions within the Executive Branch to hold expenditures to a minimum in 1970 as well as in 1969, and to be prepared for the eventuality of budgetary limitations in FY 1970 even more restrictive than those in FY 1969. I am personally convinced that the nation’s space program requires an increase in funding in FY 1970 and I am hopeful ... we will succeed in establishing the need for a significant increase. Until this decision is made ... we have no alternative but to proceed with an interim operating plan . . . which, where possible, holds open options we can exercise in FY 1970 if the budget is higher but which does not overcommit us if the FY 1970 budget is lower.” Plan retained $2,025 billion authorized for Apollo program—$14 million below budget request. It reduced authorized $253.2 million for Apollo Applications to $150 million, amount “required to work toward the important but sharply limited and deferred Apollo Applications program we now propose.” This would include cessation of Saturn IB launch vehicle production after completion of 14th (Saturn 214) and discontinuation of Saturn V at completion of first 15 vehicles. Single Saturn I workshop and single Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) would be launched in early 1970s. Authorized $5 million for advanced missions would be cut to $2.5 million, for continued studies related to manned earth-orbital and lunar missions. Authorized $136.9 million would be reduced to $132.1 million for physics and astronomy, with level of effort in supporting research and technology and data analysis approximately 10% lower than in FY 1968. The $92.3 million authorized for lunar and planetary exploration would be cut to $75.8 million, with $6.8 million for lunar and $69 million for planetary—to support Mariner-Mars 1969 mission, reacquisition of telemetry from Mariner V, and Mariner-Mars 1971 mission. Plan also supported in FY 1969, at reduced funding level, capability to conduct Mars mission during 1973 opportunity in keeping with NAS recommendation [see Sept. 19]. Overall scope of mission would be reduced and schedule compressed. Operating plan provided for construction of two 210-ft antennas for Mars and other missions during 1970s. Launch vehicle procurement authorization of $115.7 million would be cut to $100.2 million and bioscience from $33 million to $32,7 million, which was $15 million below budget request and required slip of 6—12 mo in 21-day Biosatellite missions. Space applications authorization of $98.7 million would be retained; program change necessitated by May 18 destruction of Nimbus B would result in launch of replacement, Nimbus B2, in spring 1969. Aeronautics r&d budget would remain at authorized $74.9 million, while FY 1969 effort in nuclear rockets would be limited and nerva development deferred until 1970, when $7.5 million withheld in FY 1969 could be added to allow total of $39.5 million. Interim plan.would provide $178.4 million for basic research, space vehicle systems, electronics systems, human factor systems, space power and electric propulsion systems, and chemical propulsion—at reduction of $21.5 million from NASA’s budget request. Work in long-endurance life-support-equipment technologies would proceed as planned but in other areas research and technical development would be reduced, especially efforts in support of advanced space missions. Tracking and data acquisition budget would be reduced from $289.8 million authorized to $280 million, providing full Apollo schedule support but limiting support for spacecraft aloft and on future missions. Construction of facilities funds had been reduced from $39.6 million authorized to $21.8 million appropriated. Operating plan would increase figure to $35.7 million by transferring funds from R&D appropriation. Facility planning and design funds were reduced from $3 million requested to $1 million. Interim operating plan anticipated transfer of $20.1 million from R&D to administrative operations, bringing total to $623.3 million instead of $603.2 million in authorization and appropriations acts and $648.2 million requested by NASA in budget. Dr. Paine emphasized that administrative operations appropriation did not cover only “administrative” expenses; it covered direct costs of operating NASA laboratories, research centers, development centers, and launch centers. nasa Administrator James E. Webb told Committee: “. . . when you use words such as ‘Congress consistently has supported the Apollo program,’ you must add ‘at a minimum level.’ We have clearly indicated in every budget that the basis on which we were going forward with this support by Congress was one that did not take into account unusual risks and happenings and was, in effect, based on success in all these efforts.” Webb said NASA Apollo funding was related to success on various operations and did not include “a return to test flight on the Saturn IB should we not be able to make the shift to the big rocket after this next flight.” From 1961 to 1969, Webb said, “we have not had the funds to proceed except in a manner that would permit us, within the total budget, to do this lunar landing within this decade and on an all-up systems test basis. So the excruciatingly painful period of all-up testing on the Saturn V is yet ahead of us.” (Testimony; Transcript)
Analysis of Luna IX (launched Jan. 31, 1966) TV photos showed lunar mass was decreasing because of micrometeoroid bombardment, Soviet scientist A. A. Gurshteyn reported. He explained that speed of particles dislodged by falling micrometeoroids often exceeded second escape velocity for moon of only 2.4 km per sec. (SBD, 3/12/68, 61)
Shipment of LM—2, second Apollo lunar module, and associated Saturn IB launch vehicle to ksc had been postponed pending further evaluation of Apollo 5 mission results [see Jan. 27 and 30]. Initial evaluations of first lm flight, Jan. 22—23, had indicated that second unmanned flight might not be required to qualify spacecraft for manned flight. NASA announced that further “detailed review of Apollo 5 flight data and deliberations by a [nasa] design certification review board in March will determine the final decision.” (nasa Release 68-21).
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., William A. Anders, and Frank Borman—scheduled to begin lunar orbital mission Dec. 21—• held preflight press conference at MSC. Borman, comparing mission to “a combat tour in Vietnam,” said: “The risks we take are acceptable ones. . . . We have to accept them if we believe it’s worthwhile. If I ever feel it’s not worthwhile, I’ll quit.” Describing the magnificence of space flight, Borman said, “When you’re finally up at the moon and looking back at the world, the nationalities blend. . . .You get the concept that this really is one world and wonder why ... we can’t live together like decent people.” Anders said crew “might use the opportunity [of being in lunar orbit ChristDeoember 7-10: NASA’s' Oao-II 21-foot-wu!e, 4,400-pound Orbiting Astronomical Observatory carried 11 telescopes into orbit to seek answers to questions on origin, evolution, and future of universe. Photo was made in final flight qualification testing. mas Day] to express to all peoples of the world our purposes and the benefits we can expect from space exploration.” (Lannan, W Star, 12/8/68, A4; AP, KC Star, 12/8/68; AP, M Her, 12/8/68)
Dr. Henry J. Reid, former Director and Senior Staff Associate at nasa Langley Research Center, died in Gloucester, Va., after heart attack at age 72. He had become LaRC Director in 1926 and retired in June 1961, after 34 yr continuous service. (AP, W Post, 8/1/68, B10) During July: Ralph Kinney Bennett in Data scored U.S. complacency in year which might “see some of the greatest Soviet space spectaculars of the decade.” In U.S., he said, early glamour of space race had faded and NASA projects were neither as ambitious nor as well-funded as they once were. In contrast, he noted, U.S.S.R. showed signs of “a new spurt of activity, new technical accomplishments above our planet, an accelerated assault on the moon and dark rumblings of advanced military uses of the threshold of space. The time for a Soviet resurgence could hardly be better. “. . . Soviets are badly in need of a great techno-propaganda feat to reassert their influence on world public opinion. . . .” Soviet hold on European satellite nations had shown evidence of advanced erosion. “Their position in relation to the rest of the communist world is no longer clearly defined.” U.S.S.R. was spending estimated $9 billion a year on space and half that sum went toward military applications of space technology. “There is an American attitude ... of waiting until you get burnt before you shed complacency. When Sputnik I burnt us, we came back with a vengeance. Now complacency has set in again. Perhaps we will feel the fire from the Soviets in space before this year is out and react accordingly. But in space technology . . . it’s a tough way to play the ball game.” (Data, 7/68)
Atmospheric scientists at Jpl and Ohio State Univ. announced successful high-altitude test of balloon-borne spectrometer to measure atmospheric radiation emitted in four-micron region. Data, obtained on flight from National Center for Atmospheric Research and Information station at Palestine, Tex., indicated sunlight reflected from earth would pose no significant obstacle to continuous effective operation of radiation sensors on spacecraft in earth orbit. Researchers concluded satellite-borne instrument could probe earth’s lower atmosphere for global weather prediction. Test marked step in NASA program to define experiments for manned earth-orbiting missions in Apollo Applications program. (NASA Release 68—176; Pasadena Star-News, 10/17/68)
Washington Sunday Star editorial on Apollo 6 mission: “. . . Saturn 5’s latest performance . . . suggests that our astronauts may not be able to carry out their lunar mission until considerably later than optimists have suggested—possibly not until 1971, if then. . . . However ... it is better to be safe than sorry. Saturn 5’s deficiencies must be eliminated, no matter how long the job takes, before it is used to lift a manned Apollo spacecraft to the moon. Despite loose talk about a So-viet-American ‘space race,’ there should be no all-out drive, no senseless rush, to score a first in this field.” (W Star, 4/7/68, FI)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Zond IV automatic research station, Tass announced. Station was placed in planned flight from parking orbit of artificial satellite and was flying on trajectory close to calculated one to study “outlying regions of near-earth space.” Heinz Kaminski, Director of Institute for Satellite and Space Research at Bochum, West Germany, said mission “must be regarded as a preliminary phase for a planned flight to the moon.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said he had “hunch” Zond IV was not intended to fly around moon. Apparently station made no attempt to orbit moon. One source said that after journey of about Sl/2 days, station reached “apogee . . . comparable to lunar altitude.” Zond I, launched April 2, 1964, failed in attempt to reach Venus, and Zond II, launched Nov. 30, 1964, suffered communications failure on route to Mars. Zond III, launched July 18, 1965, obtained photos of far side of moon. (W Post, 3/3/68, A17; 3/4/68, A14; 3/8/68, A12; AP, W Star, 3/4/68, A3)
In Washington Post, columnist Joseph Kraft said post-Apollo programs had been sharply cut in Congress and space spending had been compared unfavorably with money for pressing internal needs. “In this situation, it makes sense for this country to disengage while it is ahead. There is no need for the United States to race Russia to every new milestone in space. On the contrary, what the United States wants is a program closely connected to explicit American requirements—a program of exploration for its own sake, not for the sake of beating the Russians. In that way, this country can continue to develop a capability in space, without having to respond in a panic to the ups and downs that are necessary part of the space business.” (W Post, 12/26/68) Outgoing Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, recommended reexamination of concept of Federal Dept, of Science since science “has now assumed such importance to the nation that its position would be stronger if it had a voice in the Cabinet.” He advocated annual report on state of science similar to annual economic report and said Office of Science and Technology “could eventually evolve in an office of planning and analysis, looking broadly at national problems with some scientific or technological component, but extending well beyond the purely technical areas.” Under questioning, Dr. Hornig said he agreed with Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, President of Univ. of Oklahoma and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce, that Federal Dept, of Science, with NSF as its core, might encompass oceanographic agencies, high-energy-physics research currently funded by AEC, ESSA, Bureaus of Census and Labor Statistics, geophysics branches of Geological Survey, and some NIH programs. Dr. Hollomon also suggested NASA be added when it could be included “without having it become the tail that wags the dog.” Dr. Hornig insisted no massive “science agency” should be created to usurp supervision of Nation’s science effort. Bacteria might have caused gastrointestinal upset suffered by astronaut Frank Borman on Apollo 8 mission, Dr. Rudolf H. T. Mattoni, head of Biological Systems Div. of Nuclear Utility Services, Hawthorne, Calif., told meeting. Effects of weightlessness on bacteria on Biosatellite II flight (Sept. 7—9, 1967) suggested that lack of gravity might have allowed common, normally benign, intestinal bacteria to cause illness like Borman’s. Drs. Bouilin Browning of St. Thomas Univ. and Irwin Oster of Bowling Green State Univ. reported first experimental evidence that weightlessness can cause chromosomal damage of genetic significance, based on sperm cells flown 45 hr aboard Biosatellite. Cornell Univ. map expert, Prof. Arthur J. McNair, said sophisticated photographic mapping by satellites at 140-mi altitude would provide faster, cheaper, broader, and more detailed coverage than now possible by airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo, he said, would be equivalent to 1,000 photos taken by aircraft. U.S. could be fully mapped in one year from photos from satellite in near-polar orbit for four weeks. Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. Dr. Robert H. Hardie of Vanderbilt Univ. said planet Pluto had appeared to be dimming for past 10 yr. It was moving in 248-yr orbital period to point where it reflected little sunlight and its surface temperature had dropped two degrees. He speculated that planet froze into mass of stone and solid nitrogen as temperatures reached —250° C when facing away from the sun. When bathed in sunlight, planet warmed to —200° C and formed reflecting puddles which astronomers saw as variations in light intensity. (Text; UPl, W Post, 12/28/68, A9; Lannan, W Star, 12/30/68, A3; AP, W Post, 12/30/68, A6) December 27: At White House press conference President Johnson discussed Apollo 8’s effect on U.S. position in space race: “We are very pleased with the progress we have made. . . . Each side has different examples of its achievements. But in the 10 to 11 years since Sputnik I . . . when we didn’t even have a space committee in the Congress, when we were talking about the basketball up there in the air, when we have weathered the storms that have brewed—everyone who wanted to cut anything, the first thing they wanted to cut was the space program —when we have seen the editorial professors inform us that there was really no value in doing all of this anyway, it gives me great pleasure now to see the thrill that even they are getting out of it.” President described anxiety about complex mission and said he had repeatedly asked himself whether U.S. was ready, whether date selected was best one, whether every possible precaution had been taken, and whether every man had performed his requirements. “About all you can do ... is to pick men that you have confidence in, that you trust, give them the support they need, and then hold on.” Remembering he had “recommended this goal for this decade” to President Kennedy, he said: “There have been many pitfalls every step of the way. I don’t know how many folks have just wanted to abandon it, clip it, cut it, take the money for the cities or the war or just anything else. Space has been a whipping boy. “So when you see the day approaching when visions, and dreams, and what we said to the Congress when we created the Space Administration back in 1958 are becoming reality, you naturally are hopeful.” Later, in telephone message to Apollo 8 astronauts, President congratulated crew and said: “You have made us very proud to be alive at this particular moment in history. You have made us feel akin to those Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard stories of the New World for the first time. . . . My thoughts this morning went back to more than 10 years ago . . . when we saw Sputnik racing through the skies, and we realized that America had a big job ahead of it. “It gave me so much pleasure to know that you men have done a large part of that job.” {PD, 12/30/68, 1744-50)
Nine astronauts participated in life support training for aircraft pilots at Perrin AFB, Tex. They were second astronaut group to attend USAF course, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 7/10/68)
Apollo 7 spacecraft, which would carry three astronauts on 11-day earth-orbital mission in late 1968, was undergoing combined systems tests at KSC. Unmanned and manned altitude runs would follow, before spacecraft would be sent to Cape Kennedy to be placed on Saturn IB launch vehicle. Saturn had undergone tests and checkout on Launch Complex 34 for several months. NASA announced Apollo mission—which would demonstrate performance of spacecraft’s command module (cm), service module (sm), crew, and support facilities—would begin with mid-morning launch, carrying commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., CM pilot Donn F. Eisele, and lm pilot Walter Cunningham into earth orbit. During second revolution, crew would separate Apollo from rocket’s upper stage and perform transposition and simulated docking maneuver similar to one to be performed on lunar mission. Reentry under manual control of crew would culminate in splashdown in Atlantic at approximately 7 am EDT on 11th day. (nasa Release 68—108; ksc Release 285-68)
Editorial comment on Soviet space achievements, including successful orbiting of Luna XIV and docking of Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII, urged U.S. to acknowledge challenge: “The Soviet Union’s sense of purpose in space is apparently as steady and unwavering as it ever was. The U.S. . . . after coming up fast from behind in a wave of feverish anxiety and enthusiasm, now seems to have lost interest. That could be a dangerous—even fatal— tendency in an age where space is of key importance to the security of the Nation. It should be reversed, before great harm is done.” (P lnq, 4/17/68) “If we muff what now looks like a good chance to beat the Russians to the moon with manned space ships, the prestige loss to this nation will probably be immeasurable. And if our space people aren’t paying at least as much attention as the Russians to the military possibilities of space, then we are in grave danger and growing more so. All of which adds up . . . to a whole string of dire warnings to Congress not to be stingy about space projects of any description.” (NY News, 4/17/68)
nasa’s Pegasus I, II, and III meteoroid technology satellites launched Feb. 16, May 25, and July 30, 1965, were turned off by ground command after more than three years successful operation. Designed for 18-mo lifetime, Pegasus satellites, by detecting meteoroids, had confirmed protective adequacy of Apollo spacecraft for manned lunar missions but indicated that spacecraft for longer missions might encounter protection design problems. Spacecraft also provided data on Van Allen belts, earth reflectivity, solar constant, orbital and gyroscopic motions of rigid bodies, degradation of surface coatings in space, thermal control systems, and lifetime of electronic components in space operations. Pegasus program had been managed by MSFC under OART direction, (nasa Releases 68—149, 68—149A, 68—149B; Marshall Star, 8/21/68,1)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., announced he would retire as NASA astronaut after commanding Apollo 7 mission. At 45, Schirra would be world’s most experienced astronaut, having flown six orbits Oct. 3, 1962, on Sigma 7 in Mercury mission and having commanded two-man Dec. 15—16, 1965, Gemini VI mission, which had participated with Gemini VII in first rendezvous of spacecraft in space. He would remain ^ in space program, he said, “until we effect the job we set out to do”— to land men on moon and return them. (W Post, 9/21/68, A7; W Star, 9/21/68, A2)
At closed meeting at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. in July, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had said contractors’ disregard of planned delivery dates for Apollo equipment amounted to a “disease” in the project, New York Times reported. Apollo Program Director l/g Samuel C. Phillips was quoted as saying, “The lunar landing next year is within our grasp, but we don’t have a hold of it because of the disease Dr. Mueller cited.” Project was running two years behind schedule, with first manned Apollo flight expected no earlier than mid-October and earliest lunar landing in a year. Dozens of contractors in $24-million program, urged to meet tough specifications for mission safety and success at same time, were obsessed with checking and double checking all systems as result of Jan. 24, 1967, Apollo fire. Lunar module (lm) regarded as pacing item of project, had undergone only one flight test. First lm for manned flight had developed problems in rendezvous equipment. Dr. Mueller had said rate of changes in lm was three times that of Apollo command module, whose rate of changes, in turn, was four times that of Saturn V rocket. He said changes placed added burden on technicians who should be concentrating on launching operations, not on vehicle modifications. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/68,16)
At dedication ceremony attended by 19,000, USAF officially renamed Bunker Hill afb, Indiana, Grissom afb in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom who died Jan. 27, 1967, in Apollo fire. {NYT, 5/13/68)
Apollo 8 astronauts heading for moon would be “in far less hazardous position” than they would have been as crew for Columbus, NASA Director of Manned Space Flight Safety Jerome F. Lederer said in speech before Wings Club in New York. “Columbus did not know where he was going, how far it was, nor where he had been after his return. With Apollo, there is no such lack of information.” Nevertheless, mission would “involve risks of great magnitude and probably risks that have not been foreseen. “Apollo 8 has 5,600,000 parts and one and a half million systems, subsystems and assemblies. Even if all functioned with 99.9 per cent reliability, we could expect 5,600 defects. Hence, the striving for perfection and the use of redundancy.” (Text; NYT, 12/19/68, 56)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced resignation of Edmond C. Buckley as Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, and Buckley’s appointment as his Special Assistant and Vice Chairman of nasa Post Apollo Advisory Group (headed by LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson). Gerald M. Truszynski, Deputy to Buckley for seven years, would succeed him. Webb said Buckley had been “one of the architects of this nation’s great competence in tracking and data acquisition.” (nasa Release 68—17)
Data collected for 17 mo by five Lunar Orbiters indicated rate of penetration of 0.025-mm beryllium copper surface of pressurized cells by meteoroids in near-lunar environment was approximately half the rate in near-earth environment as measured by similar detectors aboard Explorer XVI and Explorer XXIII. Each experiment used 20 pressur-ized-cell detectors with total exposed area of 0.186 sq m, carried aboard spacecraft in both equatorial and polar orbits at altitudes between 18.6 and 3,852.5 mi (30 and 6,200 km). Estimates of hazard near moon had ranged from less to much greater than hazard near earth. Major uncertainty had been contribution by secondary meteoroids created by impacts of primary meteoroids on moon, according to report by NASA LaRC scientists C. A. Gurtler and Gary W. Grew. Data showed no evidence of increase in hazard from such “backsplash.” (Science, 8/2/68, 462-4)	_
NASA Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced at NASA Hq. news briefing that Apollo 8—carrying commander Frank Borman, cm pilot James A. Lovell, Jr., and lm pilot William A. Anders—would be launched from etr Dec. 21 on open-ended lunar orbital mission of at least six days. Spacecraft would circle moon 10 times at 70-mi altitude before returning to earth. Dr. Paine explained: “After a careful and thorough examination of all of the systems and risks involved, we have concluded that we are now ready to fly the most advanced mission for our Apollo 8 launch in December, the orbit around the moon.. . . “We have reached this conclusion after a long series of intensive investigations of the status of our program, the flight hardware, ground support equipment, status of our training.” l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, cited two categories of new risks with a lunar orbital mission: “In the one . . . the spacecraft propulsion system must operate properly in order to propel the spacecraft back out of lunar orbit and on its way back to earth. And the other category of risks are those that are inherent in being some three days away from the earth as opposed to . . . between a half an hour and three hours which the crew is away from the earth in a low earth orbital mission.” Although increased reliance would have to be placed on dependability of life support and electric power systems and mission would have to take on additional risks, Gen. Phillips said, “The progression of risk between the Apollo 7 mission which we have flown and the Apollo 8 mission which we have designed is a normal progression of risks in a logically stepped development, flight test program.” (Transcript; NASA Release 68—199; Schmeck, NYT, 11/13/68, 1; O’Toole, W Post, 11/13/68, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/13/68, 1) Engineer Michael O’Hagan, manager of space and military systems in government contracts dept, of U.K.’s Standard Telephone & Cables Co., told Conservative Party seminar in London U.S. was “actually buying land with mineral rights” in other countries after using satellites to discover its location. Hawker Siddeley Group Ltd. scientist K. C. C Pardoe said countries could use satellites to spy on rival nations’ crops and decide best time for marketing. (Reuters, W Post, 11/13/68, A25)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued order dissolving Apollo 204 Review Board established Jan. 27, 1967, to investigate accidental Apollo fire of that date. (Text)
NASA announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had replaced Astronaut Michael Collins as prime command module pilot for third manned Apollo mission. Lovell had held same position on mission’s backup crew. Collins had undergone successful spinal surgery July 23 and would require three to six months recuperation. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup lunar module pilot, had been moved to command module pilot position on backup crew. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., had been assigned to backup crew as lunar module pilot. Lovell joined Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders on prime crew for mission scheduled for first quarter 1969. (msc Release; KSC Release KSC-374-68; AP, NYT, 8/9/68, 14; upi, W Star, 8/9/68; W Post, 8/9/68, A7; SBD, 8/9/68, 169; msc Roundup, 8/16/68, 1)
NASA announced millions of home TV viewers in U.S., Europe, and Japan would see live pictures taken by Apollo 8 crew with cigar-box-size camera similar to that carried on Apollo 7 mission. They would be beamed to earth from spacecraft six times during Apollo 8 mission, including twice while spacecraft was in moon orbit. Manned Space Flight Network stations near Madrid, Spain, and Goldstone, Calif., would convert slow-scan signal into TV picture. Still photos would be taken of TV monitor during live transmission and pictures released in Los Angeles, Madrid, and Canberra, (nasa Release 68—214)
NASA’s Apollo 5 (AS—204) unmanned earth orbital mission, delayed for nearly four hours because of ground equipment malfunctions, was successfully launched from ksc Complex 37 at 5:48 pm est in fourth flight of Saturn IB and first flight of 31,700-lb lunar module (LM—1), designed to land two astronauts on the moon. Primary mission objectives were to verify operation of LM ascent propulsion system (aps), descent propulsion system (dps)—including restart—and spacecraft structures; evaluate LM staging; and evaluate 2nd-stage (S—IVB) and instrument-unit (iu) orbital performance. Launch phase occurred as planned; S—IVB ignited to insert spacecraft into orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 101-mi (163-km) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 31.63° inclination; nose cone jettisoned; spacecraft coasted for 43 min 52 sec; and LM separated from spacecraft LM adapter. LM entered orbit with 138-mi (222-km) apogee, 104-mi (167km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 31.63° inclination. Initial 39-sec dps burn, designed to simulate deceleration for descent to lunar surface, was automatically shut down after only 4 sec because of overly conservative computer programming. Ground controllers switched to minimum requirement sequence, an alternate flight plan with shorter total dps firing time and no provision for lunar landing simulation. Second dps engine firing occurred successfully, with 26-sec burn at 10% thrust level and 7 sec at maximum thrust. Third DPS engine firing 32 sec later consisted of 26-sec bum at 10% thrust, 2 sec at maximum thrust, and ascent stage fire-in-the-hole (fith) burn during which the two stages separated and aps engine was ignited simultaneously while dps was being shut down, simulating abort during landing phase. Duration of initial aps burn during abort staging was 60 sec, aps engine fired second time for 6 min 23 sec until fuel was depleted. At end of 11-hr 10min test period, both stages of the lm were left in orbit eventually to reenter and disintegrate. Apollo 5 mission, adjudged successful by NASA in spite of premature dps engine shutdown, proved out structural integrity of lm; verified in-space operation of dps and APS; and proved value of contingency planning, lm was last major piece of Apollo hardware to have its first test in space. Command module (cm) had been tested during AS—203 mission (July 5, 1966) and with service module (sm) on AS—202 (Aug. 25, 1966) and Apollo 4 (AS-501) (Nov. 9, 1967). Final decision on whether Apollo 5 results justified omitting second unmanned test and scheduling next mission to be manned would be deferred until March, pending final mission review, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68—6K, 68—19; msc Release 68-4; AP, Strothman, W Post, 1/23/68, 1; Fahnestock, W Star, 1/23/68, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/24/68, 20)
NASA 10th Anniversary: National Space Club presented special award to President Johnson at White House citing his legislative and executive leadership of national space program. At Space Club dinner in Washington, D.C., Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) presented retiring NASA Administrator James E. Webb award for his outstanding contributions to national space effort. In telegram tribute to Webb, President Johnson said, “The Nation is in his debt. He will be deeply missed but gratefully remembered as his dreams continue to become reality in the years ahead.” Telegram from Vice President Hubert Humphrey said, “The span of achievement which measures a decade of space progress is one which should be a source of pride to all of us. Now a new decade beckons, with new challenges, and new opportunities. And, such is the nature of the space age that we dare not become complacent about our rate of progress or the scope of our past accomplishments. It is unthinkable that we would allow ourselves to be surpassed in technology by any other nation. I have never questioned that space endeavors have contributed significantly to the strengthening and enrichment of our whole society, through a teamwork approach by private industry, our universities, and the Federal Government. By means of this program we have vitalized our economy, developed improved methods of management, stimulated our educational system, produced new goods and services, added to our store of scientific knowledge, and buttressed our national security.” Telegram from Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said, “The space program must continue to be one of our national imperatives, and it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress.” Anniversary ceremonies also included open house and annual awards presentation at msfc Sept. 28—29. (nsc Newsletter; Texts; Marshall Star, 9/25/68,4) In anniversary statement issued by White House President Johnson said: “. . . not all of nasa’s accomplishments have been out of this world. Satellites have given us a new look at the world’s weather. . . . They have given us intercontinental television broadcasts, and broken down the technical barriers to worldwide communications. NASA has brought us advances in medical science, education, mapmaking, geology, transportation, and a host of other areas that promise a better life for us here on Earth. Its intensive research and development efforts have given us new materials, products and processes; raised our standards of reliability and advanced managerial techniques. These advances, together with the useful facilities it has built, will be lasting national assets long after the Moon landing is ancient history. . . . “In the years ahead—as in the past decade—our foremost motive is to make men wiser and life on earth more meaningful. And on the mile
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on scheduled December launch of Apollo 8:	. this promises to be one Christmas when the thoughts of all . . . will contain more than visions of sugarplums, of laden stockings, of gifts about to be received and bills about to come due. It is, in fact, just possible that NASA will succeed in putting that missing ingredient back into the yule season, and that more prayers will be offered this Christmas than at any time in the past 2,000 years.” (W Star, 11/14/68, A14)
Apollo 7 prime crew—Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham—held news conference at MSC. Crew saw no reason to delay Apollo 7 launch beyond scheduled lift-off on Oct. 11 but results of flight readiness test following week would determine definite plans. Questioned about safety, mission commander Schirra said, “when we go over the sill for launch day, we will consider that all those risks that are appropriate for this type of mission are either understood by us or that they are low enough that we have a very, very high probability. . . . We would like 10.8 days and we will do our best to do it. . . . We’ve had a goal that is rather a hard one to achieve, particularly one that we have to follow on when we lost three of our compatriots, and we don’t want any mistakes ... to happen again. We have not been the ‘kid-around’ types that we might have been in the past, we’re much more serious about it, because this is a much more complicated machine and there are many, many more people involved in it. ... I think you will find that you will see a good performance out of this total crew and we have tried very hard to make this machine work just the way it should. We have basically lived with it at the plant [and] at the Cape . . . and if somebody even takes a small component off it, we become furious and say, ‘Why did you remove it?’ We expect answers immediately . . . that is the way we are working.” In answer to question, Schirra said it had taken 1 min 5 sec for all three to exit from spacecraft to white room in simulated emergency, while still being careful not to damage equipment. In real emergency, crew could probably exit in 45 sec. (Transcript)
San Francisco Chronicle said: “In their meteoric flitting about the skies the crew of the Apollo 8 did more than thrill their fellow Americans and pump up the national ego. They drew commendations from directors of the Soviet space project whose considerable achievement they had outstripped.” They made believers of “informed skeptics such as Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Observatory, who had more than ever scoffed at the value of the moon venture. (They also drove the stubborn adherents of the flat-earth theory into confusion.) All this they accomplished in faultless style.” (SF Chornicle, 12/27/68, 30)
Apollo 6 mission, second flight of Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle, would be launched from etr on or after April 3, NASA announced. Primary mission objective would be qualification of launch vehicle for future manned flights; spacecraft objectives, including recovery, would be secondary. (nasa Release 68—54)
msfc awarded Ball Brothers Research Corp. $134,500 contract for six solar sensor systems, including one prototype and five flight units, for Apollo Telescope Mount pointing control system, (msfc Release 68-76)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Stuart A. Roosa were chosen prime crew for 48-hr at-sea checkout of Apollo spacecraft, scheduled to begin March 18 in Gulf of Mexico. Apollo’s at-sea post-landing systems for first manned mission would be checked from deck of NASA’s motor vessel Retriever. (H Chron, 3/7/68)
Global military expenditures ranked first in world public expenditures. They had risen from $132 billion to 1964 to $138 billion in 1965, $159 billion in 1966, and estimated $182 billion in 1967—record high level. Preliminary data, said U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Report, World Military Expenditures 1966—67, said current military spending exceeded by 40% world’s expenditures on education by all levels of government and was more than three times worldwide public health expenditure. (Text; Shackford, W Post, 1/24/69, A21) During 1968: In 1968 U.S. orbited 64 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 74. U.S. total included 43 launched by DOD. NASA’s 21 included satellite orbited as secondary payload. Highlight of NASA’s 10th anniversary year was success in carefully planned series of Apollo missions—including first two manned flights in Apollo lunar landing program. Unmanned Apollo 5 and Apollo 6 completed inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. First manned mission, Apollo 7, carried three astronauts around earth for 11 days, verifying spacecraft operation before splashing down precisely on target. Mission included live TV transmission from space, largest number of inflight restarts of sps to date, and new record of 781 manhours in space. Apollo program climaxed Dec. 21—27 with highly successful six-day Apollo 8 mission on which three-man crew demonstrated operation of spacecraft systems in lunar environment while world watched live TV coverage via satellite. Spacecraft orbited moon 10 times, providing man with his first trip out of earth’s gravitational field and first look at moon’s far side and proving capability of crew, spacecraft, and support and control systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar-return velocity. Unmanned Surveyor VII, NASA’s first launch in 1968 and last spacecraft in Surveyor series, softlanded on moon, conducted on-site analyses of lunar soil, and took part in laser-detection communications experiment. Applications satellites launched included Intelsat—III F—2 comsat for ComSatCorp and Essa VII and VIII meteorological satellites for essa. Scientific achievements included orbiting of NASA’s Ogo V, Aao II, Explorer XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, and XL satellites and Naval Research Laboratory’s Explorer XXXVII. Oao II—heaviest and most complicated U.S. automated spacecraft ever launched—took first UV photos of stars, returning previously unobtainable data. Explorer XXXVI was successfully used by gsfc as target in first daylight operational laser tracking. Pioneer IX, launched into solar orbit, carried Tetr II pickaback and ejected it into earth orbit where it served as tracking target for nasa’s Manned Space Flight Network. Some 157 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—II spacecraft was launched on suborbital mission to obtain data on radio attenuation during reentry. X—15 rocket research aircraft made 13 flights, ending its flight program with 199 missions, including 154 at mach 4 or greater, 109 at mach 5 or above, and 4 at greater than mach 6. NASA—usaf flight research continued with 13 flights of XB—70 supersonic aircraft, usaf’s C—5A, world’s largest military cargo aircraft, made its maiden flight and three of the aircraft completed 31 flights for 88-hr total flying time. Design of sst was reevaluated and program was delayed until new fixed-wing design was selected, with prototype construction expected to begin in 1969. nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 12 successful glide flights and first powered flight. dod space program included orbiting of 8 IDCSP comsats, 1 Lincoln Experimental Satellite, 5 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, and 2 environmental research satellites; static test-firings of Titan III—M 1st stage; and near completion of mol launch complex at Vandenberg AFB. In joint NASA—aec effort, propulsion technology highlights included power tests of Phoebus 2A nuclear reactor, first tests of cold-flow test engine in flight configuration in new test stand, and first test-firings of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. U.S.S.R. launched 74 payloads, including 64 Cosmos satellites, 1 Luna, 1 Proton, 3 Zond, and 2 Soyuz spacecraft, and 3 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz III rendezvoused but did not dock with unmanned Soyuz II launched one day earlier. Unmanned Zond V and VI completed circumlunar flights and were recovered. Zond IV circled moon and apparently crashlanded. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully made 38-min maiden flight. (Pres Rpt 68; NASA Release 68-219; B Sun, 1/18/69, 28; Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; upi, W Star, 1/1/69 A7)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 spacecraft would be electrically mated to Saturn IB launch vehicle at ksc Complex 34 next week. In Apollo 503 program, command module was scheduled to be mated to service module after Aug. 20. The three stages and instrument unit of Apollo 8 launch vehicle were mated at Complex 34 and undergoing tests. Modification and retests continued on Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages and modification and checkout on Saturn V 2nd stage for 504 mission. (Text)
Business Week editorial: “. . . since the tragedy on the launch pad . . . [ Jan. 27, 1967] NASA and its thousands of supporting companies have done a tremendous job in rebuilding the spacecraft and in perfecting the safety and reliability of the entire Apollo system. The clear message of Apollo 7 is that NASA now has a spacecraft that can take men to the moon and back safely. This is a triumph for NASA and for U.S. science, engineering, and management. (Bus Wk, 10/26/68) Tass later announced that during first revolution Soyuz III “approached” to within 200 m (656 ft) of unmanned Soyuz II (launched Oct. 25), initially by “an automatic system”; subsequent operations were performed manually by Beregovoy. On Oct. 27, Tass said, Beregovoy “independently oriented the ship in space and switched on the motor,” to alter spacecraft’s orbit; continued conducting scientific, technical, medical, and biological experiments and research; transmitted TV pictures of cabin interior; and approached Soyuz II for second time before it reentered Oct. 28. Soyuz III remained in orbit until Oct. 30, completing 94 hrs 51 min and 64 orbits, before it softlanded “with the use of aerodynamics,” in a preset area in Soviet territory. (Lannan, W Star, 10/27/68, Al; O’Toole, W Post, 10/27/68, Al; Kamm, NYT, 10/27/68; SBD, 10/28/68, 279; 10/31/68, 297; AP, W Post, 10/28/68, Al; gsfc SSR, 10/31/68)
U.S.S.R. was expected to make more successful launches than U.S. during 1968 for first time since 1957, with both nations emphasizing military goals, Howard Benedict of Associated Press wrote. In 1957,	U.S.S.R. had launched two Sputniks, U.S. had launched none. In 1958,	U.S. had launched five to U.S.S.R.’s one; thereafter, U.S. had maintained substantial edge, building to 73-46 margin in 1966. In 1967, U.S. had led by only one launch, 67—66. Through 1967, U.S. had had 400 successful launches, with 532 payloads orbited. U.S.S.R. had had 240 launches with 289 payloads. In 1968 to date, U.S.S.R. had successfully launched 40 rockets with 40 payloads; U.S. had launched 22 rockets with 31 payloads, 23 fewer than in 1967, while U.S.S.R. launches had increased by five. Reasons for decline in U.S. launch rate were NASA budget cuts and improved instrumentation and data recovery in military launches (60% of U.S. firings). U.S. military payloads in 1968 numbered 22 to U.S.S.R.’s 24 out of total 40. Tracking experts had reported 16 of 1968 U.S.S.R. satellites on reconnaissance assignments, with 13 reentering after 8-day orbit, two after 12 days and one still aloft. Sole U.S.S.R. Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (fobs) test, Cosmos CCXVIII, had been launched and returned to earth in less than one orbit April 25. Drop from nine fobs tests in 1967 indicated U.S.S.R. might have perfected at least first stage in FOBS development. Neither U.S. nor U.S.S.R. had launched men into space in 1968 but experts listed Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII launchings April 15 as forerunners of manned lunar mission. In 1968, U.S.S.R. had launched nine scientific satellites, three for navigation, and two each for communications, weather, and deep space probes. U.S. had made two unmanned Apollo rocket and spacecraft tests, five scientific payloads, and one moon shot. (Huntsville Times, 8/5/68)
NASA’s Pioneer IX (Pioneer D), fourth in series of five spacecraft designed to provide continuing measurements over solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space, was successfully launched from ETR by Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta (DSV-3E) booster into orbit around sun. Orbital parameters: aphelion, 0.99 astronomical unit (au), or 92.04 million mi (148.10 million km) ; perihelion, 0.75 au, or 69.71 million mi (112.19 million km); period, 297.55 days; and inclination 0.09°. Test and Training Satellite Tetr II (tetr—b) carried pickaback on 2nd stage, was successfully ejected after 3rd-stage burnout and entered orbit around earth with 582.3-mi (937-km) apogee, 231.3-mi (373-km) perigee, 97.9-min period, and 32.8° inclination. S-band transponder was operating properly. Tetr 11 was follow-on Tetr 1 (formerly designated Tts 1; launched pickaback on Pioneer VIII Dec. 13, 1967), which was highly successful in testing Apollo communications network. Primary mission objective of 147-lb, drum-shaped Pioneer IX was to collect scientific data on electromagnetic and plasma properties of interplanetary medium for period covering six or more passages of solar activity centers. As secondary mission, Pioneer IX would: (1) acquire data when highly significant solar event occurred; (2) refine primary 'determinations of earth and moon masses, the astronomical unit, and osculating elements of earth’s orbit; (3) provide synoptic study of solar-interplanetary relations; and (4) provide target for checkout of Manned Space Flight Network equipment and training of operations personnel by launching Test and Training Satellite as secondary payload. Pioneer IX separation, boom deployment, and first solar orientation occurred as planned and all eight experiments were operating properly and returning good data. Pioneer VI (launched Dec. 16, 1965), Pioneer VII (launched Aug. 17, 1966), and Pioneer VIII (launched Dec. 16, 1967) were all successful and were continuing to transmit excellent data. Pioneer program was managed by arc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 68-192; UPl, W News, 11/8/68; W Post, 11/9/68, A10; AP, LA Times, 11/9/68; Lannan, W Star, 11/11/68, A17; SBD, 11/12/68, 46; gsfc, SSR, 11/15/68)
NASA would negotiate $3.5-million, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with General Electric Co.’s Apollo Systems Div. for Apollo Applications engineering support. GE, under direction of NASA Hq. Apollo Applications Program Office, would provide engineering support in areas of quality and reliability, configuration and data management, test, and checkout, (nasa Release 68—61)
Apollo 8 prime crew—Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders—held press conference at MSC on Apollo 8 flight plan. Commander Borman explained that an important feature of mission’s flight plan was establishment in advance of decision points when crew could decide whether to continue mission as planned or return to	earth: “. . . the	first one	[decision	point]	will be whether	we commit to	translunar	injection	[from	parking orbit] or not. . . . But even if we do commit ... we have regular abort times along the course to the moon, so that we could—in case of a system problem . . . stop at any time and come back. Then we finally reach a point where it would be swifter to just go on around the moon than it would be to try to abort. The next great point is before we burn lunar orbit injection.” Once in lunar orbit crew would receive abort data regularly and have option to return to earth every two hours. “The mission, if all works well, will be a relatively simple one,” Borman said. “. . . we designed Apollo, we said we were going to the moon, and . . . finally when we get down to examining the details and saying we are really going, people start getting a little queasy about it. But I have no hesitancy about the hardware.” (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 11/17/68, A8)
Telescope at Univ. of Arizona’s Planetary Laboratory photographed Lunar Orbiter V as it appeared beyond left limb of moon’s face. Scientists believed experiment to be first success in sending observable light signals from moon’s vicinity to earth. Some 80 photos were made through 61-in telescope by team of three astronomers under Laboratory’s Director, Dr. Gerard Kuiper, in experiment conducted for NASA and spacecraft’s designer and builder, Boeing Co. Satellite was visible on 52 photos. Boeing engineers oriented Lunar Orbiter V so its shiny panels reflected sunlight toward earth. Astronomers reduced stray light near very bright moon to prevent multiple reflections within telescope from reaching photographic plates. Dr. Kuiper explained that spacecraft resembled 12th-magnitude star in brilliance. These reference data, used with radar tracking data, would enable scientists to locate more precisely center of mass of moon with respect to its visible limb. Lunar Orbiter V was crashed on the moon Jan. 31. (nasa Release 68-34; NYT, 2/20/68,19)
nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz announced William W. Rubey, professor of geology and geophysics at Univ. of California at Los Angles had been named Director of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex. NAS had accepted interim responsibility for operation of Institute until consortium of universities could be formed to assume its direction. Formation of Institute had been announced by President Johnson March 1, 1968, to provide base for academic scientists participating in lunar exploration program, working in Lunar Receiving Laboratory, or using other facilities of Manned Spacecraft Center devoted to study of the moon. It was to serve also as center for analysis and study of lunar data obtained from NASA unmanned missions, (nasa Release 68—191; NAS Release) October 31—November 1: Soviet academician and aerospace scientist, Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, visited Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute during AlAA-sponsored tour of U.S. At press conference he said U.S.S.R. would reach moon from orbital station but this was not crux of Soviet effort in space. “Other planets are just as important.” Zond-type satellites would circumnavigate other planets and return. In question and answer period following lecture he said U.S.S.R. would not conduct manned lunar space operation within following six months. In lecture, Prof. Sedov said it was “obvious that space technology and the associated research have a pronounced stimulating effect on the development of the technological fields . . . essential for large-scale progress—particularly in the development of automatic control systems; in radio engineering, television, and telemetry; in computer technology; in the preparation of new materials and new devices; in miniaturization and minimum-weight design; in problems associated with accuracy and reliability of automatic systems. . . It was clear that “space technology has become pivotal in modern industry in the broadest sense of the word.” Dr. G. G. Chernyi, Moscow Univ. professor, also participated in seminar. (Transcripts; Aero Daily, 11/7/68,29) During October: Soviet Science in the News, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., publication, said review of Soviet technical press indicated U.S.S.R. would attempt to orbit manned space station within the year and that it possessed “well-devised and thoroughly realizable designs.” First “rooms” of station would comprise Cosmos or Proton booster joined with Soyuz spacecraft. Additional rooms would combine solid and inflatable elements like polyethylene. Tests of water recovery systems in Pacific indicated broadening of Soviet techniques. Six vessels had been completed for ocean recoveries of spacecraft. Conclusion of Soviet scientists that weightlessness had adverse effect on human skeletal composition seemed to indicate space station would use artificial gravity. ‘Rotation of space station of from 40 to. 60 meters in diameter would generate sufficient artificial gravity to allow large number of scientists to work in space.” (SSN, 10/68, 1; Aero Daily, 10/16/68)
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy called for prompt DOD action to revive work on quiet electric-drive nuclear submarine halted in May by DOD order when it decided to proceed with new high-speed nuclear submarine [see July 24]. (Transcript; Greene, NY News, 9/20/68, 8) characteristics of outer space near moon. Research mission had been completed and spacecraft was continuing to relay information to space stations. Zond V’s reentry and splashdown in Indian Ocean Sept. 21 was recorded by U.S., U.K., and West German space scientists, but U.S.S.R. made no official announcement until Sept 22. Tass then said Zond V had circled moon, explored space near moon, reentered at 11,000 mi per sec, softlanded by parachute in predetermined area, and was recovered by Soviet recovery ship—becoming first circumlunar spacecraft recovered on earth. “During the flight the station’s systems and aggregates for maneuvering on the trajectory and for returning to the Earth were tested. Flight control systems of the station and the radio-engineering means for measuring the parameters of its trajectory ensured the successful execution of the programme. “The successful flight of the ‘Zond—5’ automatic station over the Earth-Moon-Earth route, and its return to the predetermined area are an outstanding achievement of Soviet science and engineering. Another scientific-engineering problem has been solved, and broad prospects have been opened up for further research of outer space and planets of the solar system by automatic space stations which bring back research data to the Earth.” Tass announcement that atmosphere and pressure “remained within the limits of their present range” supported earlier speculation that Zond V carried prototype passenger cabin with atmosphere of artificial helium mixture which would be used by cosmonauts on future flights. Later Tass report quoted Soviet Prof. Leonid I. Sedov as saying spacecraft had special heat shield and was slowed down during reentry by “air resistance” and, “at a comparatively small height,” by parachute. Zond V was fifth spacecraft in Zond series and first Soviet spacecraft to land in water. Zond I (launched April 2, 1964) had failed in attempt to reach Venus and Zond II (launched Nov. 30, 1964) had suffered communications failure enroute to Mars. Zond III (launched July 18, 1965) had obtained photos of far side of moon; Zond IV (launched March 2, 1968) apparently had reached apogee comparable to lunar altitude and had burned in earth’s atmosphere on reentry, (gsfc SSR, 9/15/68; 9/30/68; W Post, 9/16/68, A17; 9/19/68, A25; 9/23/68, Al; NYT, 9/16/68, 29; 9/21-23/68, 1; Moscow News, 10/5-12/68, 3)
At background briefing on Apollo 6 mission, NASA Apollo Program Mission Director, Will jam C. Schneider, described flight planning activities for Apollo missions up to landing on the moon. Apollo 6 mission, originally scheduled for launch March 21, would be postponed until April because of “erratic behavior” in service module’s helium check valves. Since Apollo 5 had been so successful, Apollo 6 objectives had been “downgraded to secondary” and primary objective would be to evaluate launch vehicle. New optimum injection method in which S—IVB would be launched toward moon would be used but rest of mission would be basically same as Apollo 5, he said. NASA would continue mission planning, “so that we have the option to select a lunar orbit mission if as a result of previous flights we felt it was technically the best thing to do.” (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/16/68, 1)
In Washington Evening Star, David Lawrence asked, “What was really the big ‘miracle’ in the voyage of the American astronauts to the moon and back?” It could have happened, “and the rest of the world would not have witnessed the dramatic arrival of the astronauts aboard an aircraft carrier in the middle of the Pacific Ocean or the pictures sent from outer space for several days if it had not been for another great feat of science—transmission of television and radio from artificial satellites direct to every continent of the world.” (W Star, 12/30/68, A9)	_
Apollo 8 lunar flight was voted top news story of 1968 in Dec. 24 repolling of editors of Associated Press member newspapers, radio, and TV stations. Previous poll, completed before Dec. 21—27 mission, had selected assassinations of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy and Rev. Martin Luther King as No. 1 and No. 2 stories of year. (W Star, 12/26/68, A8)
New York Times said of Apollo 8 telecast of earth: “. . . the drama and interest of yesterday’s view of earth from space transcended any prosaic considerations of practical utility. Rather the excitement these pictures aroused among millions of stay-at-homes flowed from the visual evidence they provided of man’s successful entrance into a completely new realm, one which poses challenges, opportunities and dangers such as the human species has never before faced. And yesterday’s pictures provided a sobering perspective on man’s puny earthly works and rivalries, reminding all humanity that nature is the basic antagonist, not other men.” (NYT, 12/24/68, 22)
New York Times editiorial, “After the Lunar Landing,” said first priority would probably go to study of moon’s surface and resources. “Beyond this exploration, the moon—once accessible to men—will immediately become a laboratory world for expanding knowledge in astronomy, physics, chemistry, geology and a host of other sciences. For both purposes ... it will be desirable to create one or more permanent manned communities on the moon as soon as possible. ... As the pioneers in space, the United States and the Soviet Union have the responsibility now to begin organization of the vast international effort that must follow the coming triumph of human courage and human ingenuity. And the United Nations, of course, is the body whose flag must fly over future lunar settlements.” (NYT, 11/13/68, 40)
Tests to evaluate propellant lines for J—2 engine had been successfully conducted in vacuum chamber at Arnold Engineering and Development Center, B. J. Richey reported in Huntsville Times. Engineers had discovered that frosting which enveloped lines and provided extra protection when engine was fired at ground temperatures failed to form in vacuum or simulated vacuum, so lines burned through. Lines leading to engine’s augmented spark indicator, believed to have caused engine shutdowns and restart failure during Apollo 6 flight April 4, had been redesigned and strengthened without affecting engine performance. (Richey, Huntsville Times, 6/17/68)
Harold T. Luskin, Director of Apollo Applications in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, died in Bethesda, Md., of respiratory illness. He had joined NASA in March 1968 and had become Apollo Applications Director in May. He was past president of aiaa and had been associated with Douglas Aircraft Co. for 20 yr and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for 9 yr. He had held engineering and management positions in connection with Agena space vehicle, USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory, X—3 supersonic research aircraft, and DC—8. (NASA Ann, 11/26/68; W Post, 11/27/68, C3; Marshall Star, 11/27/68,1; W Star, 11/27/68, B4)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong ejected and parachuted to safety from NASA’s $2.5-million Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) while flying simulated lunar landing at Ellington afb, Tex. Vehicle, which had reached 500-ft altitude* crashed and burned on impact. Cause of accident was unknown. (C Trib, 5/7/68; B Sun, 5/7/68; msc Roundup, 5/10/68, 1)
Television sequences showing Apollo 7 astronauts working in spacecraft as it passed Corpus Christi, Tex., and Cape Kennedy, Fla.—as well as shots of terrain more than 130 mi below and views of anything interesting in space would be telecast by three major U.S. networks “live” Oct. 12 through Oct. 19, nasa said. Pictures would be transmitted from camera in space capsule to msc for instant showing over TV networks. Neither launch day nor splashdown day would be included in 11 am to 12 pm series. (Kirkman, W News, 9/24/68, 7)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 space vehicle Flight Readiness Test was under way at ksc, with prime crew—Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham—to participate without spacesuits and with hatch open. Apollo 8 manned altitude runs had been successfully completed, with prime crew spending 13]/2 hr in its spacecraft Sept. 20 and backup crew spending 101/2 hr Sept. 22. (Text)
Polish noncommunist party newspaper Zycie Wrszawy said of Apollo 8 crew: “We were all with them during those five days. . . . We congratulate them heartily. At such a time we do not think about politics and we forget about the country from which they come.” Paper also said, “Only a few changes would be enough for the monstrous rocket to carry a nuclear warhead into orbit instead of astronauts.” (upi, C Trib, 12/29/68)
Associated Press roundup of comment by space authorities on U.S.S.R.’s Zond V mission: NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The most important demonstration of total space capability up to now by any nation.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: Hoped U.S.S.R. achievement would “cause some stir in Congress. . . . The Russians again did something we have not done. We slept until the Sputnik. That may be what we’re doing now.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station: “I think it is a very considerable achievement and I expect that a human being will be placed in a similar spacecraft in a matter of months.” Heinz Kaminski, Chief of West Germany’s Bochum Observatory: “Still in this year or at latest in first quarter of 1969 a three-man spacecraft of the Soyuz type will circle the moon. After that [in a later flight] they will land on the moon.” In Moscow, unidentified Western expert on U.S.S.R.’s space program said that, because of seasonal factors, best time for Soviet manned lunar circumnavigation would be no later than early November—or spring 1969. “They are now in a position to send a man around the moon and back to earth, without landing him on the moon. They might try one more unmanned shot, just to be sure, and then they could send up a man.” (AP, NYT, 9/23/68, E8)
President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget was presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. At $4.37 billion, authorization request was $700 million below FY 1968 request, almost $500 million less than FY 1968 authorization, and $200 million below FY 1968 appropriation. Webb stated: “nasa’s expenditures for FY 1969 will be down $230 million from this year, $850 million below last year, and $1.3 billion less than in FY 1966. The nasa program has been cut. I hope you will decide it has been cut enough and will approve the full amount recommended by the President. “The FY 1969 request does not meet at all our Nation’s needs in aeronautics and space. It is a compromise—one which I fully support— between needed work toward advances in aeronautics and space which we can and should make, and other overriding requirements. . . . During this period when we are reducing our effort by one-third the U.S.S.R. is still increasing its effort. ... In terms of scientific advance and in applications of immediate economic use, such as meteorological and communications systems, our program has contributed more than theirs. But in terms of the use of large launch vehicles and in the rate of which future greater capabilities are being developed they are and will remain ahead, at our 1969 budget level. The hard fact we now face is that just as we have begun to catch up in large-scale booster operations ... we are cutting back our program while they continue to advance.” He listed guidelines within “necessary fiscal constraints,” which determined decisions on FY 1969 program and budget estimates. NASA would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using all-up test concept for Saturn V and Apollo. Complete success in all remaining eight Saturn V flights would be needed for manned lunar landing by “end of 1969.” nasa would reduce numbers of Saturn IB and V and work out with dod future requirements for large launch vehicles under “sharply limited” launch program. Launch of Saturn I Workshop in 1970 would be interim step toward Saturn V Workshop and would be coordinated with later launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. “Practically all” programs had been stretched out, and a number of projects would be phased out. Scope of new starts would be reduced, with nerva i replacing larger nerva n and “less costly Mariner class spacecraft” replacing Voyager mission. Urgent activities would be expanded in aeronautics and in space applications; for example, noise reduction, vtol and stol, aircraft for remote measurement of earth resources, and Nimbus D for charting atmosphere parameters. nasa Centers would be reorganized “to retain . . . after reductions [in work force] are made, a limited but strong and well-balanced team of scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” Webb responded to questions: “There are no signs that the Soviets are cutting back as we are. New test and launch facilities are steadily added . . . and a number of spaceflight systems more advanced than any heretofore used are nearing completion.” Webb forecast Soviet booster with thrust greater than that of Saturn V, resumption of manned space flights, and landing of Soviet instrument packages on Mars in 1969 and 1971. Budget reductions in FY 1968 had compelled revisions, reductions, delays and cancellations in NASA programs. “We can conduct a viable and useful program at these lower levels, hut it will be a sharply reduced one.” Despite reductions allowing almost no flexibility to work around problems, “we still have the possibility of making the lunar landing before 1970.” (CR, 2/7/68, H926-7 ; 2/12/68, E708-9)
Command module for Apollo 7, first manned Apollo flight, left North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant enroute to Kennedy Space Center. Service module had arrived at ksc May 17. (nasa Release 68—100)
NASA announced changes in Aerospace Safety Panel personnel: Dr. Charles D. Harrington, President of Douglas United Nuclear, Inc., was elected Chairman. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Deputy Director (Technical) at MSFC and Special Assistant to Apollo Spacecraft Manager, resigned from panel to devote full time to these assignments. Newly named to panel were: Frank C. Di Luzio, President of Raynolds Electrical and Engineering Co., Inc., and Vice President of eg&g, Inc.; Gen. Orval Cook (usaf, Ret.); and Dr. Harold Agnew, Weapons Div. Leader, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Dr. William A. Mrazek, Assistant Director for Engineering and Chief Engineer for Industrial Operations at msfc, was named consultant, (nasa Release 68-98)
NASA announced it had released tracking ship USNS Watertown from priority role of reentry support for Apollo missions, thus effecting reduction in operational costs required by budgetary curtailments. Manned Space Flight Network land stations in Pacific, Apollo tracking ship Huntsville, and Apollo range instrumentation aircraft would serve returning Apollo spacecraft landing in preselected Pacific area, (nasa Release 68—181)
NASA named five-man board with counsel to investigate crash of Lunar Landing Research Vehicle piloted by Astronaut Neil Armstrong at Ellington afb, Tex., May 6. Board would determine probable cause of accident, identify and evaluate corrective actions, and evaluate implication for llrv and lunar module design and operations. (NASA Release 68-90)
President Johnson nominated b/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) , msfc Director of Industrial Operations, for promotion to Major General. Assigned to NASA through special nasa—DOD personnel exchange agreement in 1964, Gen. O’Connor had been responsible for technical and administrative management of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles and Apollo Applications program, (msfc Release 68-33)
First Lady, Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, and daughter Mrs. Lynda Robb paid their first visit to KSC and participated in simulated moon landing in lunar landing module replica. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, presented model of Apollo lunar landing module for display in Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library. He said model would bear plaque listing “a few of the many contributions to our space program of Lyndon B. Johnson—as Senate Majority Leader, as Chairman of the Senate Aeronautics and Space Sciences Committee, as Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council when he was Vice President, and then as President of the United States.” Dr. Paine told Mrs. Johnson, “We trust that this model of the lunar landing module will signify to the many visitors . . . the President’s vision and leadership that has carried this nation outward into the new ocean of space.” (ksc Release ksc—500-68; Shelton, W Star, 11/25/68, E3; Blair, NYT, 11/24/68, 41)
In bbc TV interview Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said U.S. Apollo 8 plan for manned lunar orbit was, “On a scientific basis . . . wasteful and silly. . . . We’ve reached the stage with automatic landings when it’s not necessary to risk human life to get information about the moon. Within a few years this information could be obtained by automatic, unmanned instruments.” Sir Bernard said he was full of admiration for project but added, there was “a dangerous element of deadline beating in it.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, commented, “The purpose is not scientific but to take an important step in developing the capability of landing men on the moon.” In telephone interview from Huntsville, Ala., he said, “We are taking no undue risks.” Apollo 8 crewman William A. Anders told news conference at KSC, “We are flying primarily an operational mission and we strongly feel that a manned platform in lunar orbit with the operational equipment we have can add significant bits and pieces to scientific knowledge. . . . We think it will be a real boon for future Apollo flights to have the photographic, navigation, tracking, mapping, and other knowledge we’ll bring back.” (AP, B Sun, 11/21/68, 1; NYT, 11/21/68, 19; O’Toole, W Post, 11/21/68, A3)
New York Gov. Nelson B. Rockefeller announced Apollo 8 astronauts had accepted invitation to come to New York for special day of observance Jan. 10. (Fox, NYT, 1/1/69, 1)
Army Map Service technicians were building 22- by 14-ft hand-carved model of landing site astronauts would see on approaching lunar “target area,” to assist NASA in simulating manned landings on moon. Model, part of lunar module simulator (lms), would be constructed from high-fidelity lunar relief map made from Orbiter IV and V photography. (dod Release 966—68)
Apollo 8 crew, wearing their spacesuits, participated in final 2 hr 45 min of countdown rehearsal for Dec. 21 launch. Spacecraft had completed four-day rehearsal fully fueled Dec. 10. (AP, B Sun, 12/11/68, A9; UPl, W Star, 12/11/68, C4)
Apoilo 7 and 8 flight crews sign memorial document for White House Treaty Room. Signers are Heft to right): Astronaut!, R, Walter Cunningham, Donn F. Eisele, Walter M. Sckirra, Jr. (Apollo 7); William A. Anders, James A. Lovell, Jr^ and Frank Borman (Apollo 8). Standing are Charles A. Lindbergh (ioho also signed), Mrs. Johnson, President Lyndon B. Johnson, retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and Vice President Hubert H, Humphrey. dons would be made by land surface stations 300 mi apart throughout world with exception of desert areas. Further data would be passed on by weather ships, upper-air sea stations, aircraft, and meteorological satellites. (W Star, 12/9/68, A8) Committee claimed single entity could make more balanced investment choice on whether to lay more cables or launch satellites and would eliminate need for duplicate transmission facilities. Conclusions were challenged in dissenting footnote to report by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC, who said merger would inhibit development of satellite technology and reduce technological competition between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. Report also would recommend informal merger of postal and telegraph services, with Western Union Telegraph Co. permitted to operate in post offices; relaxation of fcc restrictions on cable TV to protect broadcasters; and Government sponsorship of experimental program to test TV’s usefulness in assisting minority groups. (Finney, NYT, 12/9/68, 1; 12/10/68, 1; Aug., W Star, 12/12/68, A13)
Chicago Tribune said, “Now that Apollo 8 and its three astronauts are home from their historic trip around the moon, we can safely call it one of the most memorable Christmas gifts ever given to the American people and mankind.” (C Trib, 12/28/68, 12)
International Flat Earth Society said in London that earth was definitely flat despite pictures from Apollo 8. Society Secretary Samuel Shenton said moon was circular but there was no proof it was a globe. (Reuters, BSim, 12/30/68)
msc had awarded $2-million contract extension to mit’s Div. of Sponsored Research for design and developmental support of Apollo guidance and navigation systems, including flight test and operational support for Apollo command and service modules. Contract extension brought total estimated value of mit contract since April 1965 to $48.7 million, (nasa Release 68-15)
Apollo and Apollo Applications, staff study released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, included statement by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Subcommittee Chairman: “. . . the general posture of the programs is good [but] the Apollo program, with its inherent complexity, has had and can be expected to have a variety of problems. Yet this study identifies the fact that confidence in the governmental-industrial team accomplishing this work is well placed.” Report found “that the NASA industry team is continuing to effectively employ its resources in the solution of those problems which currently face the program. NASA has indicated that, given the stretchout in the Apollo program caused by the Apollo 204 accident, nasa is not constrained by total funding for the Apollo program during [FT] 1968. The continued reduction in total effort in the Apollo program as the program passed its peak effort in fiscal year 1967 is beginning to cause dislocation in the contractor and nasa center effort to the extent that personnel that will be needed during the flight portion of the program may not be available in the event a major flight problem occurs. Timely support for the Apollo Applications program and other post-Apollo effort could have a major effect on minimizing this problem.” (Text)
Apollo 7 mission (Oct. 11—22) was adjudged successful by nasa. All launch vehicle systems had performed satisfactorily throughout expected lifetime and spacecraft systems functioned with few minor anomalies, which were countered, preventing loss of systems support. Splashdown occurred within one mile of guidance system target point and recovery of flight crew and CM was successful. All test objectives had been successfully accomplished. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA announced end of Lunar Orbiter project. Lunar Orbiter V, launched Aug. 1, 1967, had obeyed spacecraft controllers and crashed on lunar surface after 1,200 orbits. Final operation of spacecraft had consisted of 18.9-sec burn of velocity control engine at apolune to decrease speed by 64 mph for orbit decay. Impact occurred at 2:58.5 am, est, near equator on moon’s western limb. Destruction of Lunar Orbiter V had become necessary because its supply of attitude control gas was nearly depleted. In concentrating on 36 areas of moon’s face, spacecraft had completed coverage necessary for full photographic survey of moon’s hidden side, photographing and transmitting 212 telephoto and 212 wide-angle pictures of lunar surface. Spacecraft had also been used to provide tracking target to msfn stations and for crew training and computer program verification. Lunar Orbiters I, II, and III had been crashed on Oct. 29, 1966, Oct. 11, 1967, and Oct. 9, 1967, as their control gas became exhausted. Communications were lost with Lunar Orbiter IV, and it had apparently crashed on lunar surface. During Lunar Orbiter project, since first launch Aug. 10, 1966, 6,034 orbits of moon had been completed and more than 99% of lunar surface had been photographed by orbiting cameras to provide data for selection of eight candidate landing sites for Apollo project. Lunar Orbiter program was directed by ossa and managed by LaRC. Boeing Co. was prime spacecraft contractor, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68-23)
msfc announced it had awarded American Science and Engineering, Inc., $5,413,000 addition to contract for final design, fabrication, assembly, integration, test qualification, and acceptance of prototype and flight unit x-ray spectrographic telescope for Apollo Telescope Mount. Award brought total value of contract to $11,617,471. (nasa Release 68-170; msfc Release 68-234)
The successful completion of the current phase of the automated exploration of the Moon and our planetary successes to date provide the capability, experience, and framework for the next step forward in the exploration of the planets,” NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Advanced Planetary Mission Technology (apmt) effort, begun in Fiscal Year 1968 at the conclusion of the Mariner Y, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor Programs, and deferral of Voyager was “directed at planning and technology for potential planetary missions in the early 1970’s.” Emphasis had shifted from automated to manned exploration and return of lunar samples. “Regardless of missions planned by the U.S.S.R. during the opportunities in 1969, 1971, and 1973,” Dr. Naugle said, NASA’s “systematic approach . . . will be meaningful and more likely to be complemented by the U.S.S.R. missions than duplicative.” (Testimony)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 spacecraft had been moved from altitude chamber at ksc. During week it would be mated with lunar module adapter and prepared for mechanical mate with Saturn IB launch vehicle. In Apollo Saturn 503 project, radar lock-on problem in Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages’ rendezvous radar subsystem was being isolated. Saturn V launch vehicle 1st and 2nd stages had been mated. Last in series of seven water impact tests in support of first manned Apollo mission was scheduled for Aug. 13. (Text)
President Johnson submitted $186.1-billion FY 1969 budget request to Congress, including $6.76-billion total space budget. Of this sum, NASA would receive $4.37 billion, smallest amount since 1963; dod space efforts, $2,216 billion; AEC space applications, $143 million; and ESSA satellite system, $30.6 million.	: NASA FY 1969 budget, $218 million less than for FY 1968, provided for $3,677 billion to be spent for R&D (down $233 million from FY 1968	and $557 million from FY 1967); $45 million for construction of facilities; and $648 million for administrative operations. Project Apollo would be kept on schedule, development of NERVA I would be continued, and launch plans would be made for two pioneer flights toward Jupiter and one Sunblazer probe. Research on Earth Resources Observation Satellite would continue, but development would be postponed, ogo program would be phased out after OGO—f. NASA’s $2.5-billion Voyager program would be replaced with a $500-million, four-mission Mars orbiter project. Although NASA’s $2.039-billion Apollo budget request accounted for 47% of total NASA budget, amount for Apollo was $517 million less than for FY 1968, reflecting declining expenditures as program neared its completion. Requested $439.6 million for Apollo Applications (aa) program was less than half of amount originally sought and necessitated cancellation of planned 14-day AAP—1A flight. Some $76.9 million—a $10.1-million increase over FY 1968—was allotted for NASA’s aeronautics program, with most of increase attributed to additional supporting research in subsonic aircraft technology. XB—70 and X—15 research programs would be phased out by December 1968. Space science and applications were allotted $538.2 million, with 18 major NASA launches and 13 non-NASA launches scheduled for 1968. Major portions of DOD space budget would be spent on mol—$600 million, compared with $431 million requested for FY 1968., Some $60.4 million was allocated for defense and tactical satellite communications programs, and $10.5 million for Vela nuclear test detection satellite program. AEC space budget—$11 million higher than for FY 1968—included $72 million for Project Rover, with $39 million for nerva system. Most of essa’s funds would be used for development of sensors and satellite system in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for warning services, faa’s request included $351 million for SST development, $251 million increase over FY 1968 and one of largest increases given to any domestic program. It was principal item in dot’s $449-million request for r&d. (Text; dod Budget Summary; W Post, 1/16/68, A5; AP, B Sun, 1/16/68, A3; McNamara Statement; dod Background Briefing; NASA Release, 1/29/68; W Star, 1/29/68, A7; Clark, NYT, 1/30/68, 16; Aero Tech, 2/12/68, 17-35) '
Apollo 7 Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received Kitty Hawk Memorial Trophy for distinguished achievement in aeronautics at annual Wright Brothers memorial banquet in Beverly Hills, Calif. Banquet commemorated 65th anniversary of flight of Kitty Hawk, (upi, W Star, 12/7/68, A2)
NASA’s Test and Training Satellite Tts I, carried pickaback as secondary payload on Pioneer VIII and ejected into orbit Dec. 13, 1967, reentered atmosphere and was believed to have burned up over Easter Island in Pacific. Spacecraft supplied 14-station worldwide tracking network training for Apollo flights, (nasa Release 68—86; AP, P EB, 5/15/68; SBD, 5/15/68,75)	_	_
Denver Post editorial: “With the goal of the project—landing of men on the moon by 1970—so close at hand, it would be sad indeed if NASA lost some key people now because of budget and morale problems. . . . There are future manned flights and space experiments to consider, and these will surely be crippled at infancy if NASA’s budget is cut back too severely.” {Denver Post, 6/24/68) In keynote address Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, noted no other program had given such impetus to technological and economic growth as national space program. “Those who oppose adequate spending on space technology are deliberately or inadvertently campaigning for a lower standard of living for our people, a declining Gross National Product for our Nation, and a secondary position in strength to that of the Soviet Union.” U.S. investment in space to date, he said, “has mostly been an investment in the future, the returns of which can be lost in large measure if we lack the vision and the vigor and the desire to keep this country great by maintaining a vigorous space effort. “Every major power and every nation eager to raise its standard of living and world influence strives to participate in space technology and space exploration. It certainly would be ironic if the United States, as the world’s leader in international cooperation and the world’s leader in standard of living, were to abandon or even neglect the source of such strength. I believe it might be labeled the worst mistake in history.” (Text; CR, 6/24/68, E5775—6; SBD, 6/25/68, 267; Aero Daily, 6/25/68) Gen. James Ferguson, AFSC Commander, said bioastronautics problems and provisions could have serious impact on mission performance, space station design, cost, and operations. Principal problems included those of crew rotation, crew size, compartment volume per crew member, radiation exposure, versatility of astronauts, station atmosphere, and prolonged weightlessness. In one study, savings from doubling crew rotation intervals from 30 to 60 days ranged from $220 million to $470 million per year, depending on altitude. Savings from increasing from 60 to 90 days were another $100 million a year. For same cost, slightly longer interval could support two more astronauts. Crew rotation intervals of two or more months should he goal. “If a future station can be expected to be useful over a period of many years and its cost can be amortized accordingly . . . efforts to achieve long crew rotation intervals have a very large potential payoff.” (Text; Aero Daily, 6/28/68) Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, described 100-man orbital workshop that could be operational by late 1970s. Proposed 615-ft-long, 1-million-lb vehicle, carrying 10,000 lb of experiments, would be launched in three separate parts by three Saturn V boosters and assembled in space. Baton-shaped station would revolve around hub in center which would serve as spaceport and zero-gravity laboratory. Crew would live and perform some work in 240-ft arm on one side of hub. On other side, 375-ft arm would house engine which would spin entire station at 3.5 rpm, creating centrifugal force to serve as artificial gravity. (Maloney, H Post, 6/26/68; AP, W Star, 6/26/68; CSM, 6/28/68) Arthur C. Clark, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, suggested that most earth inhabitants could not be very objective about possibility of extraterrestrial life because they were too “geocentrically minded,” still considering earth the center of the universe. “The whole history of astronomy teaches us to be cautious of any theory purporting to show that there is something special about the earth. In their various ways, the other planets may have orders of complexity as great as ours. Even the moon—which looked a promising candidate for geophysical simplicity less than a decade ago—has already begun to unleash an avalanche of surprises. “The discovery that Jupiter is quite warm and has precisely the type of atmosphere in which life is believed to have arisen on earth may be the prelude to the most significant biological findings of this century.” If we discover no trace of extraterrestrial life, he said, “even such a negative finding would give us much sounder understanding of the conditions in which living creatures are likely to evolve—and this in turn would clarify our views on the distribution of life in the universe as a whole.” (Leavitt, AF/SD, 8/68, 59-62)
International comment on Apollo 8 mission:	, In statement distributed by Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., Boris Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, hailed “hardware” and “courage” of Apollo 8 astronauts but called attention to “considerable accent” placed on “automatic devices” in Soviet space program. He said, “The Soviet Union is engaged in a large-scale program of planned studies and exploration of outer space, which provides for the investigation of the earth’s upper atmosphere and of near-earth outer space and studies of sun-earth relationships and of our closest space neighbors—the moon, venus and mars, and later, on more remote planets.” Cuban National Radio called mission “a total success.” Toss: “Due tribute should be paid to the courage and mastery of Frank Borman, William Anders and James Lovell who have accomplished this outstanding scientific and technical experiment. The successful flight of Apollo 8 ushers in a new stage in the history of space exploration.” Ten Soviet cosmonauts telegraphed Apollo crew congratulations for “another milestone in scientific and technical progress.” Pope Paul VI, in message to President Johnson: “Giving thanks to God for the successful completion of the magnificent enterprise of the Apollo 8 mission, we congratulate you and the people of the United States of America and particularly the intrepid space travelers, and invoke divine blessing upon all contributing to this noble achievement.” U.N. Secretary General U Thant: “The powerful thrust of the rocket engines, the awesome speeds attained in flight, the vast distances traveled, the precision of navigation and the fidelity of communications, aural and visual, all stagger the imagination and defy the comprehension of man.” Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia: “a great milestone in man’s continued search of the unknown.” Gov. Gen. Roland Michener of Canada, in message to President Johnson: Canadians had followed astronauts’ flight with “admiration for their courage and the technical skill of all who have a part in the enterprise.” Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan to President Johnson: feat showed America’s “courage and the high level of scientific technology.” In Kaduna, Nigeria, New Nigerian said Apollo 8, “Apart from being the supreme technological achievement ... of all time,” was “another exciting chapter in man’s eternal quest to triumph over his own natural environment.” Same skills and resources which were helping to conquer space ’’could easily be diverted to giving man a better life on earth itself—if only all of us would allow the good that is inherent in all mankind to assert itself.” (AP, B Sun, 12/28/68, 1; New Nigerian, 12/27/68, 1)
nasa released plans for lunar landing experiments. First LJ.S. astronauts to land on moon in 1969 would place three scientific experiments on lunar surface instead of more complex Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) originally planned. Change was necessitated by uncertainties in workload required to deploy ALSEP by astronauts in pressurized suits on moon’s surface. Mission’s primary objective would be to prove Apollo system by achieving successful moon landing and safe return to earth. During first landing, two astronauts would leave spacecraft for up to three hours on moon’s surface, making observations and photographing area in vicinity of landed spacecraft, collecting soil and rock samples, and deploying experiments. Scientific and medical data would be obtained on expenditure of astronauts’ energy, monitoring ability to perform in vacuum, extreme temperature, and 1/6 gravity for planning of longer, more complex missions. Experiments were (1) passive seismometer (self-contained 100-lb seismic station with earth-moon communications link, designed to last up to one year), (2) 70-lb laser ranging retro-reflector, and (3) 1-Ib solar-wind-composition experiment. They would provide data on internal activity of moon; would provide data to improve measurement of earth-moon distance, fluctuation of earth’s rotation rate, and variations in gravitational constant G, as well as to test theory of intercontinental drift by direct measurements from different continents; and would entrap noble gases (helium, neon, krypton, xenon) from solar wind for analysis. In second lunar landing mission, astronauts would deploy full geophysical station or alsep and conduct detailed field geology investigation. (nasa Release 68-200)
Associated Press quoted Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair, who was instrumental in having prayer removed from U.S. public schools, as saying she would register complaints with NASA against reading by Apollo 8 astronauts of portions of Genesis during lunar orbit and would organize mail campaign to bar prayer from space. (AP, W Post, 12/28/68, A9)
In Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial, Robert Hotz said: “The element of sharp competition between the U.S. and the USSR in manned space flight has unquestionably forced progress at a much more rapid pace than if either nation were going it alone. . . . Much has already been learned by these competitors from each other. It is a pity that the Soviets’ obsession with secrecy bars them from a more fruitful international exchange of technology. . . . “Events of the past month have put the space race into high gear again. With a lunar window opening in December, it is a strong possibility that both the U.S. and the USSR can launch a manned circumlu-nar mission as another step towards the ultimate lunar landing. With a Soyuz and an Apollo carrying the Hammer and Sickle and the Stars and Stripes, respectively, around the moon at about the same time, it would require a phlegmatic world indeed not to get excited at these extraterrestrial Olympics.” (Av Wk, 11/4/68,11)
S—II 2nd stage for fifth Apollo Saturn V mission left Seal Beach, Calif., onboard usns Point Barrow en route to Mississippi Test Facility (mtf) , where stage would undergo static testing before shipment to Ksc, Also onboard ship, to save $6,000 in transportation charges, was F—1 rocket engine. Engine would be unloaded for inspection at Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, then transferred to barge for remainder of trip to mtf. (msfc Release 68-23)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines said NASA announcement of plans for 1974 Mars landing marked revival “of a project that was sacrificed last year on the altar of the great God Apollo whose manned moon program was gobbling up all the funds at NASA’s disposal. It also marked the first positive action by NASA in two years directed to starting rather than terminating activities.” Its timing, one month after presidential election, seemed “to provide a tantalizing clue to the Nixonian philosophy about space.” Hines said it was likely new administration would heed post-Apollo views of NAS which had recommended more attention to scientific exploration of space with instruments. (W Star, 12/15/68, F4)
Apollo 204 accident was reviewed in Senate Report No. 956, issued by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The thorough investigation by the Apollo 204 Review Board . . . determined that the test conditions at the time of the accident were extremely hazardous. However, the test was not recognized as being hazardous by either NASA or the contractor prior to the accident. The committee can only conclude that NASA’s long history of successes in testing and launching space vehicles . . . led to overconfidence and complacency.” Committee recommended that “safety ... be considered of paramount importance in the manned space flight program even at the expense of target dates” and urged NASA to keep “appropriate Congressional committees informed on significant problems arising in its programs.” Individually, three Committee members—Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.), and Sen. Charles H. Percy (R-Ill.)—filed more critical separate reports. Sen. Brooke and Sen. Percy stated: “. . . NASA’s curious reticence to supply these facts and figures [Phillips Report] relevant to a thorough evaluation of Apollo program management brought the credibility of NASA and its top management into sharp question [and] this initial lack of candor as to the existence and then the status of the Phillips report threatened one of the essential assets of the space program—the confidence of the American public and their elected representatives.” Sen. Mondale said NASA “has an unfortunate habit of swamping Congress with engineering details and starving it for policy and management information. . . . Congress should be able to count on frank answers to pertinent, responsible, and legitimate inquiries.” Criticizing Committee’s report, Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) said in news release later, “Although the Senate Committee does charge NASA with such misdemeanors as overconfidence and complacency, the report remains a whitewash and an evasion of the real issues involved.” (Texts)
Times of India termed Apollo 8, “the most magnificent achievement in space to date.” It was “by any reckoning a tremendous achievement of science and technology” and “decidedly the most daring adventure man has ever undertaken.’ (Times of India, 12/26/68, 8)
Apollo 7 prime and backup crews successfully completed egress test at ksc. Astronauts performed both aided and unaided egress from spacecraft under simulated emergency conditions. At MSC three astronauts completed five-day vacuum chamber tests in spacecraft similar to command and service modules to be flown on second manned Apollo mission and lunar flights, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 9/10/69)
Apollo Program Director, b/g Samuel C. Phillips, told post-launch press conference at KSC early portion of Apollo 8 mission had been perfect: . . Apollo 8 is now on its way to the Moon. And ... I certainly envy the crew the magnificent views that they might have at this point as they were describing it to us. . . . To he able to see the entire earth. I think by this time in their flight, they are something over 10,000 miles high and moving at about 25,000 miles an hour. . . . The countdown . . . was—during most of the night actually a hit, and even into the late minutes of this morning, the count was proceeding with comfortable margins of time. The flight of the Saturn V was flawless in all of the maneuvers it was expected to make. The performance of the spacecraft . . . has similarly been flawless.” (Transcript)
In major organizational changes at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. W. R. Lucas, Director of Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, was named Director for Program Development, effective Dec. 16; Dave Newby was named Director of Center Operations; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Space Sciences Laboratory, was named Associate Director for Science. All were new positions, msfc Research and Development Operations would become Science and Engineering, with Hermann K. Weidner remaining Director; Industrial Operations would become Program Management under same director, E. F. O’Connor. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, said major function of new Program Development organization would be to “harden” complete package plans for new programs, such as space station. Director for Program Development would “help chart the course for this Center in the post-Apollo period, keeping in mind our Apollo program requirements and aap obligations.” (msfc Release 68—276; Marshall Star, 12/11/68,1)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
Two-volume Review Board report, Status of Actions Taken on the Apollo 204, was submitted to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ kasa Oversight Subcommittee by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. According to report, major changes made in Apollo project included: installing quickopening hatch; eliminating most combustible materials in cabin; remaking spacesuit, primarily of glass fiber instead of nylon; equipping and training launch pad workers for fire fighting; placing metal shielding over exposed electrical wiring; and replacing aluminum oxygen pipes with more-fire-resistant stainless steel pipes. NASA reported spacecraft had been modified by North American Rockwell Corp. so that it could use ordinary air or oxygen-enriched air, as well as 100% oxygen, while on launch pad. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 1/20/68, 1)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed Ninth National Conference of United Press International Editors and Publishers in Washington, D.C.: “For the conception and construction of the equipment necessary to the safe transport of men into space and for their accomplishment of productive tasks in that new atmosphere, a new mix of professional and scientific disciplines has been created which has forced cooperation between engineers and medical doctors. Many of the technologies which are essential to our sending three men to the moon and back did not exist a few years ago. They had to be invented, adapted or developed. . . . “We now have the giant boosters which have released man from his atmosphere, and . . . life support systems that can maintain him in space. As a result of the cleanliness requirements of the space program wre have the largest ‘clean rooms’ in the world—rooms which hospitals are now emulating. . . . Over 600 computers now comprise the largest and most advanced communications system in the world. The fuel cell, which had Iain dormant for many years, was activated to power spacecraft in orbit. Thirty public utility companies now have a $27,000,000 program for the adaptation of the fuel cell for home power units. We had to know on a real-time basis how fast the hearts of the astronauts were beating while they were in space . . . how much oxygen they were using, and how their muscles were responding ... so we invented another new system, biosensor to computer to data gathering equipment, and through communications network to the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston—from 100 ... or 800 ... or from of a million miles out in space. And a half a dozen newly formed companies are now manufacturing these adapted space-created instruments for the use of doctors and hospitals here on earth.” In conclusion Dr. Mueller quoted the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first Deputy Administrator: “None of us knows what the final destiny of man may be—or if there is any end to his capacity for growth and adaptation. Wherever this venture leads us, we in the United States are convinced that the power to leave the Earth-—to travel where we will in space—and to return at will—marks the opening of a brilliant new state in man’s evolution.” (Text)
In interview published in New York Times, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, science adviser-designate to President-elect Richard M. Nixon, said problem facing Government was not “Shall Government support and use science and technology, but how shall it do it. What are the priorities. . . .” Fundamental to use of science was knowledge; therefore, “one must have in any modern society a very important and extensive free basic research enterprise establishment, largely in universities, so that new areas of knowledge will be explored.” Basic research budget of country should increase at least 10% annually for next few years. When it came to using this knowledge, “the Government can, and somebody must, direct, set up the goals.” On space program, Dr. DuBridge said that “the astonishing discoveries” made by launching instruments into space justified further exploration from scientific point of view. When man entered picture as “another piece of the instrumentation that is needed for the exploration,” first effect “is that the costs get large. . . . Apollo landing of a man on the moon is vastly more expensive . . . than the Surveyor landing. ... By the same token, the information returned will be much greater, too. However, as the technology of the spacecraft improves, and our instruments need to get more complex, heavier, or longer lasting, there may very well be a time when putting a man up will actually be cheaper than trying to use automated instruments.” (Sullivan, NYT, 12/17/68, 1).	_
Soviet test pilot Eudard V. Yelyan test-flew Tu-144, U.S.S.R.’s delta-wing supersonic transport, on successful 38-min maiden flight from airport near Moscow. Tass reported “the equipment on board the airliner operated normally.” Aircraft was designed to carry 120—135 passengers at speeds to 1,600 mph over 4,000-mi range. It was equipped with four Kuznetsov N.K.—144 turbofan engines. Tass said sonic boom “is almost not felt” on earth because Tu-144 reached maximum speed at high altitudes. Later, New York Times editorial commented: “The long international debate about supersonic airliners is sure to be stepped up in the wake of the news that the Soviet entry, the TU—144, has made its first flight. Since it has not been claimed that this initial trial reached supersonic speeds, the likelihood is that the TU—144 was kept subsonic on its first outing. But Soviet airplane designers and builders have manufactured enough supersonic military planes to suggest that on a subsequent flight the TU—144 will fly faster than the speed of sound. ... In this country, the Soviet first will undoubtedly spur those who want to pour still more Government funds into the Boeing project to build an advanced supersonic plane that is faster and larger than the TU—144. Fortunately, this country’s technological prestige is now higher than ever in the wake of the Apollo 8 moon journey. That fact should help the incoming Nixon Administration to see that there are better uses for the nation’s scarce resources than to engage in a supersonic plane race whose economics are dubious and whose product’s contribution to noise pollution is all too loud.” (Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; UPl, W Star, 1/1/69, A7; Winters, B Sun, 1/1/69, Al; NYT, 1/2/69, 30)
Dr. Arthur Rudolph, Saturn V Manager at msfc for past 4)/, yr, was retiring after 38 yr in rocketry, MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, announced. He would be succeeded by Lee B. James, Deputy Director of Apollo program in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, (msfc Release 60-106; AP, NYT, 5/15/68,5; AP, W Star, 5/15/68, A2)
History of lunar nomenclature and tradition in naming lunar features was reviewed by Director of Fels Planetarium, Dr. I. M. Levitt, in Air Force and Space Digest. Knowledge from space research had created complications for specialists who had to name lunar features. In past, craters, mountains, rills, and seas on moon had heen named for scientists, mathematicians, and philosophers. In 1647, Johannes Hevelius had published Selenographica in Danzig, setting stage for naming lunar features. Ground rules were set down in 1932 hy International Astronomical Union (iau) , which formed committee of astronomers to select names. U.S.S.R. had asked 1967 General Assembly of iau to pass on 153 more names for features on moon’s hidden side. Levitt recommended that names of dead astronauts—both American and Russian—be accepted for lunar nomenclature; later, living astronauts could be similarly honored. Also pioneers in space research—“such as Goddard, von Braun, Gilruth, Newell, Ley, Lovelace, Flickinger, Stehling, and so on” —and astronomers and; benefactors of mankind could be considered. (.AF/SD, 1/68, 66-9)
President Johnson presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest award, to recently retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb at ceremony in Johnson City, Tex. He also awarded cluster to NASA Exceptional Service Medal held by Apollo 7 commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Exceptional Service Medals to Apollo 7 Astronauts R. Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele. President said U.S. was “ready to take that first great step out into the solar system and on to the surface of the nearest of the many mysterious worlds that surround us in space.” Noting that Apollo 7 had logged more than 780 man-hours in space—more than had been logged “in all Soviet manned flights to date”—and had accomplished 56 mission objectives, as many “in this one flight as were accomplished in the first five manned flights of the Gemini spacecraft,” he said: “This is not important as either a game or a contest. But it is important because the United States of America must be first in technology if it is to continue its position in the world. I believe today, as I did when we had our original hearings that created the Space Administration, that the United States must be first.” President read citation, presenting Medal to Webb for “outstanding leadership of America’s space program from 1961 to 1968. . . . More than any other individual he deserves the credit for the great achievements of the United States in the first decade of space, and for helping man to reach outward toward the stars.” Webb responded: “The citation and medal . . . should, in my view, be converted into some kind of holographic substance so it could be divided into thousands of parts . . . and each part should really go to an outstanding person in NASA, in our scientific group, Working in our universities, and in the great industrial organizations of this country that have really done the work.” (Transcript; Citation; PD, 11/8/68, 1568-71)
President Johnson announced promotion of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders (Maj., usaf) to lieutenant colonel under his policy of granting one-grade promotion to military astronaut after his first successful space mission. (Maynard, W Post, 12/29/68, A4; PD, 1/6/69, 5)
George Alexander reviewed in Washington Post Erik Bergaust’s Murder on Pad 34, story of Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire. Book was “characterized by sloppy errors of omission and commission, innuendo and pointlessness,” Alexander said. “It was good fortune, nothing else, that the various mechanical flaws and human faults that occurred in the . . . Mercury and Gemini programs did not coincide ... as they did inside Apollo-one. Foresight tries to prevent such coincidence, but . . . not all possible coincidence can be foreseen. . . . Accidents . . . will happen. And the searching investigation conducted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration into Apollo-one could find no evidence that the fatal fire was anything but an accident.” (Book World, W Post, 7/14/68,4-5)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator whom retiring Administrator James E. Webb had said would be named Acting NASA Administrator by President Johnson, represented “new breed of scientist-administrators making their way into government,” said John Lannan in Washington Evening Star. Unlike Webb, he was new to Government, having come up through “the scientific ranks of the sprawling General Electric Co. over a period of 19 years.” As Webb’s chief deputy since March, Dr. Paine had been authorizing and signing major announcements but had yet to confront Congress. He and Webb saw eye-to-eye, he had said, on agency’s current program emphasis, which had been criticized as too heavily oriented to manned flight. “I am a very strong supporter of doing as much as we can in planetary areas.” Dr. Paine said, “but it’s one of those cases where you’ve got limited resources and you’re trying to do all the things you can. You’ve got to do things in aeronautics; we’ve got to finish up the Apollo program; and we’ve got to do more in earth resources (surveying them from space) here on this planet.” A lot of NASA’s future “is in the questions that we’ll be raising as we continue to probe the planets.” On balancing space needs against problems of cities, Dr. Paine felt U.S. suffered from “what I would call almost a national hypochondria ... in many ways crippling some of the forward-looking things we’re able to do. ... I feel that one of the very highest priority matters is the war on poverty and the problems of the cities. But in the meantime, we’re making . . . a lot of progress in the civil rights area and really, this nation is a good deal healthier than we’re giving it credit for today.” He was confident of a resurgence of public interest in space once the Apollo program got underway. (W Star, 9/17/68, A4)
Washington Evening Star editorial: “The Russians are going to the moon just as fast as their technology will carry them. ... It is, of course, impossible to judge what lies ahead or guess what problems either nation may encounter before the lunar landings are carried out. But if all goes well it looks as though both nations might be ready to go in about a year. We would have no objection at all if a way could be found to ‘fix’ the race, and an agreement reached to make the landings literally simultaneous. It would be one way of assuring that neither nation would pursue the goal of national prestige to the point of tragedy.” (W Star, 10/25/68, A10)
nasa announced that H. Julian Allen, who joined naca in 1936, would retire as Director of Ames Research Center Nov. 15. arc Associate Director John F. Parsons would serve as Acting Director. Leading authority on supersonic and hypersonic wind-tunnel design, Allen had originated concept of bluntness for reentry shapes—as used in Apollo spacecraft—and had received naca’s Distinguished Service Medal, NASA medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, aiaa Sylvanus A. Reed Award, and Air Force Assn.’s Air Power Trophy. After his retirement Allen would be available to NASA as a consultant, (nasa Release 68-183; SBD, 10/28/68, 272; nasa Ann)
In Washington Post Rudy Abramson of Los Angeles Times described retiring nasa Administrator James E. Webb as “a huckster. A good one. Maybe the best Washington has ever seen.” Even when he could talk politicians into putting up $5 billion in a year for civilian space program, “he left many of them feeling a little guilty because they had not done enough.” Congressional opponents had charged he was overzealous to point of dishonesty in protecting his empire at NASA. “Space buffs were piqued because Webb continued calling the Apollo spacecraft a ‘capsoole’ and publicly seemed to view the astronauts with childlike adoration. But Webb had it where it counted. President Johnson ranked him with Robert S. McNamara as an administrator. Influential Congressmen sided with him against their colleagues who challenged the wisdom of the space program and the quality of the Webb management. . . . “If Richard Nixon is elected President, it is a dead certainty that he would not want to keep Webb on as NASA Administrator. Hubert Humphrey might also want his own man. But even if Webb could stay in the job, it’s probably all for the better that he quit now. The investigation following the Apollo accident permanently soured his relations with some members of Congress. One has to suspect that Webb is leaving the space program because the country seemed less and less interested in listening to its evangelist.” (W Post, 9/26/68, K4)
At NASA Pasadena (Calif.) Office third annual awards ceremony, Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, said: “During the next few years . . . our efforts in astronomical observations, in space applications and in planetary exploration, should receive priority. ... In astronomy, perhaps more than in any other scientific discipline, major progress has been achieved when a new observing technique is used. In the next several years we will provide our astronomers with such new observational tools—telescopes and detectors in space above the absorbing and obscuring effect of the earth’s atmosphere. ... we envision a complementary program using both manned and automated observational platforms leading to permanent observatories in space in the next 10 to 15 years. On the other hand, OAO, oso, and the small astronomy satellite will carry the burden of automated observation, while the Apollo Telescope Mount provides us with early experience in the contribution man can make in astronomy. Before very many years, it should be possible for us to move into astra-type systems in which we combine the best of both techniques, i.e., long-term automated instruments in orbit of a cost and complexity which justify their being serviced and maintained by man. . . . “Although . . . post Apollo plans are much more modest than previously announced, even at these reduced levels, it should be possible to carry out some important near-earth and extended lunar missions following the Apollo landings. However, there remains no clear picture as to the future of manned space flight beyond the use of the launch vehicles and rockets left over from Apollo. The resolution of the future goals of manned space flight must await the . . . next administration.” (Text)
Westinghouse Defense and Space Center engineer Paul J. Kiefer had received AIAA annual award for “outstanding contribution to aerospace sciences or technology” for overall mechanical design and development of Gemini rendezvous radar system and for development of lunar TV camera for use in Apollo series. (Westinghouse Release; AP, W Star, 7/5/68, A3)
British physicist Samuel Tolansky, appointed special investigator for Apollo program, had predicted discovery of industrial diamonds among 40 lb of matter Apollo spacecraft would bring back from moon. Theory was based on supposition that lunar craters had been caused by meteor impact or volcanic eruptions producing shock waves. “You can create diamonds by passing a shock wave through carbon,” he said. “And there has to be carbon on the moon.” (NANA, Pasadena Independent, 7/9/68)
Mathematical tools used to predict lunar motions were so imprecise that they hampered evaluation of lunar flights and use of moon as timepiece, according to two articles in Science by group of JPL scientists. Amplifying report, Dr. J. Derral Mulholland, JPL scientist in charge of revision of methods of prediction, said errors seemed to derive largely from inadequate emphasis on gravital influence of other planets, particularly Jupiter and Venus. JPL was preparing computer program to prediet lunar position for future space flights. (Science, 5/24/68, 874-8; Sullivan, NYT, 5/24/68,47)
USAP-Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft, takes of} from Dobbins afe on first test flight. C—5 reached 230 mph and 10,000-foot attitude on 94-minute flight, not attempting maximum speed of 350 mph. (afsc photo) commercial plane of this size.” (AT5C Neimreview, 6/68, I; Witkin, ATT, 7/1/68, 1; AP, W Star, 7/1/68, 1; AFHF Newsletter, 8/68, I) * Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of gsfc Institute for Space Studies, reviewed Arthur C. Clarke’s The Promise of Space. Clarke had described chronology of Apollo decision as “politics and astronautics combined” and had written: “The verdict of history may well be that the United States made the correct decision even if from dubious motives.” Dr. Jastrow said Clarke “seems to betray a point of view that the primary purpose of the space program is, or should be, the exploitation of its scientific potential and the search for knowledge in the space around the earth and on the other bodies of the solar system. “My own view is that he is mistaken. Spacecraft have yielded important scientific discoveries , , . but it seems clear to me that preservation of national security, and not scientific research per se, was the motivation for the Kennedy proposal. Kennedy acted out of a deep gut instinct, shared by the Congress and the American people, that the United States had been presented with a major challenge to which it must respond effectively or pay a heavy penalty. The decision on the expanded space program may have been accelerated by the events of the spring of 1961, but the Soviet challenge . . . was permanent.” Dr. Jastrow saw promise of space as “dollars-and-cents return in increased productivity in the U.S.” To Clarke it was “the universe—or nothing.” (W Post, Book World, 6/30/68, 1; CR, 7/9/68, E6290) During June: Last of 11 JC—130 Hercules turboprop aircraft left Patrick afb, Fla., to be replaced by larger, high-speed jet EC—135N Apollo Range Instrumentation aircraft. With complex electronic instrumentation, Air Force Eastern Test Range Hercules had supported hundreds of Cape Kennedy space and missile launches, including Atlas, Titan, Polaris, Minuteman, Saturn, Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. When fully operational in 1961, they had replaced earlier C—54s. (afsc Newsre-view, 6/68, 4)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary. In preparation for first manned Apollo flight, Apollo 7 spacecraft command module (cm) and service module (sm) had been mated in ksc altitude chamber to confirm compatible operation systems. Saturn IB launch vehicle 2nd-stage engine was being modified to strengthen propellant feed lines to augmented spark igniter. Apollo/Saturn 503 mission might be first manned Saturn V flight. Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle had successfully completed eight-day vacuum chamber test of Apollo 2TV—1 cm and sm at msc June 24. All tests necessary to help verify Apollo for first manned flight had been completed, with review of test data in progress. Last of seven scheduled verification tests of modified Apollo earth landing system had been postponed to complete analysis of all possible test conditions before drop of 13,000-lb full-scale Apollo cm from aircraft at Naval Air Facility, El Centro, Calif. Test would simulate severe landing condition using one of two drogue parachutes and two of three main parachutes. Ultimate load test of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes in reefed condition was scheduled no earlier than June 27. Repeat of unsuccessful test, it would be conducted from 13,00-lb parachute test vehicle at aircraft altitude of 46,000 ft. (Text; upi, W Post, 6/22/68, A8; SBD, 6/25/68, 270; 6/27/68, 285)
John N. Wilford described in New York Times front page article decline in U.S. space expenditures since 1966: “Under pressure from the war in Vietnam, civilian space spending has dropped from $5.9-billion in the peak year of 1966 to $4.8-billion this year, and it is expected to drop much lower in the fiscal year starting in July. Employment in space work at private companies, universities and Government centers has declined from 420,000 in 1966 to fewer than 300,000 today, and it is still dropping at the rate of 4,000 a month.” Signs of decline were clearly visible, in “ghost towns” that were once test sites, and in removal of numerous projects from NASA’s post-Apollo plans. Fortunately, impact of cutback was softened because NASA had not replaced many personnel who ordinarily left agency each year and because personnel dismissed were absorbed by growing aircraft industry and expanding military space program. But there was a growing feeling “that once astronauts have landed on the moon, they will have no other place of significance to go for several years because of sharp budget cuts. These cuts have trimmed to the bone all preparations for future missions. It is as if the astronauts are heading for a dead-end on the moon.” (NYT, 4/16/68, 1)
JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan, who had devised method using computers to improve spacecraft photos of moon and Mars, planned to link computers with electron microscopes to photograph single atom. Within six months much of connection work should he done, he said, and “with luck, we could be taking pictures of atoms in a year or so.” (Dighton, Glendale News-Press, 7/5/68, 1)
In Apollo spacecraft loading tests, drogue parachutes would be tested within several days at Naval Air Facility, with 13,000-lb test vehicle dropped from aircraft at 46,000-ft altitude, subjecting parachutes to “ultimate loads” in reefed condition before they opened fully. Drop, repeat of previous test which failed, was to 'complete verification test series which had begun in 1967. (Text)
Prof. J. Hoover Mackin, one of four experts chosen by NASA to examine first rock samples to be returned from moon, died in Houston, Tex., at age 62. He had held William Stamps Farish Chair in Geology at Univ. of Texas. (AP, W Post, 8/14/68, B6)
Apollo 7 commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received from Italian Ambassador to U.S. Egidio Ortona gold medallion awarded by Assn, of Man in Space, group of Italian scientists and jurists, at Washington, D.C., party in his honor. (Billington, W Star, 11/11/68, B7)
First flight test of Apollo lunar module (Apollo 5) Jan. 22—23 was adjudged success, nasa officials were gratified with maturity of spacecraft’s hardware; studies indicated LM showed more maturity in its first flight than many previous spacecraft, including some designed to be manned. Although overly conservative programming of guidance computer caused early shutdown of first descent propulsion system burn, data indicated no problems with computer or system’s engine. (nasa Release 68—19)
In Christian Science Monitor, Robert C. Cowen asked, “Is U.S. space ability eroding?” and warned, “Even if it beats the Soviet Union to the moon, the American space capability relative to that of the Soviet Union may have atrophied.” At Boeing Co. Space Div. some valuable space teams were splitting up. “It will take time as well as money to buy this kind of asset back, if and when it is wanted.” At JPL, officials had said personnel cutbacks now were “reaching the bone.” More than any other facility, JPL “embodies American competence in this challenging field.” Plight of Boeing, as an industrial contractor, and JPL, “as an outstanding government space laboratory, typify the peril the American space program faces. Loss of funds . . . means more than postponement of certain projects. ... It threatens also at least partial loss of the competence to carry out such projects in the future.” {CSM, 9/27/68)
Entire thrust of Soviet space program pointed to circumlunar flight by cosmonauts before U.S., according to former astronaut Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn). Speaking at Beloit College symposium on oceanography, he predicted NASA might try to send crew around moon in autumn as counter to Soviet manned space spectacular. (Lewis, B News, 5/19/68)
Under Administrator James E. Webb’s leadership, Don Kirkman commented in Washington Daily News, NASA had “put John Glenn in orbit in the Mercury capsule, brought back all the Gemini spacemen without mishap, and intended to put U.S. astronauts on the moon before the 1960s ended.” Unmanned spaceships had photographed moon and Mars and probed Venus host of weather, communications, and navigation satellites had been launched. But since Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire and with needs of Vietnam war, “every new budget brought new blows.” ( W News, 9/17/68, 9)
nasa issued summary of combined findings of Accident Board and Review Board appointed to investigate May 6 accident which destroyed Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) at Ellington afb. Pilot, Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, had to eject few seconds after loss of helium pressure in propellant tanks caused premature shutdown of attitude control rocket system. Helium had been inadvertently depleted earlier than usual in flight. Armstrong incurred minor injuries. Review Board, appointed by then nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine to study accident’s possible impact on Apollo program, discovered no unfavorable effects on lunar landing project, particularly lunar module. It agreed with Accident Investigation Board in calling for improvements in design and operating practices in LLRV and urged more stringent control over such flying programs and greater attention to all NASA lunar landing simulators, (nasa Release 68—182)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center, was announced winner of Rockefeller Public Service Award in science category. He had supervised plans for rocket installation on Lunar Orbiter and Surveyor spacecraft. Dr. Silverstein had been first Director of Space Flight Programs in NASA Hq. in 1958. Under his leadership first U.S. man-in-space program, Project Mercury, had been planned and groundwork laid for Gemini and Apollo programs. He had joined naca at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929 and helped design and later was in charge of Full-Scale Wind Tunnel. He was transferred to Lewis Laboratory in 1943, where he was responsible for conception, design, and construction of first U.S. supersonic propulsion wind tunnels. After serving in Washington, D.C., three years he returned to LeRC as Director in 1961. Leonard C. Meeker, State Dept, legal adviser, won award in foreign affairs and international administration for his work on 1967 space law treaty. (W Post, 11/14/68, B7; lerc Biog, 4/67; Lewis News, 11/22/68,1)
NASA announced award of $7.4-million contract to Link Group, General Precision Systems, Inc., for maintenance and modification support of MSc’s simulator complex, continuing services provided by Link Group since March 1964. Apollo mission simulators, at msc and at ksc, had provided flight training for astronaut crews in which nearly every detail of flight except weightlessness could be simulated, (nasa Release 68—20).
Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial: “Those who argue that the country should be spending more money on important domestic programs are correct. But these increases should not have to come at the expense of American space exploration and newly-won world prestige. NASA’s needs deserve high priority. There should he no lost opportunities. When the first American sets foot on the moon next year, his accomplishment should symbolize a beginning, not an ending.” (C Plain Dealer, 12/30/68)
Major administrative events affecting NASA and its role in space were resignation of Administrator James E. Webb in October, after 7% yr as NASA’s head, and budget cuts necessitating program and personnel reductions. Press marked Webb retirement with praise for many accomplishments of U.S. space program during his leadership. Webb, planning to devote time to interests in education and urban and foreign affairs, continued to serve as consultant to Acting Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. NASA FY 1969 budget request of $4.37 billion, already smallest since 1963 and $700 million below FY 1968 request, was further trimmed by Congress because of urgent national needs in other areas, particularly Vietnam war and urban problems. Authorization of $4,013 billion was lowered to appropriation of $3,995 billion-—$375.12 million below original request. Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968 again reduced NASA funds, as well as funds for dod and other agencies. Dr. Paine in October announced NASA interim operating plan limited to $3.85 billion for FY 1969. Cutbacks included “sharply limited and deferred” Apollo Applications program, end to Saturn IB and V booster production, 50% cut in advanced mission studies, reduced lunar and planetary exploration program, one-year delay in NERVA development, slips in Biosatellite program, and reductions in astronomy, physics, and basic research. In November Dr. Paine said that below $4-billion level NASA could no longer “hold together our hard-won capabilities and utilize them effectively in critical programs; some of them would have to be dropped entirely.” (EH)
In Pravda, Prof. Boris Petrov, Soviet guidance mechanisms specialist, said U.S.S.R. preferred not to send men to moon at this point, though unmanned Zond V and Zond VI “were adapted for piloted flight.” (Reuters, W Post, 12/31/68, A3)
nasa said it had reassigned management responsibility for Saturn I Workshop airlock module and modified lunar module ascent stage for Apollo Telescope Mount from msc to msfc, to establish satisfactory balance between Apollo Applications and Apollo programs. Move placed aa program design and integration responsibilities under single NASA center. Management responsibilities encompassed systems engineering, including development test and integration, to ensure compatibility of flight hardware and ground support equipment. Airlock module, mounted on Saturn IB vehicle, would provide 65-in-dia airlock tunnel for Apollo astronauts between spacecraft and living area of workshop inside hydrogen tank of rocket’s 2nd stage. Lunar module ascent stage was being modified as control station for ATM. AA program would further develop space capability in series of earth-orbital long-duration flights using Apollo hardware and other facilities, (nasa Release 68—159)
essa was studying solar flare prediction technique and ground observatory support for NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount flight scheduled for 1971. NASA had transferred $30,000 to essa for six-month investigation to enable astronauts to know when and where solar flare would occur within accuracy of 1,000 mi out of 860,000-mi-wide face of sun. essa also would study data required for maximum results from atm mission and examine existing data collection networks and observing procedures. Effort would be monitored by atm Project Office and Space Sciences Laboratory at msfc. (msfc Release 68—103; SBD, 5/15/68, 73)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed joint meeting of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute (casi) in Montreal: Systems engineering concept applied to management “was pioneered and developed in aerospace programs and is being increasingly applied as a powerful tool in the management of other major enterprises.” In NASA most extensive application was in Apollo program. Factors unique to manned space flight had contributed to management approach, including “sheer size of Apollo program, larger in . . . lead time, money, organization and technological development than any previous program.” Special feature was high reliability and safety required. And space program had been executed under scrutiny of press, public, Congress, and scientific community. Weight and volume budgeting were critical. High cost of flight-testing space vehicles made maximum ground testing necessary, as well as all-up (concurrent rather than sequential) flight testing. Vehicle was as complete as practicable for each flight, to obtain maximum information from minimum number of flights and provide earliest possible system readiness. Open-ended mission concept was used to accomplish as many flight objectives per vehicle as consistent with safety and mission success. Review of status throughout mission determined length of mission. Redundant, or alternate, means of operation reduced ability of single failure to endanger crew or mission. Prime design consideration in all manned space flights was safety. (Text; UPl, H Chron, 7/10/68)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart were scheduled to be launched on Saturn V in second manned Apollo space flight. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 with Saturn IB booster, would carry Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham into earth orbit in third quarter of 1968. (nasa Release 68-81; W Star, 4/28/68)
In New York Times Walter Sullivan described “The Sun-Spot Menace to Astronauts.” Apollo 7 and U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz III served as reminders that sunspots were reaching their 11-yr peak. If eruptions were particularly severe, protons were hurled out at almost speed of light. These could penetrate spacecraft. While Apollo 7 astronauts were never in danger, Soviet spacecraft placed in orbits reaching north beyond latitude 51° might “nudge zone” within which protons ejected by sun “rain fiercely on the atmosphere.” Major flare had occurred Oct. 30 just after Soyuz III returned to earth. If astronauts had been in orbit —particularly if they had been outside spacecraft—they could have been subjected to hazardous radiation. Many warnings preceded this event. For moon journey it should be possible to postpone or cut short flight if sun looked ominous. In any miscalculation, radiation exposure to astronauts inside spacecraft would be severe only during most intense outbursts. However, on prolonged journeys to other planets there would be no escape. “It may therefore be necessary to design the spacecraft so that a portion of its interior will be shielded from such radiation.” (NYT, 11/10/68, 7E) Zond VI reentered and softlanded in a predetermined area in Central Asia Nov. 17. Unlike Zond V, which had plunged directly through upper atmosphere, Zond VI skipped across outer layers of atmosphere to reduce its reentry speed and then resumed its descent with aerodynamic forces. Announcing recovery, Tass said Zond VI had for first time tested a “more complex and promising method of the return of spacecraft from interplanetary trajectories—the method of controlled descent with the use of aerodynamical lifting force (aerodynamical quality) of the descending craft. . . . “The braking of the descending apparatus in the atmosphere . . . was effected along a trajectory with two immersions in the atmosphere. During the first immersion . . . the second cosmic speed ... [11 km per sec, 24,607 mph] was reduced to 7.6 kilometers a second (17,000 mph) through aerodynamical braking. In doing so, the descending apparatus . . . was oriented through the onboard control system in such a way that it, passing through the dense layers of the atmosphere, left them and next continued along the ballistic trajectory until the second immersion . . . [in which] the further lowering of the descending apparatus was also effected along the trajectory of controlled descent with the use of aerodynamical qualities which ensured its return to the Earth in the pre-set district.” Zond VI was sixth spacecraft in Zond series [see Sept. 15—21]. (AP, W Star, 11/11/68, 1; NYT, 11/15/68, 8; gsfc SSR, 11/15/68, 11/30/68; Winters, B Sun, 11/19/68, 1; Kamm, NYT, 11/19/68, 1; SBD, 11/19/68, 71-2)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 27 background briefing on NASA FY 1969	budget, in which Administrator James E. Webb explained how Apollo program had been kept close to schedule in spite of severe budget cuts. Although budget had been reduced $600-million in 1964, NASA had been given great deal of flexibility to reprogram funds. “This in effect permitted the driving forward of the program even though there were substantial reductions in the plan. I think if you examine all of the very large systems development in the country, you will not find a one that has kept more on schedule, given more for the money, and more nearly realized its goals on time than the Apollo, in spite of the fire, in spite of the reductions. The kind of rolling readjustment that we have had to make . . . has involved very large problems. And the projections we made as to our capability to meet problems of that kind have pretty well been borne out. . . . The fact is within this short period of time the Saturn V has flown. The heat shield on the Apollo has been improved. Service module has been tested. LM has been tested. And we have I think moved about as rapidly as any program—certainly more rapidly than any program of a comparable complexity.” Webb said NASA and dod were studying closer cooperation “in the area of orbiting laboratories,” such as mol and Saturn V Workshop. He envisioned production of “a basic capability of a rather primitive sort, something like an Antarctic base flown on the Saturn V which could be used for any national purpose.” (Transcript)
John Lannan in Washington Evening Star called GSFC “home base” for Apollo 7 astronauts. All their communications would pass through Center. Communicating with some or all lunar spacecraft would be 14 land stations, 4 ships, and 8 aircraft around the world, manned by 4,000 persons. All circuits used would be put together from GSFC switching centers. Except for astronaut’s electrocardiagram and his voice, all mission data would be channeled in digital form, which meant vast bulk of detail controlling system itself, in addition to mission data from Houston or spacecraft, could be handled rapidly by computers. (W Star, 9/2/68,1)
