Baltimore Sun said Indiana Univ. had announced plans for experiments with nasa to determine problems in making future lunar colonies selfsupporting. Studies to start in August would probe feasibility of growing earth plants in lunar soil to provide food for manned space stations and possibly fodder for animals transported to moon colonies in 20 to 30 yrs. “Moon grow” experiment would use lunar soil retrieved by lunar missions and would expand as more material became available. Experiments would be conducted by astrobotanist Dr. Paul Mahlberg and team at msc laboratory and later at university. (Perkinson, B Sun,
Retirement of Dr. Abe Silverstein, LeRC Director, was announced by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. He would be succeeded Nov. 1 by OART Acting Administrator Bruce T. Lundin. In requesting retirement, Dr. Silverstein wrote: “As NASA engages in its second ten-year program, it may be important that the men whose decisions initiate the new long-range projects be available to complete them. Since I do not think I can stretch my 40 years of service into 50, it is perhaps best ... if I bow out now.” Few have made so great a contribution to our national space effort,” Dr. Paine said. Dr. Silverstein had been first Director of Space Flight Programs in NASA Hq. in 1958. Under his leadership first U.S. man-in-space program, Project Mercury, had been planned and groundwork laid for Gemini and Apollo programs. He had joined NASA at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929 and helped design and later was in charge of Full-Scale Wind Tunnel. Transferring to Lewis Laboratory in 1943, he was responsible for conception, design, and construction of first U.S. supersonic-propulsion wind tunnels. After three years with NASA Hq., 1958—1961, he returned to LeRC as Director. Lundin had served NASA since 1943, when he joined staff at Lewis. In 1961 he was appointed Associate Director for Development. In May 1968 he went to NASA Hq. as Deputy Associate Administrator for oart. (nasa Release 69—145; LeRC Release 69-61; LeRC Biog 4/67)
Washington Post editorial on Apollo 12 launch: “Through the peculiarities of our time, we are all about to become participants, albeit vicariously, in the kind of research and exploration that has been carried out previously by lonely scientists almost in isolation. Radio and television make it possible for us to watch and to hear two explorers as they go about the somewhat mundane business of making and recording observations, picking up rocks, and setting up equipment. As these flights roll on through the next few years, we will watch the slow process of exploration proceed. In a way, it will be like being there when Darwin traveled around the world and made the observations that resulted in his theory of evolution or when Lewis and Clark explored the Northwest. Not too much should be expected from any one trip or any one set of experiments. It is the totality of knowledge, not its fragments, that counts.” (W Post, 11/15/69, A20)
nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders, Apollo 8 astronaut, told Western Conference of Young Presidents’ Organization in Phoenix, Ariz., that U.S. lost $13 billion each year in agricultural production from insects, disease, and fire. Use of satellite sensors could improve surveys of agricultural and forest resources, aid mineral and petroleum prospecting, obtain better inventory of earth’s water sources, detect natural and man-made geography changes, sense ocean currents and temperatures to aid fishing industry and improve routing of commercial shipping, and study effects of environmental and water pollution. While NASA space expenditures were averaging about $4.5 billion annually— about 2/3 of 1% of GNP—nearly $4 billion was spent in U.S. for nondurable toys and sport supplies, $4.7 billion for foreign travel, and over $6.5 billion in amusements. Anders urged international harmony through space. “We travel through space on a small planet. The Earth looked so tiny in the heavens that there were times during the Apollo 8 mission when I had trouble finding it. If you can imagine yourself in a darkened room with only one clearly visible object, a small blue-green sphere about the size of a Christmas tree ornament, then you can begin to grasp what the Earth looks like from space. I think all of us subconsciously think the Earth is fiat or at least almost infinite. Let me assure you that, rather than a massive giant, it should be thought of more as the fragile Christmas tree ball which we should handle with considerable care. . . . From space, the earth is indivisible. There are no flags, no national boundaries. Let us on Earth then use the Communications Revolution to break down the barriers which separate us, so that all of Earth’s people will be truly brothers.” (CR, 10/6/69, E8190—2; nasc pio) *. Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and wives arrived at Las Palmas, Canary Islands, for two-day rest before proceeding to Madrid and meeting with Gen. Francisco Franco during 38-day goodwill tour. (AP, NYT, 10/6/69)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman received gold medal for “distinguished service to humanity” from National Institute of Social Sciences in New York. Institute President Frank Pace, Jr., said, “The great scientific adventure in which you extend the reach of man cannot equal for us the moments in which you expanded the human spirit.” Borman replied, “The awesome power of today’s technology undoubtedly terrifies many social scientists. But far from subjugating man, I think this technology, if properly applied, is the only chance to preserve the dignity of human life.” (AP, W Star, 11/21/69, A2)
Apollo 12 prelaunch press conferences were held at ksc and msc. Operations were proceeding as planned toward launch from ksc at 11:22 am est Nov. 14. Astronauts were in good health and weather was expected to be within minimums for launch. Liquid-hydrogen tank that had leaked Nov. 12 had been replaced, liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been loaded, and conditions were all go. Launch azimuth had been expanded to 160° to provide 120 min additional time for liftoff and greater opportunity for launch on Nov. 14. (Transcript)
President Nixon sent telegram to Apollo 11 astronauts: “On the eve of your epic mission, I want you to know that my hopes and my prayers—and those of all Americans—go with you. Years of study and planning and experiment and hard work on the part of thousands have led to this unique moment in the story of mankind; it is now your moment and from the depths of your minds and hearts and spirits will come the triumph all men will share. I look forward to greeting you on your return. Until then, know that all that is best in the spirit of mankind will be with you during your mission and when you return to earth.” President also telephoned astronauts: “. . . as you lift off to the moon, you lift the spirits of the American people as well as the world. . . . You carry with you a feeling of good will in this greatest adventure man has ever taken. . . .” {PD, 7/21/69, 997)
MSFC announced award of eight-month identical $400,000 contracts to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. and Bendix Corp. for preliminary design and definition studies of dual-mode lunar roving vehicles. DLRV would provide mobility for one astronaut on lunar surface and could be operated by remote control from earth while making automated, long-range traverses of large lunar areas. DRLV would be delivered to moon aboard Apollo lm. After astronauts left, it would be placed in remote control for geological and geophysical trips of 600 mi or more for one year, during which it would collect up to 200 lbs of lunar samples and measure lunar terrain. It would then rendezvous with manned spacecraft and transfer samples for return to earth for analysis. (msfc Release 69-110)
msfc announced it had completed negotiations with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. on $4,075,490 contract modification extending F—1 engine deliveries through June 1970 to align engine effort to stretchout in production rate of Saturn Y boosters. F-l engines for initial order of 15 Saturn V boosters had been slated for April 1969 delivery. msfc also announced award of $1,239,045 contract modification to ibm for work in connection with 31 launch-vehicle data adapters and 31 launch-vehicle digital computers. Adjustments, necessitated by changes in Apollo launch schedule, provided for streamlining contractor’s plan for product identification control and accounting system. (msfc Releases 69—78, 69—81)
Psychological, technical, and political factors had combined to enable U.S. to win lunar landing race over U.S.S.R., said Harry Schwartz in New York Times. Moscow had shown overconfidence in underrating American capabilities, ignored lunar rendezvous technique adopted by U.S., and purged Nikita S. Khrushchev, who had been “enamored of space exploits and the propaganda they gave him.” New Soviet leaders had changed priorities to concentrate on domestic problems. Since U.S. lunar landing, however, “two very different reactions are visible in the Soviet Union.” Scientists, engineers, and many ordinary people were overcome with admiration. Ideologists and Soviet propaganda managers were deeply unhappy, “and their regret that it was not Soviet cosmonauts who went to the moon is scarcely hidden.” (AIT, 7/27/69)
New York Times said Dr. Carlos Varsavsky, Director of Argentine Radio Astronomy Institute at La Plata, and 23 team members engaged in international research in radioastronomy faced dismissal for joining general strike May 10 in defiance of Argentine government. They had received notifications of termination of appointment. (NYT, 6/15/69, 24) lated lunar landings in third lunar landing training vehicle (lltv) at Ellington afb, Tex, Armstrong piloted lltv to 100- and 300-ft altitude and practiced touchdown maneuvers in preparation for lunar landing during Apollo 11 mission, to be launched July 16. Armstrong told newsmen lLtv did “excellent job in simulating the landing characteristics of the lunar module.” Flights were first for Armstrong since crash of second lltv Dec. 8, 1968. First lltv, piloted by Armstrong, had crashed May 6, 1968. (upi, NYT, 6/16/69, 1; msc Release 69—49; W Star, 6/17/69, A5)
Since “any contamination of the earth from the moon would affect all men and all nations,” said New York Times, protective arrangements “should be approved by an international group, preferably by a formal United Nations committee. In the future men will go to Mars and other parts of the solar system where the prospects of finding living organisms are much greater than they are on the moon. If Americans now monopolize the key decisions regarding protection of the earth’s environment, they will have no grounds for objecting later on if Russians, Chinese, Germans, Japanese, Brazilians or others monopolize similar decisions affecting human beings returning from more distant celestial bodies.” (NYT, 6/7/69, 32)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, spoke before student seminar at California Museum of Science and Technology in Los Angeles: “Besides serving as a subject of scientific exploration for its own secrets, the moon may be an important base for outward looking space science programs of the future.” It might eventually support large optical telescopes. There was strong evidence “that the most ideal location for large radio telescopes will eventually be the far side of the moon. This may be the only place within our convenient reach where the earth, which will become increasingly noisy as a radio source, may be completely screened out. In addition, the lunar surface presents us with a very large stable base, with only 1/6 gravity, no wind disturbance and no atmosphere absorption at any wave length. . . . Another attractive possibility is to use stations on both the moon and earth as a radio interferometer baseline for highly precise directional radio astronomy.” (Text)
At Salzburg news conference preceding celebration of his 75th birthday, German rocketry pioneer Prof. Hermann Oberth proposed that man extract usable raw materials from moon and store them suspended in gravity-free zone between moon and earth. Materials could then be retrieved from area and brought to earth. He suggested erection of giant concave “space mirrors” to gather celestial light and reflect it on earth as heat to melt polar caps and improve earth’s climate. He predicted development of electrically propelled spacecraft and electromagnetic catapults to launch spacecraft without consuming fuel. During celebration, sponsored by Hermann Oberth Society of Nuremberg, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said Oberth’s ideas on rocketry published in 1923 remained valid to date. (NYT, 6/29/69, 3)
Astronaut Prank Borman repeated Apollo 8 reading from Genesis at White House service attended by President and family, Vice President, Cabinet members, Congressmen, and members of Joint Chiefs of Staff, and of diplomatic corps. During sermon, Dr. Paul S. Smith, President of Whittier College and member of Religious Society of Friends, said: “It was a philosopher . . . who, two thousand years ago, first recounted a voyage to the moon. Lucian called it The True History but confessed in the preface that he wrote ‘of things which are not and never could have been.’ It was a political satirist’s precautionary disclaimer because his real subject was the stupidity of human warfare. His lunar voyagers got caught up in internecine strife between the moonmen and the sunmen over the colonization of Venus! If there is something instructive in the thought, it may be the implication that after two millennia of philosophy men are still fighting over real estate and still dying in the name of philosophical abstractions, but that a voyage to the moon is just as feasible (though somewhat more expensive) as a trip to Timbuktu.” (Wiegers, W Post, 1/21/69, Bl; CR, 7/22/69, H6189—90)
In inaugural address following his taking oath of office as President of U.S., Richard M. Nixon said: “Those who would be our adversaries, we invite to a peaceful competition;—not in conquering territory or extending dominion, but in enriching the life of man. As we explore the reaches of space, let us go to the new worlds together—not as new worlds to be conquered but as a new adventure to be shared. . . . Only a few short weeks ago, we shared the glory of man’s first sight of the world as God sees it, as a single sphere reflecting light in the darkness. As the Apollo astronauts flew over the moon’s gray surface on Christmas Eve, they spoke to us of the beauty of Earth—and in that voice so clear across the lunar distance, we heard them invoke God’s blessing on its goodness. In that moment, their view from the moon moved poet Archibald MacLeish to write:
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced 1969 recipients of National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering, including: Purdue Univ. chemist Herbert C. Brown, for “discovery and exploration of hydroboration reaction and for developing it into a major and powerful tool in chemical synthesis”; Princeton Univ. mathematician William Feller, “for original and definitive contributions to pure and applied mathematics, for making probability available to users, and for pioneering work in establishing Mathematical ReviewsJack S. C. Kilby, Texas Instruments Inc., for “original conceptions and valuable contributions in the production and application of integrated circuits”; and Wolfgang K. fi. Panofsky, Director of Stanford Univ. Linear Accelerator Center, for “classic experiments probing the elementary particles of matter and for contributions to advancing the means of experimentation in this challenging field.” {PD, 1/5/70, 10-1) During December: NASA issued Apollo 11: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP—214), summarizing scientific findings of first manned lunar landing mission July 16—24. In foreword Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “The concept of traveling across the vastness of space to new worlds has stirred the imagination of men everywhere. . . . The success of this mission has opened new fields of exploration and research . . . which will lead to a greater understanding of our planet and provide a new insight into the origin and history of the solar system.” Report included photographic review of Apollo 11 mission with observations by crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Descriptions of geologic setting of lunar material, soil mechanics investigation, passive seismic experiment, laser ranging retroreflector, and solar wind composition experiment were provided by principal investigators. In addition to major findings reported Sept. 15 in summary by NASA Preliminary Examination Team (pet), SP—214 reported passive seismic experiment package deployed on moon had operated satisfactorily for 21 days and had detected seismic signals from astronaut activity or lm motions. Whether actual lunar seismic events had been detected was uncertain. Laser reflector deployed on moon had been used as target for earth-based lasers and distance to moon had been measured to within four-mile accuracy. Future studies would be made on distance variation to study motion of moon and earth. Preliminary analysis had been made on part of aluminum foil and showed helium, neon, and argon; isotopic composition of each element had been measured. (Text; NASA Release 69—160)
During stop at Hickam AFB, en route to MSC from Apollo 11 splashdown, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said it would be “helpful and hopeful for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to cooperate in space missions. He saw “indications” during his tour of U.S.S.R. that Russians would be interested, but “talk is cheap” and U.S.S.R. “is still supplying 85 per cent of the munitions to North Vietnam.” He said U.S. had gone “95 per cent of the way” toward promoting cooperation. It was up to U.S.S.R. to do the rest, (upi, NYT, 7/26/69, 12)
Apollo 11 flight was public relations man’s and reporter’s dream, James Clayton said in Washington Post. NASA had kept “very little, if anything” from hundreds of U.S. and foreign press. More than 3,500 sets of press credentials had been issued at msc and Cape Kennedy. Most went to Americans, but 55 foreign countries were represented, including Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania. There were 111 newsmen representing Japan among 800 foreign newsmen, several of whom had been waiting in Houston since Apollo 10 flight May 18—26. Voice of America joined in transmitting news abroad. At peak, Apollo 11 story was going out in 22 languages to every world area except some Communist countries. “Even those had the radio beams directed at them.” (W Post, 7/27/69, B6)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said nasa Administrator was “the last big Federal post President Nixon has left unfilled.” He asked, “Is it because he can’t find the man he wants? Is it because no man he wants wants the job? Or is Mr. Nixon playing with the possibility of appointing [Acting Administrator Thomas O.] Paine to the post of Administrator?” Washington “space watchers” felt job could not be kept vacant much longer, “if only because the program to land American astronauts on the moon is rapidly nearing its goal.” (W Post, 2/9/69, All)
Five segments of Apollo 9’s 6,500,000-lb “stack” remained in space, making total 1,613 objects floating in earth orbit after Apollo 9, said James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Armed Forces Journal. Descent stage of lm, in eccentric low orbit, would soon be captured by earth gravity and burn on reentry; ascent stage might remain in high orbit 20 yrs, along with lm adapter [gsfc reported later that LM descent stage had reentered March 22; ascent stage was still in orbit], S—IVB 3rd stage mated to instrument unit was directed into solar orbit. Of 1,613 orbiting objects listed by norad, 356 were payloads, both active and expired. Remaining 1,257 pieces were debris. Items in solar orbit included 3rd-stage and instrument-unit combinations from Apollo 8 and 9, four U.S. Pioneers and Mariner VI still sending useful data, and U.S. and U.S.S.R. planetary explorers launched before 1969. About 20 solar orbiting objects would remain in space a long time, along with 28 spacecraft which had crashed on other celestial bodies, including'U.S.S.R.’s Venus III and IV on Venus, 9 Soviet Lunas, 5 U.S. Rangers, 7 Surveyors, and 5 Lunar Orbiters. (AFI, 3/22/69, 15; gsfc SSR, 3/31/69)
U.S.S.R. launched Luna XV unmanned spacecraft from Baikonur into selenocentric orbit to conduct “further scientific studies of the moon and near lunar space,” Tass announced. Spacecraft was expected to reach moon late July 16—scheduled date of launch of NASA’s Apollo 11 manned lunar landing mission. There was speculation that Luna XV was Soviet attempt to land spacecraft on moon and return it to earth with sample of lunar soil before U.S. landed. (W Post, 7/14/69, Al; SBD, 7/18/69, 22; B Sun, 7/14/69, Al; gsfc SSR, 7/15/69)
William Hines said in Washington Evening Star: “It now seems entirely . possible that NASA may sneak into a Mars program without a specific go-ahead of the type given for the moon adventure in 1961. A case can be made that exploration of the planets is but a logical extension of exploration of the moon; that once the space frontier is crossed in 1969 everything else is evolutionary, not revolutionary. This sort of gradualism, which is analogous to a girl’s becoming a little bit pregnant, is just as effective in the long run as the flamboyant setting of spectacular goals, and probably a good bit more feasible in a time when there is already much grumbling about pre-occupation with other worlds when our own is in such a sorry state.” (W Star, 4/27/69, G4)
Apollo 10 mission would be launched from etr May 18 carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot), on eight-day lunar orbital mission. Final decision to fly mission as previously planned followed review of technical and operational data from ApoUo 9 (March 3—13). Mission would provide additional experience in combined system operation and, with exception of actual landing on lunar surface, was same as for lunar landing mission. While spacecraft circled moon at 69-mi (111.0km) altitude, Stafford and Cernan would separate lm from csm, pilot lm twice to within 10 mi (16.1 km) of preselected landing site, and return to csm. Crew would then make landmark sightings, take photos, and transmit live TV views of moon, earth, and spacecraft interior before returning to earth, (nasa Release 69—46)
Tass carried Apollo 12 report shortly before launch. Report described mission objectives and ended: “We wish a successful flight and a safe return to the courageous team of the American spaceship Apollo 12.” (Reuters, W Post, 11/15/69, A6)
Prearranged meeting at Paris Air Show between Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart and Cosmonauts Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and Vladimir Shatalov and wives developed from brief technical exchange into what U.S. officials called an epic of all space meetings. After inspecting interior of Apollo 8 spacecraft and joining astronauts for drinks in VIP lounge at U.S. pavilion, cosmonauts escorted astronauts through U.S.S.R. pavilion, provided technical explanation of 1968 Soyuz missions, and entertained with vodka and caviar in Soviet trijet Yak-40 on display field and later in 500-passenger An-22. (NYT, 6/3/69, 78; AP, B Sun, 6/3/69, Al)
Gloom and embarrassment over Apollo 11 success and crash of Luna XV on moon had caused controversy among Soviet leaders, including Communist Party Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Nikolay V. Podgorny, at July 21—23 meeting of Eastern European leaders in Warsaw, New York Times said. Reports of enthusiastic public response to Apollo feat across Eastern Europe had been interpreted as sign of lingering and latent sympathy for U.S. It was strongest in technologically advanced East Germany and Czechoslovakia, but had been noted as well in Poland, Hungary, and Romania. (Hofmann, NYT, 7/28/69, 7)
Current Book-of-the-Month Club selection, The Andromeda Strain by Michael Crichton, would “hardly gladden the hearts” of those at NASA, said Walter Sullivan in New York Times. It dramatized dangers of back contamination that had “suddenly become a subject of sharp debate on the eve of the Apollo 11 mission to the moon.” (NYT, 6/15/69, E8)
In Cape Kennedy interview before Apollo 11 launch, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said, “It is my individual feeling that we should articulate a simple, ambitious, optimistic goal of a manned flight to Mars by the end of this century. Whether we say it or not, someone’s going to do it.” After liftoff, Vice President told NASA launching team, “. . . all the time I was out there I couldn’t help thinking of you, the people in here and all over NASA who have done such a brilliant job in putting together the combined effort behind those three gentlemen who are off on this historic mission. ... I bit the bullet for you today as far as Mars is concerned. But on the other hand ... I may be a voice in the wilderness.” In Washington, D.C., Senate Majority Leader Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) told press, “I think we have a lot of problems here on earth that we must face up to and when we settle those we ought to consider future space ventures.” Senate Majority Whip Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said, “The Apollo program is for landing a man on the moon and exploration and should take another one to two years. I think after that the space program ought to fit into our other national priorities.” (Witkin, NYT, 7/17/69, 1; Transcript, Agnew statement to NASA launch crew; Unna, W Post, 7/17/69, Al)
NASA awarded Boeing Co. $32,815,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee supplemental agreement extending for additional 12 mos Apollo program technical integration and evaluation support initiated by Boeing June 15, 1967. (nasa Release 69—1)
Washington Post said it found intellectuals “deeply divided” on implications of lunar landing. Univ. of California physicist Dr. Owen Chamberlain had said achievement showed “mankind can be in charge of his destiny. . . . We should now come back and put our emphasis on the surface of the globe” to achieve peace, lessen poverty, control overpopulation, and preserve our environment. Univ. of California chemist Dr. Harold C. Urey said if some of space effort reliability rubbed off on industry, “spin-off” would be enormous and space program would pay for itself. Less than % of 1% of GNP was spent on space and if lessened there was no guarantee it would be spent on necessary domestic programs. Harvard Univ. biochemist Dr. George Wald had said: “What should have been a great flight of the human spirit comes to us heavy with threat. Those almost miraculous guidance systems that so uncannily find their targets, will they one day be guiding missiles to find us?” Dr. Wald wondered if Apollo 11 had opened new horizons for his students. “I am afraid that they see in this an exercise in great wealth and power, heavy with military and political overtones. I am afraid that they feel a little more trapped; a little more disillusioned, a little more desperate.” Most overseas intellectuals tended to concur with historian Prof. Arnold J. Toynbee’s judgment, “If we are going to go on behaving on earth as we have behaved here so far, then a landing on the moon will have to be written off as just one more shocking misuse of mankind’s slender surplus product.” But Oxford Univ.’s Prof. A. J. Ayer had said, “I doubt if Prof. Toynbee has any evidence that men are being prevented in any large numbers from turning their minds to meaningful pursuits by the part which they play, or the interest which they take, in the exploration of space. ... I think that these spatial explorations . , . are intellectually stimulating, especially to young people.” (W Post, 7/22/69, Ai4)
In telephone interview, evangelist and presidential religious adviser Billy Graham took issue with July 24 statement of President Nixon in welcoming Apollo 11 astronauts back to earth. Graham told upi, “. . . as a Christian, I would contend that there have been three much much greater days” than those of lunar landing and moon walk. They were first Christmas, day on which Christ died, and first Easter. While he did not wish to detract from “magnificent achievement,” he felt “President was speaking extemporaneously. And I’ve found from years of speaking extemporaneously that in the excitement and emotion of a moment, you don’t think through every statement you make.” Associated Press later quoted Graham as saying, “I know that President Nixon agrees that the greatest single event in history was the coming of Christ”; he was sure President Nixon meant moon walk was probably man’s greatest accomplishment. (W Post, 7/26/69, A10)
President and Mrs. Nixon watched Apollo 8 films at White House showing attended by Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Borman narrated. (Shelton, W Star, 1/31/69, Bl; PD, 2/3/69, 194)
Delegation of 10 Soviet scientists visited Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton, N.Y. During luncheon they peered through microscope at 12-gm piece of lunar matter brought back by Apollo 11 for study at laboratory’s nuclear research facilities. Scientists were on two-week tour arranged through memorandum of cooperation on peaceful uses of atomic energy. Group of U.S. scientists would pay reciprocal visit to U.S.S.R. early in 1970. (Kaufman, NYT, 11/20/69, 45)
Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and wife inspected container vessel American Astronaut in London and signed autographs for longshoremen. Mrs. Lovell had christened vessel in April. (Reuters, C Trib, 10/7/69)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said to press representatives in Houston he was “surprised and disappointed” by May 19 speech of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) suggesting slowdown in U.S. space program after lunar landing and exploration. “He is wrong,” Dr. Paine said. “The United States should not weakly yield technological supremacy in space to the Soviets. We should not ground our astronauts after Apollo.” He told press he did not want Apollo 10 astronauts in flight to moon to hear news of speech and would not include item in news reports sent up to spacecraft. (W Post, 5/21/69, A12)
Visiting Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov received Presidential pens and bronze inaugural medals from President Nixon .during brief stop at White House. Later they flew to msc, where they were honored at dinner by 30 astronauts. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman showed cosmonauts NASA T—38 jet aircraft. (PD, 10/27/69, 1485; AP, W Star, 10/22/69, A3)
National Telemetry Conference of Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., presented award for telemetry achievements to NASA team responsible for directing, planning, engineering, implementing, and operating Manned Space Flight Network in support of Apollo program. At Washington, D.C., luncheon, award was accepted by GSFC Assistant Director for Manned Flight Support, Ozro M. Covington. (gsfc Release G—1—69)
Press conference on preliminary science results of Biosatellite III (launched June 28) was held at NASA Hq. Spacecraft, carrying male macaque monkey Bonny, had been launched on 30-day mission to investigate physiological problems during space flight but had been deorbited after 8% days when monkey’s condition deteriorated. John W. Dyer, Manager of Biosatellite Project Operations at arc, said all of automatically controlled functions performed “beautifully” after launch and spacecraft and instrumentation performed well throughout mission. “The animal was reported to be enthusiastically eating and drinking, and after four or five days, a routine operation capable of going the duration of on-board consumables was projected.” Clear data on Bonny and entire flight system were recorded at 16 stations in 180 intervals of 5 to 10 min each and good quality data were returned from onboard tape and film records recovered with capsule. Bonny remained alert until eighth day, providing much new information on cycles of sleep and wakefulness at zero g. Dr. W. Ross Adey of UCLA, principal experimenter, said one important discovery was alterations in circadian rhythms, daily rhythms in physiological functions. “At least it is clear that if there is not an actual prolongation of the rhythms there is a very significant phase shift so that the animal woke later and later each day.” Most interesting discovery about sleep patterns was that dream sleep, which constituted 20% of normal night’s sleep on earth and was characterized by rapid eye movements (rem), occurred in space. “It had never been clear in space whether man or animals have this REM sleep, and there is evidence that decreased gravitational inputs, or decreased inputs from the body will seriously disrupt it. So we were very interested to see that REM sleep in the monkey . . . that there was indeed a great deal of sleep of this rem type, and that it occurred in ... an intermediate stage of sleep.” One of first abnormalities noted in Bonny was pendular eye movement, swinging movement that occurred when vestibular mechanism in inner ear was disturbed. Fluid was moving in some fashion that might indicate pressure or cooling if it occurred on earth. “None of these conditions applied here. But the weightlessness would allow movements of the fluid which were probably unusual. . . . This is interesting because the Apollo astronauts who have now much more room to move around than in . . . the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft have . . . almost uniformly reported some degree of vestibular disturbances.” By eighth day, brain and body temperature and central venous pressure had dropped dangerously. Fluid loss by sweating and diuresis was high, apparently because of redistribution of blood in visceral pools from weightlessness. On recovery Bonny was semicomatose and his temperature was below 35°C. Immediate resuscitation measures with intravenous fluid were begun and monkey’s condition improved substantially. “The temperature came up to about 35.8, the heart rate stabilized, and the blood pressure came up. . . . And the animal was lifting his head . . . and making coordinated movements with all four limbs. And then quite suddenly, about twelve hours after recovery, a condition of ventricular fibrillation ensued. It came on very suddenly, and the heartbeat became totally disordered, And there was no recovery. This is a common occurrence in monkeys of this species when recovering from hypothermia . . . and death is almost a certainty.” Autopsy revealed 20% loss in body weight, much higher than 3%—8% reported for astronuats in early days of flights. Restraint, weightlessness, and decreased feedback from peripheral structures had decreased shivering response, and monkey had failed to respond to falling temperature with normal thermogenic response. Restraint and, particularly, weightlessness had led to pooling of blood in thorax and abdomen, raising central venous pressures and leading to loss of fluid through kidney and sweating. Dr. Adey said mission was “highly successful in revealing physiological effects of weightlessness in spite of the reduced duration of the experiment” and indicated “great value of carefully designed animal experiments in collection of important biomedical data relevant to manned flight.” Virtually every piece of information that could be drawn about manned space flight indicated similar changes in astronauts, though to smaller degree, he said. Scientists still did not know whether gravity was necessary for long-duration space flights. “Therefore, I think it is premature to consider the design of space platforms or the larger space stations until we know more from the biomedical point of view about what is absolutely necessary.” President’s Science Advisory Committee report to President Nixon, being printed, would say necessary biomedical basis for elaborate space platforms and space stations did not exist in NASA or in scientific community. (Transcript)
Washington Post published letter from John M. Raymond, Jr., of Washington, D.C., which praised decision of Florida Legislature to ask for return of original name “Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy [see June 6]. “It is for us today a thrilling thought that men will leap to the moon from a cape discovered by Spanish adventurers early in the 16th century—a cape with one of the very earliest American place names to be retained to the present day. Or almost to the present day. Let the NASA center bear the name Kennedy. It is an appropriate tribute to the man who set us on the course to the moon. But let us restore to the cape the proud name it carried for 400 years.” (W Post, 6/14/69, A24)
Apollo 10 mission (May 18—26), first lunar orbital mission with complete Apollo spacecraft, was adjudged successful by NASA. Mission had achieved all objectives; systems had performed according to plan with only minor anomalies and crew had acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for subsequent Apollo missions. (nasa Proj Off)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star criticized NASA’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory and plans to protect U.S. from lunar contamination: “. . . there is ample doubt that (1) the quarantine will really be air-tight and (2) it will make very much difference if the contamination shield leaks a little.” He also commented that, earlier, “great lip service was paid to the necessity for avoiding contamination of the moon and other celestial bodies by lifeforms from Earth. The rationale was pragmatic, not moral, and purely anthropocentric: If we contaminate the surface we won’t be able to say with certainty whether the lifeforms we eventually find are native or imported. This line is still being hewed to—after a fashion—in the case of Mars, but for the moon the game has proved too costly to be played with strict attention to rules.” (W Star, 6/8/69, C4)
nasa released first of hundreds of photos and moving pictures taken by Apollo 10 crew. Pictures showed moon from variety of positions and csm as seen from LM. Photo of Triesneck Crater showed network of broad rifles which resembled tracks left by large snowballs rolled over snow-covered plain. Photo of Sea of Tranquility, prime landing site, had only few rugged features, including medium-sized Moltke Crater and Hypatia Rifle. Pictures showed striking resemblance to aerial photos of Antarctica. Films included scenes of moon taken from lm at pericynthian and of Astronaut John W. Young shaving in CSM. (AP, B Sun, 5/29/69, Al; W Post, 5/29/69, A4)
Expectation of one million tourists to witness Apollo 11 launch had led to extraordinary precautions at Cocoa Beach, Fla., Washington Post said. Tank truck would be stationed at City Hall to fuel police cars; airboats would stand by to rush casualties to hospital if ambulances could not penetrate automobile traffic; and officials were concerned about scores of aircraft circling overhead to glimpse spacecraft. (Greider, W Post, 7/14/69, Al)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs to succeed Dixon Donnelly who had resigned in January. Nomination was submitted to Senate Dec. 2. (PD, 12/1/69, 1667; 12/8/69, 1702)
NASA released first photos taken by Apollo 12 astronauts on and near lunar surface, including color stills and 16-mm film showing solar eclipse, lm descent to moon, astronauts walking on moon, and lm separating from csm. Still photos showed closeup of Ocean of Storms, bleak, dull-gray area strewn with rocks and sprinkled with footprints and an astronaut inspecting Surveyor 111, with LM in background at top of crater rim. (AP, NYT, 11/28/69, 32)
Washington Sunday Star published Associated Press interview with Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations: While 4,514 hrs of weightlessness endured by U.S. astronauts in space had produced no serious medical problems, on moon “we will be placing men in an entirely new environment.” After four days of weightlessness, they would step onto surface where gravity field was one-sixth that of earth. At Mission Control Center in Houston, Dr. Berry would be watching Apollo 11 astronauts’ heart rate, oxygen consumption, and temperature of water that cooled spacesuits. Preflight physicals had enabled doctors to draw metabolic profile of each astronaut, including work capacity on earth at various heart rates, oxygen consumption, and body heat generated. “We know the heat production level which the portable life support system can handle without being overburdened. If it reaches that point for five minutes, we will tell the astronauts to stop and rest.” Because of spacesuits’ bulk astronauts would start with simple tasks and work up to tougher ones. Excitement could affect ability to sleep in four-hour rest period planned before lunar walk. “We might have to make a real-time decision on whether to give them a sleeping pill or perhaps a stimulant.” Apollo had taught one “amazing medical fact—that the loss of red-blood-cell mass apparently is caused by a pure oxygen atmosphere.” Results of using mixed nitrogen-and-oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft since January 1967 Apollo fire had indicated nitrogen apparently protected cells. (Benedict, AP, W Star, 7/13/69, A9)
Washington Post editorial: “There was a certain logic in playing down the purely scientific aspects of the Apollo program in the past since the effort was to land men on the moon before the Russians did. But that day is past. The scientists of space, as contrasted with its engineers and technicians, have been forced into the back seat of the manned space program. It is time now to make them the navigators. The choice of missions—for future flights to the moon and for future operations that will lead some day to a trip to Mars and eventually other planets— should be largely in their hands. They, far better than the men who created the hardware and the knowledge necessary to make space travel possible, know the areas most appropriate for exploration in terms of gaining knowledge.” (W Post, 8/8/69) Pac (Package Attitude Control) system, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 340-mi (547.1-km) apogee, 300mi (482.7-km) perigee, 94.2-min period, and 32.9° inclination. Primary objective was to flight-test long-life, low-power, three-axis Pac earth-stabilized control system for Delta 2nd stage and to demonstrate feasibility of using stage as experimental platform. Oso VI was spin-stabilized, weighed 640 lbs, carried seven experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. It was similar to previous osos but had unique capability which enabled two sun-pointing telescopes to study in detail uv and x-ray spectra at any point on solar disc and would provide greater knowledge of solar atmosphere (chromosphere) as well as outermost layer (corona) visible only through special instruments or during total solar eclipse. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by Harvard College Observatory, Naval Research Laboratory, Rutgers Univ., Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories, Univ. of New Mexico, Univ. of Bologna, and University College (London). Both tape recorders were operating at liftoff and were still operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft stabilized and acquired sun as scheduled shortly after entering orbit. By Aug. 15 all experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Two minor anomalies— higher than planned use of current by motor that provided fine elevation pointing and lower than expected spacecraft operating temperature —were not expected to affect spacecraft operation adversely. Oso VI was seventh in series of eight oso spacecraft designed to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and together provided more than 8,600 hrs of scientific information, oso—c (launched Aug. 25, 1965) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily. Oso V (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit, oso program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Releases 69—112, 69—112A, 69—123; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman met in Moscow with Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and spent 40 min with U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny in talk which Borman said was “encouraging and beneficial” in efforts to achieve U.S.— U.S.S.R. cooperation in space. (AP, W Post, 7/10/69, A23)
At Smithsonian Institution ceremony attended by Apollo 11 astronauts, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented two-pound, gray, lunar rock of igneous, breccia type to Smithsonian Secretary, Dr. S. Dillon Riply, for Smithsonian collection. It would be sealed in nitrogen-filled container covered by three-foot glass bubble and displayed to public beginning Sept. 17 for indefinite period in Arts and Industries Building. At presentation, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., • said: “Every human being, every animal who has looked up into the heavens has seen that rock. It is a fortunate time for mankind to look up and be able to say, ‘here is the moon.’” (Smithsonian Release SI—150—69; Shelton, W Post, 9/17/69, Bl)
Apollo 11 lunar landing had been selected number one foreign news story of year by Japan’s Kyodo news service, Associated Press said. Second was President Nixon’s decision to reduce U.S. troops in Vietnam; third was Communist China’s ninth party congress in Peking. {St. Louis G-D, 12/8/69)
NASA noted new level of maturity in conduct of Apollo 8 mission, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. ■Homer E. Newell, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C. “We got the feeling that the people . . . handling the operations had now a new tool that fit the hand.” Maturing of total space capability was seen in use of Pioneers and earth orbiting satellites during Apollo 8 “to keep track of what the sun was doing so that the directors of the Apollo operation could know what radiation conditions in space were relative to . . . crew safety.” Mission also used weather satellites and communication satellites, “not only to transmit pictures . . . but also as an integral part of the operation, to transmit data. . . .” Asked NASA’s priority on space station versus lunar exploration in view of increase in funding request for lunar landing program, Dr. Newell said: “Now you have touched uppn what I think is going to be the most difficult question for the country to resolve in the months ahead.” There was general agreement that manned space flight should continue. Debate would be over whether it would be done by continued lunar exploration, earth orbital operations, or both. “Our own feeling is that the country ought to do both. Certainly after having put all the investment into landing a man on the moon and developing the capability to do so we must continue to explore the moou. And we cannot foresee any reasonable or rational national program in which we do not continue that exploration. At the same time ... we haven’t finished developing the manned space flight capability. We have got to . . . get that permanent foothold in space and that is where the space station comes in.” (Transcript)
Univ. of California’s Lick Observatory successfully recorded first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. Hits, which came after 2,000—3,000 unsuccessful attempts by Lick and Univ. of Texas’s McDonald Observatory, were made by Lick’s 120-in telescope — world’s second largest. Scientists fired 500 pulses with pure red beam of ruby laser. Each pulse lasted 15-20 billionths of a second, reached moon in 1.3 secs, and bounced back in same time. Target— 18-in-square panel of 100 three-faced prisms of fused silica—was hit about three-fourths of time, (gsfc Historian)
In Brussels, Astronaut Frank Borman and family attended dinner given in his honor at palace by King Baudouin and Queen Fabiola. Borman showed Apollo 8 film, (nasa Int Aff; AP, B Sun, 2/10/69)
President Johnson sent $195.3-billion FY 1970 budget request to Congress, including total space budget of $5,946 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $3,599 billion (plus $7.89 million for aircraft technology and $117 million in unobligated funds from prior years to be applied to 1970 program); dod would receive $2,219 billion; aec, $105 million; essa, $10 million; nsf, $4 million; Dept, of Interior, $6 million; and Dept, of Agriculture, $4 million. Total NASA FY 1970 budget request of $3,878 billion was below $4 billion for first time since FY 1963 request. Expenditures were budgeted to decline nearly $300 million from FY 1969 level of $4,250 billion, to $3,950 billion. Of budget request, $3,168 billion would go for r&d, $58.2 million for construction of facilities, and $650.9 million for program management. Slightly more than 50% of total FY 1970 authority—$2,008 billion—would be in manned space flight, including Saturn IB Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount. Space science and applications were allotted $558.8 million; advanced research and technology, $290.4 million. Larger proportion of NASA funds would go to research than to development in FY 1970 as Apollo costs declined. Increases would go to Apollo Applications (total $308.8 million in FY 1970), 1971 Mariner-Mars flight ($45.4 million), Viking project ($40 million), 1973 Mariner-Mercury ($3 million), Planetary Explorers ($8 million), Applications Technology Satellites ($44.2 million), and Earth Resources Survey program ($25.1 million). Aeronautical vehicle technology program, up from $74.9 million to $78.9 million, included $21.78 million for advanced research, $500,000 for general aviation, $11.25 million for v/stol, $16.19 million for subsonic aircraft, $20.9 million for supersonic aircraft, and $8.28 million for hypersonic aircraft. DOD space funding would include satellite development, certain portions of missile development and operating costs, mol (increased to $576 million), Titan III booster, and supporting R&D. In addition, aircraft r&d funds of $1.4 billion would include $500 million for new usn F—14A fighter to replace F—11 IB, $1 billion for series of advanced jet aircraft, $75 million for long-range bomber to succeed B—52, and funds for usaf F—15 fighter and usn vsx antisubmarine aircraft. aec space funding included amounts for nuclear rocket, propulsion technology and nuclear power sources for space applications, including production of isotopic fuels and aerospace safety. ESSA funds would support Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) program research. nsf’s total request was up from $400 million in FY 1969 to $497 million. Of this amount, its $4-million space funds were for research in astronomy using rockets and satellite-borne observation instruments. Dept, of Interior would conduct experiments with data from erts spacecraft. faa’s r&d budget would increase from $49 million in FY 1969 to $59 million in FY 1970. Principal increases were for research on air traffic control and noise abatement. President Johnson requested no additional funds for sst program, (nasa Release, 1/15/69; bob Special Analysis Q; Dale, NYT, 1/16/69, 1; Schmeck, NYT, 1/16/69, 24; Lindsey, NYT, 1/16/69, 81; W Post, 1/16/69, A12)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., received Distinguished Service Medal at dod ceremony for service as Apollo 8 command module pilot. IW Post, 4/5/69, A7)
NASA released “Debrief: Apollo 8,” 28-min, 16-mm color film showing first manned lunar orbit. (NASA PAO; Nelson, Science, 1/24/69, 371)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., dressed in full landing attire, rehearsed simulated lunar landing at msc for the 2 hrs 40 min they would spend walking and working on lunar surface in July. Astronauts practiced scooping rock and soil samples, unfurled umbrella-like antenna, and deployed seismometer to detect quakes and array of mirrors to serve as laser target for astronomers on earth. (Wilford, NYT, 4/19/69; upi, P Bull, 4/19/69)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins reported on Apollo 11 mission to joint session of Congress called in their honor. Astronaut Armstrong said: “Several weeks ago I enjoyed the warmth of reflection on the true meanings of the spirit of Apollo. I stood in the highlands of this Nation, near the Continental Divide, introducing to my sons the wonders of nature and pleasures of looking for deer and for elk. In their enthusiasm for the view they frequently stumbled on the rocky trails, but when they looked only to their footing, they did not see the elk. To those of you who have advocated looking high we owe our sincere gratitude, for you have granted us the opportunity to see some of the grandest views of the Creator. To those of you who have been our honest critics, we also thank, for you have reminded us that we dare not forget to watch the trail.” Astronaut Aldrin said: “Our steps in space have been a symbol of this country’s way of life as we open our doors and windows to the world to view our Successes and failures and as we share with all nations our discovery. The Saturn, Columbia, and Eagle, and the extravehicular mobility unit have proved . . . that this Nation can produce equipment of the highest quality and dependability. This should give all of us hope and inspiration to overcome some of the more difficult problems here on earth. The Apollo lesson is that national goals can he met where there is a strong enough will to do so.” Astronaut Collins said: “We have taken to the moon the wealth of this Nation, the vision of its political leaders, the intelligence of its scientists, the dedication of its engineers, the careful craftsmanship of its workers, and the enthusiastic support of its people. We have brought back rocks. And I think it is a fair trade. For just as the Rosetta stone revealed the language of ancient Egypt, so may these rocks unlock the mystery of the origin of the moon, of our earth, and even of our solar system,” Astronauts presented Congress with two U.S. flags which previously had flown over Senate and House of Capitol and had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (CR, 9/16/69, H7937—9)
In Washington Post, Victor Cohn said fight for ideas “which once would have been labeled ‘wild’ ” had begun when NASA began congressional committee hearings on its $3.7-billion FY 1970 budget [see March 4]. It had continued with announcement of “dramatic plan for ten more manned expeditions to the moon after the first men land there in July.” Americans had responded to 1 “exciting” Apollo program “with heightened fervor for a man in space.” But new fight for funding would probably be “nasa’s toughest.” Americans were asking, “How about our needs here on earth?” Many scientists felt unmanned instruments could do cheaper and nearly as effective job of space exploration. Congress had been calling nasa’s present spending level “enough.” Still, NASA had succeeded in marshaling “powerful scientific support.” As yet unreleased report of Dr. Charles H. Townes’ space task force appointed by President Nixon urged both vigorous manned space program and development of reusable space shuttle. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, had declared himself for “a really solid, many-faceted program.” NASA officials were optimistic but funds actually appropriated for FY 1970 budget would finance only five more Apollo flights plus first hardware for Apollo Applications program. Public thinking was “just about 50—50 today, and new U.S. consensus has not yet crystallized.” (W Post, 3/16/69, Al)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and other top NASA officials testified on future space programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Introducing programs, Dr. Paine said: “The decade of the 1970’s and 1980’s should have a program as bold in concept and as productive as we have had in the decade of the 1960’s. ... we need to have clear objectives to focus our work and a commitment, subject ... to annual review, as to what these achievements will be. Our general goal area should be the continued exploration of the solar system while deriving the maximum scientific and practical benefits here on earth from the space program. There is no question that, at some future time, we will have the capability for manned planetary exploration and we need to face now some of the decisions that will not bear fruition for more than a decade. Although I do not believe that we will see manned exploration of the planets in the 1970’s in the United States ... I do think this could come in the 1980’s. It is by no means clear that for the Soviet Union the decision may not be made to mount a crash program and bring this in before the end of the decade of the 1970’s.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, described possible 1981— 1982, 12-man, 2-ship expedition to Mars [see Aug. 1]. Each spacecraft would weigh 1.6 million lbs at departure from earth orbit and would be 270 ft long, “smaller than what we are flying already to the moon.” nasa was using “concept of reusability” in planning, to improve and reduce cost of operating in space, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Committee. Reusability could be achieved “through the reuse of launch and space vehicles and . . . through the reuse of a mission module such as a space station” put into orbit and used over 10-yr or even 20-yr period. Space shuttles would be designed to run 100 or more flights. Modules and vehicles would be designed for multiple applications in earth, lunar, and synchronous orbits. Space tug would permit travel from space station to other spacecraft and back again—“general purpose . . . equipment.” In earth orbital operations, “it permits us to fly off from the space station over to ... an oao, orbiting astronomical observatory, either to repair or check the oao, or to bring it back to a space station where it can then be loaded on the space shuttle for return to earth and then brought back into orbit after repairs.” (Transcript)
Lee R. Scherer, Director of NASA’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, testifying on FY 1970 budget request before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described extravehicular activity (eva) planned for first lunar landing. Emerging on lunar surface, astronaut would acquire and seal bagful of surface material and place it in spacesuit pocket, inspect lm, and with geological tools, fill large sample container. Location would be photographed before and after sampling. Passive seismometer would be emplaced to measure “moonquakes” and permit estimates of moon’s internal structure for comparison with that of earth. Instrument, operated on solar power, would record and transmit lunar data to earth for about one year. Laser retroreflector would be emplaced to permit measurement of earth-to-moon distance and monitoring of distance variation. Measurements would be repeated several times daily for year or more and precise times determined by atomic clock. From data on relative motion of moon and earth and of each about own center of gravity, scientists could refine “knowledge of size and shape of the Moon, detect small movements that may occur between the Earth’s continents, and perhaps even test gravitational theories.” If time permitted, second sample return container would be filled more selectively, with greater effort to document and to pack samples individually. (Testimony)
Classical astronomical data on figures of moon and terrestrial planets were being supplemented by new information from Lunar Orbiter program. Comparable future planetary probes would provide fundamental . data from simple experiments, Cornell Univ. radiophysicists Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Dr. Malcolm J. Campbell, and Dr. Carl Sagan said in Science. Lunar Orbiter results had revealed lunar mascons’ nonuniform surface distribution that could explain lunar dynamical asymmetries “and perhaps similar asymmetries for Mars and Mercury.” {Science, 8/15/69, 651—7)
Retiring Chief Justice of Supreme Court Earl Warren said at Lincoln Univ. commencement in Oxford, Pa., “We’re going to be on the moon —perhaps by July, they tell us. But it would be better if our universities taught us how to live in our great cities.” (AP, W Post, 6/3/69, A9)
Walter Rundell, Jr., of Iowa State Univ. Dept, of History described U.S. Government historical programs at National Convention of Southern Historical Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “NASA’s historical program began in 1959 under the leadership of Eugene M. Emme. Two years later Emme launched the official publications with his Aeronautics and Astronautics: An American Chronology of Science and Technology in the Exploration of Space, 1915—1960, This has been followed by similar annual chronologies and chronologies devoted to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo projects. Since 1966 the office has published several monographs, some written under contract by private scholars, rather than being undertaken by the permanent staff. A good example is This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, by Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander.” (Text) During October: The Atlantic commented on Apollo 11: “We enthusiastically join the rest of human kind in applauding the feat of the Apollo 11 astronauts and their NASA sponsors. It is an achievement far greater, even, than the construction and successful launchings of The Brick Moon, which happened in these pages exactly one hundred years ago.” Story, by Edward Everett Hale, had told of group of New Englanders who had constructed artificial moon of bricks and launched it into orbit to provide perpetual navigation aid for seamen. “So far as we can determine, the launching of The Brick Moon provoked considerably less public interest than the latest American lunar expedition.” (Atlantic, 10/69, 3)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory examined several large, dust-covered, crystalline rocks from first box of Apollo 12 lunar samples. Largest rock weighed 3—4 lbs and was 5 in long and 4^2 in thick. (Rossiter, W Star, 11/27/69, A4)
In NASA-funded project U.S. Bureau of Mines was seeking way to get water and air from lunar rocks, build underground lunar shelters like mines, weld and melt lunar materials, and mine planets like Mars and Venus which might bear substances more valuable than those on moon, Associated Press said. First lunar mining would occur during Apollo 13 mission in March. Astronaut would bore 10-ft hole in lunar crust to determine what lay beneath and to test drill designed for NASA by Martin Corp. Scientists at U.S. Bureau of Mines research center in Bruceton, Pa., and at six other locations had been studying since 1965 possible use of lunar materials to build and support manned lunar station. Project Director Thomas C. H. Hutchinson had said, “Even if we found pure platinum on the moon, it would cost too much to bring it back.” Goal was to establish manufacturing processes on moon to speed exploration of planets. (AP, W Post, 11/20/69, A78)
Apollo 9 mission to prove capability of LM to operate in space (March 3—13) was adjudged successful by NASA. Overall performance of launch vehicle, spacecraft, flight crew, ground support and control facilities, and personnel was satisfactory and all primary mission objectives were accomplished. (NASA Proj Off)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said during Moscow interview with Soyuz cosmonauts there were “some advantages” to joint space experiments with U.S. “We have no objection in principle,” he said, “and the setting of this type of goal has some merit. Even now the two countries participate in a number of international programs.” He added, “One would have to think, and choose this kind of joint program carefully. Maybe one of the flights to a planet in the future, or maybe around the earth also could be interesting. It is difficult to say exactly what I would like to see.” Keldysh said Soviet scientists had not received special technical data on Apollo 8 flight from U.S. However, “Certainly the success of such an outstanding flight, even if it does not produce any concrete new data, still gives something to all mankind.” (Winters, B Sun, 1/25/69, A2; Shabad, NYT, 1/25/69, 6)
Univ. of Chicago scientist Anthony Turkevich had found by analysis of data from three Surveyor spacecraft that roeks on lunar surfaee contained sufficient oxygen to maintain life without supplemental sources, UPI reported. In interview Turkevich had said that, with nuelear or solar power sources, oxygen extraction from moon might cost less than shipping oxygen supplies to moon from earth. Also, there was little danger that moon rocks and dust carried into LM by returning astronauts would create explosion hazard because of oxygen lack. He had been unable to determine whether moon had sufficient hydrogen to allow chemical creation of water by future colonists or valuable minerals in commercially exploitable quantities and had found no evidence of fossil fuel supplies. (W Star, 6/30/69, A5)
Jerald R. Kubat, former Director of NASA Manned Space Flight Program Control Office, died in Seattle, Washington. He had joined Apollo Program Office in 1964. (nasa Hq WB, 5/12/69, 5)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II—8) was successfully captive-fired at Mississippi Test Facility for 385 secs, with only four outboard engines functioning for final 86 secs. Center engine was intentionally cut off early to evaluate early cutoff as suppressor of longitudinal oscillations (pogo effect) which had occurred on Apollo 8 and 9 flights. If test data were satisfactory, center engine might be cut off early during Apollo 10 mission in May. (msfc Release 69—107)
Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Director of Science and Applications at msc, announced he would leave NASA in September to become Director of Research Laboratories for essa in Boulder, Colo. His successor had not yet been selected. Dr. Hess said he was taking new position because job was challenging one in growing organization with important mission. “We have passed a milestone in the "manned space flight program by the recent lunar landing. We have put the Lunar Receiving Laboratory into operation and it is performing its mission well. We have placed instruments on the moon successfully and have the scientific program for the next several lunar missions well organized.” Before going to MSC, Dr. Hess served as Chief of Laboratory for Theoretical Studies at gsfc, 1961—1967. (msc Release 69—54)
President Nixon addressed 24th session of U.N. General Assembly: “Of all man’s great enterprises, none lends itself more logically or more compellingly to international cooperation than the venture into space. Here, truly, mankind is one: as fellow creatures from the planet Earth, exploring the heavens that all of us enjoy. The journey of Apollo 11 to the moon and back was not an end, but the beginning. “There will be new journeys of discovery. Beyond this, we are just beginning to comprehend the benefits that space technology can yield here on earth. And the potential is enormous. For example, we are now developing earth resource survey satellites, with the first experimental satellite to be launched sometime early in the decade of the seventies. Present indications are that these satellites should be capable of yielding data which could assist in as widely varied tasks as these: the location of schools of fish in the oceans, the location of mineral deposits on land, the health of agricultural crops. “I feel it is only right that we should share both the adventures and the benefits of space. As an example of our plans, we have determined to take actions with regard to earth resources satellites. . . . The purpose ... is that this program will be dedicated to produce information not only for the United States, but also for the world community. We shall be putting several proposals in this respect before the United Nations, These are among the positive, concrete steps we intend to take toward internationalizing man’s epic venture into space—an adventure that belongs not to one nation but to all mankind.” (PD, 9/22/69, 1275-81)
Newsiveek’s 42nd space age cover story since October 1957 contained comments from “opinion makers” on Apollo 11 mission. Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said scientific basis for mission was to discover secret of earth’s past through study of lunar rocks. Resolution of “cold moon” versus “hot moon” theory controversy—whether moon was formed cold, or cooled off shortly after its birth, or whether it was like earth molten or partly molten inside with volcanic surface—“may ride with Apollo 11.” Southern Christian Leadership Conference President, the Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy, said: “A society that can resolve to conquer space; to put man in a place where in ages past it was considered only God could reach; to appropriate vast billions; to systematically set about to discover the necessary scientific knowledge; that society deserves both acclaim and our contempt . . . acclaim for achievement and contempt for bizarre social values. For though it has the capacity to meet extraordinary challenges, it has failed to use its ability to rid itself of the scourges of racism, poverty and war, all of which were brutally scarring the nation even as it mobilized for the assault on the solar system.” Anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead said: “This can be a first step, not into space alone, but into the disciplined and courageous use of enhanced human powers for man, ennobled as he is today, as the first men step on the moon.” Philosopher Lewis Mumford said: “Space exploration . . . is strictly a military by-product; and without pressure from the Pentagon and the Kremlin it would never have found a place in any national budget.” Best hope was “that this colossal perversion of energy, thought and other precious human resources may awaken a spontaneous collective reaction sufficient to bring us down to earth again. Any square mile of inhabited earth has more significance for man’s future than all the planets in our solar system.” (Newsweek, 6/7/69, S, 60—1)
Lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey said in lecture at Univ. of California at San Diego that new evidence had been uncovered during Apollo 11 mission that moon had been formed by collision process begun about 4.5	billion yrs ago. Water might have been present on moon temporarily and might still be beneath lunar surface. Information was to be made public by NASA in January 1970. (upi, W Post, 10/10/69, A5)
lrl technicians Ronald J. Buffum and George E. Williams, accidentally exposed to lunar samples when glove used to examine samples cracked, were placed in quarantine with Apollo 11 astronauts, 2 doctors, and 12 technicians, cooks, and other employees. (W Post, 8/2/69, A4)
Washington Daily News reported song called “The Wondrous Telephone,” by Thomas P. Westendorf, had been published in 1877 with cover showing group of men talking by telephone to man in the moon. (W News, 11/20/69, 52)
Qatron Corp. announced it had received $275,000 contract from gsfc to build several recorder-receiver switching and preprogrammable patch systems for Apollo program. (W Star, 9/2/69, A16)
Cross-country ceremonies for Apollo 11 astronauts constituted “probably the single greatest peacetime celebration in the nation’s history,” New York Times editorial said. “It was more than a tribute to three courageous and able men; it was also an act of homage to the hundreds of thousands of workers, engineers, technicians and scientists whose hard work over almost a decade made the moon landing possible. At the most fundamental level, perhaps, the outpouring of national rejoicing stemmed from the renewed sense of purpose the Apollo’s incredible feat had brought to a nation long torn and depressed by military travail abroad and racial and generational antagonisms at home. The essence of that sentiment was well stated by Mr. Armstrong when he declared at the United Nations that ‘we citizens of earth who can solve the problem of leaving earth can also solve the problems of staying on earth.’ ” (NYT, 8/14/69)
msfc announced it had awarded $1,954,999 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to IBM Federal Systems Div.' for designing, developing, and building five general-purpose digital computers for Apollo Telescope Mount project, (msfc Release 69—71)
Economist editorial commented: “If the Russians are ever going to get another prestige victory over the United States, and not the sort of worldwide humiliation they have endured with Luna 15 during the American moon landing, and then with the triple Soyuz anti-climax, they will have to pull something off soon. For if not the Soviet planners may see increasingly less reason to continue spending even 1 per cent of the country’s gross national product on its cosmonauts. . . . What is ironic is that a Soviet slowdown could be seen as a mirror image of the running battle in the United States between the scientists and the space engineers, but with the Russian scientists coming out on top. The Academy of Sciences is widely regarded as the repository of all that is most stuffily conservative in Soviet science. That may have been the central cause of the Russian flop.” It was also blow to Americans who relied for new space funds on Nixon Administration’s “continuing fear of what the Russians may yet do.” (Economist, 11/8/69, 12-3)
At White House dinner for West German Chancellor Kurt G. Kiesinger, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, told press putting man on Mars by 1982 posed less risk than putting man on moon because most technical problems had been solved. In time space travel would become commonplace, with spacecraft carrying passengers. On Martian surface man could move from home to car or office in completely controlled environment. (Shelton, W Post, 8/8/69, D2)
Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders returned to Houston, Tex., for biggest parade in city’s history, with quarter million spectators filling sky with ticker tape and balloons. Astronauts received city’s highest honors, bronze medals for heroism with motto “per aspera ad astra.” (AP, B Sun, 1/14/69, A8; upi, W Post, 1/14/69, A4)
usaf dedicated 365-ft-long, $3.3-million telescope on 9,200-ft elevation in Sacramento Mountains in southeast New Mexico. Described as most important new solar observing facility constructed in U.S. in decade, telescope would expand solar research capability of USAF’s Sacramento Peak Observatory and provide unequaled image stability. Telescope would be used for research on solar centers of activity—sunspots, magnetic fields, solar flares, and plage areas. Sacramento Peak solar research was endeavoring to identify causal relationships to predict solar energy variations and environmental disturbances affecting USAF operations. Observatory would participate in Global Flare Patrol Network support of NASA’s Apollo 12 mission, scheduled for Nov. 14 launch. Operated by essa’s Space Disturbance Center in Boulder, Colo., network would give warning of any solar flares dangerous to mission, (usaf Release 10-69-42; AP, NYT, 10/19/69, 62; essa pio)
Apollo 11 launch continued to draw wide editorial comment in foreign and national press. New York Times: “One could hardly watch the magnificent spectacle of the liftoff, let alone contemplate the feats of human ingenuity that made it possible, as well as the courage and skill of the flyers, without some reflection upon the meaning of this event. . . . The temptation is strong to fall back upon lyricism. The poetry of the thing has yet to find its expression in any of the earnest, proficient Americans who have ventured away from the Earth; yet, the stunning beauty of man’s most marvelous creation, as it rose in its majesty toward the unknown, toward the future, could be matched only by the profound sense of having been present at an end to something and therefore necessarily at a beginning.” (Wicker, NYT, 7/17/69) Chicago Tribune: “The Apollo 11 blastoff was as beautiful a one as we’ve seen. It displayed every hit of the precision and the careful planning which we have come to expect from NASA.” One of most “satisfying” things was that, “like our earlier launchings, it took place within the sight of anybody who wanted to go to the Florida coast to watch it, and was broadcast live to countless millions more in every corner of the world. People will not fail to contrast this with the secrecy of Russia’s unmanned Luna 15, which may reach the moon today on a mysterious mission of its own.” (C Trib, 7/17/69) Christian Science Monitor: “And although it is an American moon-craft, bearing American men . . . the venture is, in the best sense, a universal one. It is the result of American technology putting to use the knowledge, techniques and discoveries in which all nations and races have participated. ... all nations and peoples are taking part.” (CSM, 1/17/69) Seattle Times: “The space program has yielded immense new resources in . . . scientific and technological advances which . . . make the program worth while even beyond the explorations and discoveries —and national pride—offered by the ventures into outer space. It strikes us, therefore, that the time is at hand for these so-called byproducts of the space program, which hold such promise for utilization in behalf of mankind, to be put to work for that purpose.” (S Times, 7/17/69) Bulgarian Telegraph Agency report carried in Bulgarian newspapers Rabotnichesko Delo, Narodna Mladezh, Trud, and Kooperativno Celo commented: “In the coming days all humanity will follow this flight with interest and tension. And surely there is no one on our old planet who will not ask himself this question: ‘Will it succeed?”’ (Am Embassy, Sofia)
Apollo program after lunar landing was discussed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Fight, Dr. George E. Mueller, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearing on NASA FY 1970 appropriations: “A thorough exploration plan has been evolved by the scientific community which will be initiated with the remainder of the fifteen Saturn V launch vehicles and Apollo spacecraft available under the Apollo program. Three initial phases of lunar exploration have been defined. The first phase will consist of landings that sample and observe the major classes of regions on the moon. To establish these norms, it will be necessary to land, carry out geological prospecting, and obtain rock and soil samples for return to earth from four separate sites. . . . “The second phase would include the investigation of the major classes of lunar anomalies . . . volcanic types, sinuous riverlike channel-ways, fracture zones and impact craters. Six additional sites have been identified as the minimum ... to provide answers to basic questions about the moon and to evaluate locations of potential resources, building materials or underground shelter openings. The third phase would be to tie together this information from 10 or more sites by making a remote sensing survey of the moon from lunar orbit.” Apollo Applications FY 1970 budget provided for “continuation of flight hardware development and for integration of modified subsystems into hardware for a set of five earth-orbital flights.” Their completion in 1972 “terminates the manned flight activity until other manned flight programs are established.” (Testimony)
In telephone interview, ucla astronomer Dr. Samuel Herrick, Jr., said planetoid Geographos, due to pass earth at 5.6-million-mi distance Aug. 27, would be best site of all asteroids for eventual space station beyond moon and good spot for manned or unmanned spacecraft landing. Its farthest point from sun in given orbit was least distant from sun and from earth of all minor planets. But astronauts landing on it would have to “dig in and tie themselves down” since its estimated g was so slight “even a sneeze directed at the surface would propel a man off into space.” (AP, B Sun, 8/23/69, A3)
There appears to be much more to be squeezed from Apollo than just the incalculable value of national prestige or scientific discovery,” Michael Getler wrote in Space/Aeronautics. “The ability to mine these supporting talents, to judge their value outside manned space flight and disseminate and apply them may well prove the most telling and measurable argument in the debate which is bound to continue over Apollo’s real value.” Apollo had combined “much of what we have with what we do best. Though complex, it was manageable. It had clear goals, was well funded, enjoyed fairly widespread public support, and dangled the element of competition in front of our involuntary reflex. Most importantly, it tapped an industrial base and an enthusiasm for gadgetry that are unmatched anywhere. . . . Because many of today’s challenges confront human nature and not technology, Apollo can be made to seem irrelevant. In fact, however, we are not left alone with our behavioral troubles. There is still an economy to keep sound, industry and commerce to be kept competitive, and a government to be made more efficient. Failure to take this extraordinary project apart, piece by piece, and examine its usefulness in these areas would indeed be wasteful.” (S/A, 9/69, 42—53)
Apollo 11 countdown began at ksc at 8:00 pm EDT in preparation for launch toward moon at 9:32 am EDT July 16. (Apollo 11 Status Rpt)
NASA released first photos taken by Apollo 11 astronauts on and near lunar surface, including four color stills and 16-mm film of LM descent. Film opened as lm swung low and curved slightly over area pocked with craters and rocks and showed dust being scattered by exhaust as lm touched down safely. It then showed Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong as he descended ladder to surface, took first step on moon, and deployed initial equipment. Still photos showed closeup of brownish surface sprinkled with footprints, silhouettes of lm and U.S. flag, Armstrong inside lm, and earth with Europe, Africa, and Asia visible. (Witkin, NYT, 7/30/69, 1; Cohn, W Post, 7/30/69, Al, A3)
Space program could provide tools and knowledge to help eliminate air pollution, NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut, said in speech before Governors’ Conference on California’s Changing Environment in Los Angeles. With remote sensors in aircraft “pilot can quickly and accurately map pollution levels over a wide area and range of altitudes.” Pollution map of entire U.S. could be generated each day. “Thus, aircraft and satellites with these remote sensors offer the unique advantage of being able to view large areas through new eyeballs very quickly and selectively. Further, by computer, the data can be reduced to formats that can be quickly and easily understood.” Aircraft and satellite surveys would provide “data which supplement surface techniques and which, in some cases, can’t be gathered in any other way.” Rather than fantastically expensive, satellite measurements could “be competitive with surface systems.” (Text)
“We are doing the planning for ... 10 vehicles beyond Apollo 11.” After first landing NASA would stretch out flight schedule to allow time to make modifications and to understand results, with about two or three landings per year. NASA had equipment for scientific payloads for first four Apollo vehicles—of which two would land in lunar maria and two in highland areas—which would provide capability for later pinpoint landings at points of unique scientific interest outside Apollo landing zone. NASA would emplace on lunar surface network of 10 seismographs, series of heat-measuring probes, cameras, and other geophysical instruments to determine environment of lunar surface. Astronauts would wear new, “constant volume” spacesuits which would enable them to move around lunar surface very freely to conduct experiments. (Transcript)
President Nixon arrived in Belgium at start of eight-day goodwill visit to heads of state in Brussels, London, Bonn, West Berlin, Rome, Paris, and the Vatican. In welcoming speech at Brussels National Airport, King Baudouin said: “During this year, which will perhaps be that of man’s first landing on the moon, we are more than ever conscious of the gulf between the wonderful possibilities open to us and the obligations which burden the world because of war, want, injustice, and inequality. May your journey and your interviews provide an opportunity for friendly nations better to combine their efforts to solve their problems on which the very future of mankind depends.” (PD, 3/3/69, 310) Primary mission objective was equatorial flyby mission for exploratory investigations of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary objective spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 840-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mission offered first opportunity to make scientific measurements on night side of Mars. Two onboard TV cameras would take pictures of Mars disc during approach with 15-mi optimum resolution and of surface during flyby with 900-ft optimum resolution. Infrared spectrometer and uv spectrometer would probe Mars atmosphere, and oc-cultation experiment would obtain data on atmospheric pressures and densities. Infrared radiometer would measure surface temperatures on both light and dark sides of Mars; celestial mechanics experiment would use tracking information to refine astronomical data. Sharp increase in data returns would be achieved over 1964 Mariner missions. Mariner VI TV pictures would contain 3.9-million bits of information; Mariner IV contained 240,000 bits in 1965. Mariner VI would transmit science data at basic rate of 270 bps and high rate of 16,200 bps before flyby; Mariner IV transmitted at 8 % bps. Mariner VI was follow-on to 1964 Mariner/Mars missions and precursor to 1971 orbital and 1973 landing missions. First Mars probe, Mariner III (launched Nov. 4, 1964), had failed to achieve desired orbit when shroud remained attached to spacecraft. Mariner IV (launched Nov. 28, 1964) had transmitted first close-up photos of Mars in July 1965. Mariner VII (Mariner G) would be launched
m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Program Management at msfc, would return to duty with usaf after Apollo 11 mission, msfc Deputy Director, Technical, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, announced. Maj. O’Connor would be replaced by Lee B. James, Manager of Saturn Program Office, (msfc Release 69—155)
11 Mattino del Lunedi, Asmara, Ethiopia, said of Apollo 11 mission’s completion: “, . . today we not only admire, but exult. Because this ‘almost superhuman’ exploit has been accomplished by a society which is free and pluralistic, by a society which has no close and oppressive traditions, by a society which has founded its political and constitutional structure not on a totalitarian ideology but on the democratic philosophy of the Declaration of Independence. It has been accomplished by a nation, the American nation, whose characteristic ... is the fusion of the spirit of precision and discipline . . . with the spirit of freedom. . . . This is the reason why we today exult. Because we know that the conquest of Apollo—11 is in the service of man and not to oppress him.” (Am Consul, Asmara)
On first day out of quarantine, Apollo 11 crew visited MSC offices, then enjoyed official day off. NASA spokesman said astronauts had requested their activities be kept secret, (upi, W Post, 8/12/69, A3)
Lick Observatory scientists said at news conference they had measured distance between earth and moon to be 226,970.9 mi, based on data from Aug. 1 test in which laser beam successfully hit reflector on moon, lrl preventive medicine specialist Dr. Norman D. Jones remoon. Figure was accurate to within 150 ft and eventually might be pinned down to inches. (AP, NYT, 8/4/69, 13)
H.R. 16, 17, and 204, bills to authorize award of Congressional Medal of Honor to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, were introduced during first session of 91st Congress. {CR, 1/3/69, H33—42)
Apollo 11 lunar samples would not be first moon material to reach earth and to undergo scientific examination, Los Angeles Times quoted Dr. Dean R. Chapman, Chief of arc Thermo- and Gas-Dynamics Div., as saying in interview. Tektites—molten pieces of lunar surface in form of chunks of black glass—had fallen to earth when meteorites struck moon with tremendous force. Most recent tektite shower had occurred 700.000	yrs ago. While tektites’ origin was matter of scientific dispute, Dr. Chapman believed most commonly held theory—lunar origin. In working out shower’s trajectory, he had determined tektites came from Tycho crater on moon’s southern hemisphere. He believed Tycho to be 700.000	yrs old and that crusts of earth and of moon were intimately related. (Getze, LA Times, 7/7/69)
Apollo 10 astronauts would each carry out about two hours of head exercises early in mission in attempt to prevent motion sickness which plagued previous Apollo astronauts, msc Deputy Director of Medical Operations, Dr. A. Duane Catterson, said. Exercises—which included nodding, rocking, and twisting head—would be done to point just below threshold of illness until normal adaptation occurred. Since pilots who regularly performed drastic maneuvers in aircraft seldom suffered motion sickness, astronauts had flown aerobatic jet flights in barrel rolls and high-gravity maneuvers during week before launch. (Cohn, W Post, 5/18/69, A8) Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot)—entered initial parking orbit with 118.1-mi (189.9-km) apogee and 114.6-mi (184.4-km) perigee. Checkout followed lunar trajectory insertion; then csm, code-named Charlie Brown, separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, codenamed Snoopy. Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm. Excellent quality color TV coverage of docking sequences was transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and seen on worldwide commercial TV. Crew extracted lm from S—IVB and conducted 1st sps burn. All launch vehicle safing activities were performed as scheduled and successful propellant dump provided impulse to S—IVB for slingshot maneuver to earth-escape velocity. On second day, first midcourse maneuver was not required. Crew conducted midcourse maneuver number two, which was so accurate that third and fourth maneuvers were canceled. Five color TV transmissions totaling 72 min and showing excellent views of receding earth and spacecraft were made during translunar coast. Spacecraft entered moon’s sphere of influence on fourth day, May 21, at 61:50 get. Crew conducted first lunar orbit insertion maneuver with 356-sec sps burn to reduce speed to 5,474 fps and place spacecraft in initial lunar orbit with 196.1-mi (315.5-km) apolune and 68.6-mi (110.4-km) perilune. Second loi maneuver, 13.9-sec sps burn, circularized orbit with 70.8-mi (113.9-km) apolune and 67.8-mi (109.1-km) perilune. Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of lunar surface. Cernan transferred to lm at 81:55 get for two hours of housekeeping activities and communications test. On fifth day Stafford and Cernan entered lm and checked out all systems before firing sm reaction control system thrusters to separate csm and lm ahout 30 ft and again for 2.3-mi separation, lm descent propulsion system burn propelled lm to within 9.6 mi of lunar surface over landing site No. 2. Crew had no difficulty identifying landmarks and Stafford said, “It looks like all you have to do is put your tail wheel down and we’re there. . . . The craters [around No. 2 landing site] look flat and smooth at the bottom. It should be real easy” for Apollo 11 landing, lm crew took numerous photos of lunar surface and provided continuous commentary on their observations after cameras malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes and light-colored craters that glowed as if lit by radioactive substance. Crew conducted lm radar test during low-altitude pass which indicated 47,000-ft pericynthian (lowest point in orbit), dps phasing burn raised apocynthian (orbital high point) to 218.6 mi (351.7 km). lm descent stage was jettisoned and Res separation maneuver and staging were accomplished. Anomaly in automatic abort guidance system caused lm ascent stage to undergo extreme gyrations. By taking over manual control, Stafford reestablished proper attitude. APS insertion maneuver burn at pericynthian established equivalent of standard LM insertion orbit of lunar landing mission (51.8 by 12.9 mi), where lm coasted for one hour. Concentric sequence initiation at apocynthian, constant-delta-height maneuver, and terminal maneuver were conducted. lm successfully docked with csm at 106:33 get, after eight-hour separation; and lm crew returned to csm. On sixth day lm ascent stage was jettisoned; its batteries burned to depletion and it entered solar orbit. Crew made 18 landmark sightings and took extensive stereo and oblique photos of moon. Two scheduled TV periods were deleted because of crew fatigue and crew rested and prepared for return to earth, sps burn at 137:36 get injected csm into transearth trajectory after 61.5 hrs (31 orbits) in lunar orbit. Maneuver was so accurate that two other scheduled midcourse maneuvers were not necessary. During return to earth astronauts made star-lunar landmark sightings, live color TV transmissions, star-earth horizon navigation sightings, and csm S-band high-gain antenna reflectivity test. Pictures of moon from receding spacecraft were spectacular. Scheduled 10- and 29-min color TV broadcasts of earth, moon, and spacecraft interior were later followed by unscheduled TV transmission, which provided beautiful pictures of earth and brought total color TV broadcasts to 19 transmissions totaling almost six hours. On eighth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from CM on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 10 splashed down in Pacific at 12:52 pm edt May 26, 3.4 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Princeton 192 hrs 3 min after launch and precisely on time. Crew was picked up and reached recovery ship at 1:31 pm edt. All primary Apollo 10 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor discrepancies, which were corrected. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits were continually evident. Accomplishments included evaluation of LM steerable antenna at lunar distances; demonstration of lunar landing mission profile; low-level evaluation of lunar visibility; inflight demonstration of Weslinghouse color TV camera; testing of landing radar in near-lunar environment; and manned navigational, visual, and photographic evaluation of lunar landing sites 2 and 3, and in addition other possible lauding sites in highland areas. Apollo 10 was seventh Apollo mission to date, fourth manned Apollo mission, largest payload ever placed in earth and lunar orbits, and first demonstration of lunar orbit rendezvous. Mission acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for Apollo 11 and subsequent missions and numerous visual observations and photos of scientific significance. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of manned LM to operate in space. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, M5FC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj OH; NASA Release 69-68; W Post, 5/19-27/69, Al; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/19-27/69, Al; W Star, 5/19-27/69)
Scientists at JPL presented conflicting opinions to newsmen on preliminary data from Mariner VI and Mariner VII flybys of Mars. Dr. George C. Pimentel and Dr. Kenneth C. Herr of Univ. of California at Berkeley said data from infrared spectrometer indicated presence of gaseous ammonia and methane in Martian atmosphere. “We are confident that we have detected solid carbon dioxide that is not on the surface; that is, it is suspended as a cloud above the polar cap. Our data are consistent with and suggest that the polar cap is composed of water ice and probably not solid carbon dioxide near the polar cap edge.” If life did exist on Mars, they said, it could be in region near edge of polar icecap where “polar ice provides a reservoir of water” and solid carbon dioxide cloud “provides protection from ultraviolet radiation.” Dr. Gerry Neugebauer of Cal Tech said temperature of Mars was “strong circumstantial evidence that the polar caps are in fact predominantly made of carbon dioxide.” Infrared radiometer experiment, which measured temperatures on Martian surface, indicated that temperature of south polar cap was close to —253 °F, temperature at which carbon dioxide would solidify in thin Martian atmosphere. uv spectrometer experiment had found large amount of uv radiation reflected from south polar icecap, indicating that uv light from sun was penetrating thin Martian atmosphere and reaching surface. Dr. Charles W. Hord of Univ. of Colorado said strong uv radiation reaching surface “would destroy many of the important molecular bonds of organic compounds.” If life did exist on Mars, he said, it “must be pretty strong stuff,” or it must have some means of protection against uv rays. Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech said one of most striking results of Mariner photos was indication of dynamic process occurring on Martian surface. Unlike rest of Martian surface, which was heavily cratered and closely resembled moon, Hellas area appeared to be smooth and free of craters. “Hellas is the first non-lunar-like feature” discovered by Mariner VII, he said. Apparently there was “activity in that region . . . obliterating craters as fast as they are being formed.” (Bishop, WSJ, 8/8/69; Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/69, 1; Lannan, W Star, 8/8/69, A4)
Atlas said its “Talk of the World” section had “got a little hoarse” on subject of Apollo 11. It quoted “a few of the more unusual moon-thoughts” from international press. El Tiempo in Bogota had reported Colombian wool fabrics were used in Apollo 11 spacecraft upholstery. Canada’s Kitchener Waterloo Record had said lm had touched down on moon with legs made in Canada by Montreal firm. Oiga, in Lima, Peru, had said when Sputnik went into orbit “it was noted that Pedro Paulet Mostajo had invented a jet-propelled rocket back in 1895.” Atlas commented that “this could go on forever.” (Atlas, 9/69, 10)
Washington Post Federal Diary column noted Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would receive $2-per-day travel allowance as civil servant during Apollo 11 mission. As GS—16 at NASA, Armstrong collected maximum per diem of $16 when traveling on duty. But for Apollo 11 mission, it had been ruled that he would be enjoying Government billeting and subsistence. (Clopton, Causey, W Post, 6/11/69, Bll)
White House announced President Nixon would observe Apollo 11 splashdown and recovery aboard U.S.S. Hornet and proceed to Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, India, and Pakistan. He would meet with Asian leaders “to reemphasize his longstanding concern with peace and progress in Asia.” Announcement was released in New York City. (PD, 7/7/69, 926)
U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts, in joint space efforts, could succeed in improving U.S.-Soviet relations where “tired old politicians” had failed, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said during visit to msc. “Maybe this would be a way to break through to the rulers of Russia. When you get professional people together—scientists, aviators . . . you find you have many common problems.” Sen. Goldwater said he hoped Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would not seek Senate seat in 1970 but would wait awhile “and take mine.” (upi, NYT, 11/16/69, 79)
Worldwide audience focused on Apollo 11 launch: At summer residence, Castel Gondolfo, Italy, Pope Paul VI asked for prayers for U.S. astronauts a few hours before launch toward moon. U.S.S.R. radio and TV gave factual accounts of Apollo 11 launch but maintained third day of silence on Luna XV. Major Soviet news program at 8:30 pm Moscow time showed tape of Apollo 11 liftoff taken from live comsat coverage. In U.K. TV viewers saw launch via transatlantic satellite. BBC scheduled live coverage through July 24 splashdown and would relay broadcasts to continent by cable. London newspapers frontpaged Apollo 11. Daily Express headline read, “Ho Hum—Anyone for the Moon Today?” over report on Telaxed astronauts. Polish TV viewers saw launch via 45-min transmission directly from Cape Kennedy. Hundreds of Germans and Americans crowded Apollo 11 exhibit in Mannheim, Germany, department store. Swedish TV viewers were advised by state broadcasting company not to turn off sets Sunday night—so they could be awakened for scheduled moon landing Monday. Hippies in Iran held milk and honey pots in Teheran restaur ant to toast astronauts. In Egypt, Moslem world’s leading moon expert, Sheikh Ahmand Haredi said, “The Koran urges Moslems to look up from their earthly abode to what lies behind the moon and stars.” Japanese department stores featured models of Apollo command module. In Greece, Aspis-Pronoia insurance company issued first outer-space life insurance policy, to cover Apollo 11 crew at $10,000 each. In Spain people called event most interesting since Columbus discovered America.	• Israel’s state radio broadcast in Hebrew from Cape Kennedy while Israelis stood around TV sets and portable radios in streets. U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv and U.S. Consulate in Jerusalem opened Apollo 11 information offices. Apollo 11 reaction was “generally tepid” in Lagos, Nigeria. Radio Nigeria reported launch seven minutes into its morning broadcast. Later it became number one newscast item. Most of Latin America missed launch on TV because of failure of Intelsat-111 F—2 June 29. Latin American newspapers and TV correspondents traveled to U.S. to cover launch and were reported to be outraged by absence of TV coverage in their countries. In Colombia, government asked TV manufacturers to put sets in all town squares. Bogota students would have July 21 off to watch lunar landing. (NYT, 7/17/69, 21, 22; Bishop, C Trib, 7/17/69)
Visiting U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov went on “Flight to the Moon” ride at Disneyland, Calif., during U.S. tour. They received Mickey Mouse watches and caps from employees dressed as cartoon characters in spacesuits. Beregovoy said, “Now we are admitted to this particular society.” (upi, NYT, 10/25/69, 3)
Between 750,000 and 1 million persons crowded Brevard County, Fla., to witness launch of Apollo 11, including 5,000 dignitaries headed by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and former President Lyndon B. Johnson. The Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy and 40 representatives of Poor People’s Campaign watched launch from bleacher seats with 10,000 guests including families of Apollo program personnel, while other representatives marched outside ksc. Paris Match had brought 105 European businessmen. Some 3,100 press members were at special stand. As Apollo spacecraft lifted from launch pad there was some applause, but most spectators stared in silence until Saturn V rocket disappeared overhead. Afterward many were caught in monumental traffic jams. Banana River, five miles south of Launch Complex 39, was clogged with several thousand boats registered from New England to Texas. (Greider, W Post, 7/17/69, Al; Weinraub, NYT, 7/17/69, 21; Lyons, NYT, 7/17/69, 21)
NASA announced addition of two lunar orbits to Apollo 11 flight plan, which would increase revolutions to 30 and total time in lunar orbit to 59 hrs 30 min. Addition of orbit before lm/csm undocking would improve communications during critical maneuver by bringing LM within radio sight of 210-ft dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station during its descent to lunar surface. Addition of orbit after redocking and before lm jettison would allow astronauts two more hours for decontamination of equipment exposed to lunar environment, (nasa Release 69—83A)
Chances of U.S.S.R.’s Luna XV successfully returning to earth with lunar sample were small because of complexity of operations required, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told ksc Center Directors’ Briefing. Landing, deploying equipment, collecting and storing samples, and then lifting off “are not simple tilings to do . . . and doing it remotely is more difficult than doing it with men in space. I don’t think by any means impossible, but . . . the chances of being able to carry it out on the first mission are relatively low compared to the kind of probability that we would associate with our own landings.” If Luna XV were able to successfully retrieve lunar sample, feat would be “significant technological step and one that represents a considerable degree of prestige,” he said, but “each country [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] will obtain its proper share of credit. . . . The first sample returned if it were possible to do so and the first man landing on the moon are significant events, each in their own right, and are to be treated as such.” (Transcript)
President Nixon, at White House ceremony, presented National Space Club’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Apollo 8 astronauts and announced nomination of Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to be NASA Administrator. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., accepted award for himself and Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders. Citation: “In an epic journey man for the first time in December 1968 soared out of the earth gravitational field, flew unerringly into a close orbit of the moon, then back to a precise and safe landing. This historic voyage performed at times before the largest television audience in history, and open for coverage by the world’s press, reflects the utmost credit on the United States Space Program, Congress, nasa, and thousands of companies and employees in industry representing all these, the courageous, competent crew of Apollo 8.” Following award presentation, President announced Dr. Paine’s appointment: “There has been a great deal of interest as to who would be the new head of NASA. ... we have searched the country to find a man who could take this program and give it the leadership that it needs, as we move from one phase to another. This is an exciting period, and it requires the new leadership that a new man can provide. But after searching the whole country for somebody, perhaps outside of the program, we found . . . that the best man in the country was in the program.” Dr. Paine in his response said: “I believe in the space program. I believe in this country, and I think that this country should indeed be the preeminent nation in space-faring, and ... I am sure that we can go ahead to . . . see that the NASA program in the second decade of space will even out-perform the accomplishments in the first.” (PD, 3/10/69, 369-71)
September 6: Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders were named winners of 1969 Harmon International Astronaut’s Trophy for December 1968 Apollo 8 mission. Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) was awarded Aviator’s Trophy for testing NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle. Harmon trophies were awarded annually to world’s outstanding pilots for feats of individual piloting skill, (upi, W Star, 9/7/69, A7)	.
Mexican President Gustavo Diaz Ordaz announced in Coahuila, Mexico, that President Nixon had accepted invitation for ApoUo 11 astronauts to start round-the-world tour in Mexico. He repeated congratulations to Government and U.S. people on Apollo 11 success: “The United States gave proof of its greatness when it achieved this triumph, but it became even greater when they understood it and accepted it as a triumph of all humanity.” President Nixon was in Mexico to attend dedication of Amistad Dam on Rio Grande. (PD, 9/15/69, 1241)
NASA and Australian Dept, of Supply and Dept, of Education and Science announced that 210-ft-dia radiotelescope at National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Parkes, Australia, might be used to relay TV signals from moon during Apollo 11 lunar landing mission in July. Signals from Apollo 11 antennas were scheduled to be received by Goldstone Tracking Station. If mission were delayed and moon were not visible from Goldstone while TV was scheduled, signals would be received at Parkes, transmitted to Sydney, and transmitted to NASA’s Mission Control Center at Houston via Intelsat-III F—3 over Pacific. (NASA Release 69—72)
More TV coverage of Apollo 11 mission had been transmitted overseas via satellites to worldwide audience than of any previous event, ComSatCorp announced. More than 230 hrs of satellite time for 200 programs were transmitted during nine-day mission. Previous record was 225 hrs, set by Mexico Summer Olympic Games during 18 days in October 1968. Broadcasters estimated that 500 million persons were able to watch Apollo IVs TV broadcasts in more than 40 countries on 5 continents. (ComSatCorp Release 69—46)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family ended official goodwill tour of Western Europe with lecture and luncheon in Lisbon. During final European news conference previous day, he had predicted U.S. would put man on moon in summer 1969 “if everything goes well.” (upi, W Star, 2/20/69, A8)
Hours before lunar landing attempt by Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Pope Paul VI said at Castel Gon-dolfo, Italy: “In the ecstasy of this prophetic day, a real triumph for means produced by man for the domination of the universe, we must not forget man’s need to dominate himself. Admiration, enthusiasm and passion for instruments, for the products of man’s hand, fascinate us, perhaps to the point of madness. . . . This is the danger: We must beware of this worship.” (Schmick, B Sun, 7/21/69, A4)
Australian Civil Aviation Minister Reginald Swartz said passengers on transpacific Qantas Airlines flight would see Apollo 11 reentry July 24 when command module would parallel their aircraft for four minutes during descent near Gilbert and Ellice Islands. (Reuters, W Post, 7/23/69, A12)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
Apollo 11 astronauts on world tour arrived in Seoul, Korea, for overnight stay. They were treated as state guests and decorated in ceremony at presidential mansion. (AP, W Star, 11/3/69, A21)
Transfer of usaf mol officers to NASA astronaut corps [see Aug. 14] was criticized in Washington Sunday Star by William Hines: “With the initial moon landing now an accomplished fact, the pace of manned space operations has slowed down to three flights per year. This means that no more than nine men can fly annually, and with 54 astronauts now on board, this, in turn, means an average of six years between flights.” Though pace might accelerate in time and future space stations would increase annual number of crew assignments, “the glamor and glory of being an astronaut—particularly a nonflying one—no longer compensates for the enforced idleness imposed by the modified flight schedule.” (W Star, 8/24/69, D4)
Across U.S. on eve of Apollo 11 launch, newspaper editorials commented on lunar landing mission: Los Angeles Herald-Examiner; “It is with an almost breathless sense of awe that we await tomorrow’s blast-off from Cape Kennedy—the launching of three space explorers on the most ambitious and fearsome adventure in all human history. Mere words cannot capture the immensity of the flight of Apollo 11. Quite literally, man will be attempting a final break of the chains which have bound him to this earth.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/15/69) Newport News, Va., Times-Herald: “Now, this triumph of human courage and knowledge stands poised on the threshold of accomplishment. For a few fleeting moments, the attention of the world will follow the Eagle as it ferries its two astronauts toward a destiny until now only dreamed of in our history. Then, most probably, our attention will filter back to the pressing problems on earth.” (Times-Herald, 7/15/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Apollo 11 is providing insight into the meaning of life and the imperatives of human society. It is forcing us to face the grim paradox of exploiting human reason and the marvels of machinery to soar into the majesty of space while the world becomes fragmented into selfish national sovereignties—some armed, some arming, with the hideous capacity to end life itself.” (Milwaukee Journal, 7/15/69) Denver Post: “The Soviet attempt to send an unmanned spaceship to the moon in advance of Apollo 11 is a bold bid to draw attention to Soviet space prowess. But even if it succeeds ... in mechanically scooping up samples of the moon and returning to earth, the Soviet project will not overshadow the American mission. Instead, the Soviet flight will serve to underscore the expensive duplication of effort created by the space race. If the Russians and Americans had cooperated, rather than competed, the risks and the costs involved in landing a man on the moon would have been far less.” (Denver Post, 7/15/69) Washington Evening Star: Soviet Luna XV seemed strangely timed. During their Moscow discussions on space cooperation, U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny had not given Astronaut Frank Borman “slightest hint that the Kremlin was planning to send an unmanned spacecraft to the moon to coincide with the history-making Apollo 11 American mission.” Was it really possible “to work together in space exploration with a country that seems to be playing tricks with ours at a moment when we are engaged in a historic effort to land men on the moon?” (W Star, 7/15/69, A12)
At Geneva luncheon during meetings of Disarmament Conference, U.S. and U.S.S.R. opened exploratory talks on proposed treaty banning use of seabed for stationing nuclear weapons, (upi, W News, 3/20/69, 2) for “national program for the development of a permanent space station and a logistic support system in a way that will not only serve the needs and goals of the civilian space program, but will also be capable of supporting future defense research and developments as needs become clearly defined.” (Text) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator, said: “Although similar space technology is used in Apollo Applications and the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, there is no unnecessary duplication in the experiments planned. These activities require different equipment, different orbits and different timing. I believe that any attempt to combine the two programs would jeopardize the returns to each agency and would ultimately increase the cost. There is a distinct need to continue with manned space operations under both military and nonmilitary auspices. Cooperation between nasa and dod has been close, and will continue.” (Text) afa’s highest award, Henry H. Arnold Trophy, was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. NASC Executive Secretary, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, received Gill Robb Wilson Trophy for Arts and Letters for his part in interpreting aerospace role in modern society, afa’s Citation of Honor went to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his management of NASA Apollo program, and to Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) for “outstanding contributions to the Air Force and the nation for being the first to achieve hypersonic winged flight while piloting the X—15 aircraft to a speed of 4,534 miles per hour.” (afsc Newsreview, 3/69, 1; AFJ, 3/8/69, 30)
Svenska Dagbladet, Stockholm, Sweden, welcomed Apollo 11 launch: “One of the greatest adventures of human history begins today. . . . Studies of the moon will to a great degree enrich our knowledge of both the earth and space. Among other things it will be possible to make comparisons which will propel science by leaps in various disciplines. . . . While we can predict much that may result from conquest of the moon, there will in all likelihood be many results which we cannot even imagine now. All great discoveries and bold undertakings have brought advances which no one could have foreseen from the outset.” Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden: “There is an irrational element in these feats of discovery which fortunately dominates the prosaic calculation of gains. Then one can regret that man’s fantasy seems incapable of being fired for such a tremendous task as eliminating starvation from our earth, or for bringing peace to Biafra or for eliminating the U.S. Negro ghettos. . . . Three men will be lifted to world acclaim today on the crest of mankind’s greatest ever coordinated effort. . . .” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Federal Register published rule signed by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, which made unauthorized manufacture, sale, reproduction, or possession of official Apollo flight insignia, “or any colorable imitation thereof,” misdemeanor punishable by $250 fine and six months in prison. (Federal Register, 7/26/69, 12332-4)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, both U.S. Naval Academy graduates, presented Academy flag carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft to brigade representing 4,000 midshipmen at Annapolis. (AP, B Sun, 4/3/69, All)
dod internal, classified memoranda suggested Government would waste money buying additional Lockheed C—5A aircraft, Washington Post article said. Central conclusion was that most efficient and least costly transportation network to support two major and one “brushfire” war “for which military wants to be prepared consists of the existing three squadrons (58) [of] C—5As plus smaller carriers like the C—141 and modern freighters.” (Nossiter, W Post, 8/31/69, Al) During August: Pace magazine published articles by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, also nasc Chairman, and by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. Dr. Paine said, “To improve conditions in our society we need to create more wealth through greater productivity based on new technology. We should be restless and dissatisfied with our slowness in overcoming social ills, and I hope that the space program will continue to spur us onward here. If we can go to the moon, why can’t we build great and shining cities? Why can’t we eliminate ignorance, crime and poverty? If our space program highlights such questions and helps form a national commitment to find new solutions, it will have served the nation well. Our space advances should embolden the nation to proceed forward with increased confidence in these other areas. Our Apollo program has demonstrated anew what Americans can accomplish given a national commitment, capable leadership and adequate resources. “Man’s future in space is limitless. We have embarked on a new stage of evolution that will engage all future generations of men. We face the unknown in countless areas: What are the effects of sustained zero and artificial gravity? Of time-extending flight at nearly the velocity of light? Of societies genetically selected for extraterrestrial living? “We must find the answers. We must move vigorously forward in space. The practical benefits alone justify this venture, but there are many other compelling human reasons. Progress in space should continue to spur us onward to find new solutions to our age-old problems here on Spaceship Earth. We must make the blue planet Earth a home base, worthy of men who will set forth one day on journeys to the stars.” Vice President Agnew said: “With the remarkably successful Apollo moon-landing program on the verge of culmination, we are now faced with a need to define just what we should proceed to do to make use most effectively of the results of our past and continuing space-exploration investment. Wealthy as our economy is, rich as our technology has become, we must plan carefully in order to meet a wide range of urgent national requirements. ... It is our hope that, with a carefully reasoned set of goals adequately funded by the people through their Congress, the nation and the world will reap the maximum possible benefit from mankind’s most ambitious undertaking. We must keep our horizons wide and our sights high. Despite its many internal domestic priorities, this nation should never turn inward, away from the opportunities and challenges of its most promising frontier.” (Pace, 8/69, 2—4)
During “Meet the Press” interview shown on nbc TV Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said he thought Apollo 11 spacecraft would have crashed if Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong had not piloted it on final lunar approach. Quick reactions hy Apollo 12 crew had helped save mission from power failure on its launch. “I think that the [Apollo 12] launch would have been a success. But we felt a good deal better with the astronauts there.” Dr. Paine thought U.S.S.R. would attempt moon trips “in the next few years.” (W Post, 11/17/69, A3)
Use of space technology in “complete and systematic rehabilitation” of Washington, D.C., was proposed by RCA president Robert W. Sarnoff in speech before Fourth Annual Computer Age Conference of National Industrial Conference Board in New York City. “A comprehensive systems effort to revitalize the city and its environs should invoke a nationwide response ... as broad and enthusiastic as that inspired by the Apollo moon landing.” (Text)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 12: “It is almost incredible that such giant strides could have been made in the few months that separated Apollo 12 from Apollo 11.” Navigational capabilities available to Neil Armstrong last July were “so inexact that for days or weeks after his landing there was no certainty even as to just where Eagle had touched down. Intrepid, on the contrary, landed within a few hundred feet of Surveyor 3, the prime target of its crew’s planned collection activities. It will take months, perhaps years, to harvest the full scientific gains from Apollo 12. Already, however, it is evident that mankind is still at the stage where the more it learns about the moon, the more mysterious and puzzling that natural satellite appears to be.” (NYT, 11/23/69, 12)
North American Rockwell Corp.’s Space Div. had earned incentive award fees of $1,100,000 and $270,000 under nasa contracts for Apollo command and service modules and 2nd stage (S—II) for Saturn V launch vehicle, nasa announced. Awards were determined by Performance Evaluation Board on basis of NAR’s achievement of management objectives specified in contracts from Sept. 1, 1967, through Dec. 31, 1968, which encompassed S—II contract activities from Aug. 4, 1968, through Dec. 28, 1968—first of three time increments extending through completion of Apollo program, (nasa Release 69—38)
Edgar L. Piret, U.S. Embassy Scientific Attache in Paris, accepted Prix Pierre Guzman gold medals on behalf of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Award had been established by Mme. Anna Emile Guzman in 1889 for first persons “to find the means of communicating with a heavenly body—Mars excluded” [see Aug. 13]. (AP, W Post, 12/9/69, A23)
At New York meeting sponsored by Goddard Institute for Space Studies, msc, and Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, msc scientist Wilbur R. Wollenhaupt said Apollo 8 computer had erred in prediction of spacecraft’s position by 15,000 ft in range and 1,500 ft in elevation. Apollo 10 computer erred only 2,000 ft in range and 500 ft in elevation with programming of more accurate model of moon’s asymmetrical gravity field. Apollo 10 results made it likely Apollo 11 could be guided to extremely accurate landing in July. Dr. Richard Lingenfelter of ucla described study of meandering tracks across moon’s surface which showed evidence that at least 130 river-like rifles around large circular lunar mare had been formed by flowing water. Evidence was presented from gravity studies and magnetic observations in nearby space that moon’s interior was homogeneous rather than subdivided into heavy core surrounded by lighter mantle. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/7/69, 16)
In Huntsville interview, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said accomplishment of first lunar landing would not necessarily mean U.S. was first in space race. “. . . whether the Russians have this particular objective in their program, I just don’t know.” It was no longer possible to decide in simple terms who was ahead. “. . . today the space program has so many facets that it may be impossible for all eternity from now on to be ahead of them in all fields. And . . . impossible for them to be ahead of us in all fields.” It was still possible for U.S.S.R. to reach moon first if July launching date for Apollo 11 was delayed. Russians now had rocket more powerful than Saturn V, which would allow direct lunar flight. “If this rocket is flown in the very near future—which it might—they may still have a chance of landing a man on the moon in the latter part of 1969.” As for Soviet unmanned lunar landing, Dr. von Braun said, “I think the Russians very definitely have the capability as far as their equipment is concerned to soft land enough payload on the moon to take a sample of lunar soil and fly it back to earth.” (upi, NYT, 6/6/69, 18)
At White House press briefing President Nixon introduced Apollo 8 astronauts and announced that Astronaut Frank Borman would make eight-nation goodwill trip to Western Europe. Tour would point out “what is the fact: that we in America do not consider that this is a monopoly, these great new discoveries that we are making; that we recognize the great contributions that others have made and will make in the future; and that we do want to work together with all peoples on this earth in the high adventure of exploring the new areas of space.” Later, Press Secretary Ronald Ziegler announced Borman family would visit England, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, Italy, Spain, and Portugal. {PD, 2/3/69, 189-90; AP, W Post, 1/31/69, A2)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman acknowledged that he had discussed possibility of running for Governor of Arizona or U.S. Senate with Rep. Morris K. Udall (D-Ariz.) but said he did not “foresee right now” that he would do so, Associated Press reported. (W Post, 6/4/69)
Pope Paul VI hailed Apollo 10 flight and said man’s presence in cosmos was sign of God’s presence “in our world and our life.” Pope told 30,000 persons at St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome, “Even more than the face of the moon, the face of man shines before us; no other being known to us, no animal, even the strongest and most perfect in its vital instincts, can be compared to the prodigious beings we men are.” (NYT, 5/22/69)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong stood to inherit 100,000-franc fortune of Mme. Anna E. Guzman, widow of French industrialist, which had been held in trust by Academy of Science of Institute of France since her 1891 death, according to article Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) inserted in Congressional Record. Legacy—once worth $20,000 but currently decreased in value to $290 exclusive of interest—was to be awarded to first scientist to make personal contact with heavenly body other than Mars. (CR, 8/13/69, E7023)
Second official public display of lunar rock fragment retrieved from moon by Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled at MSc by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director. Exhibit included 12 photograph and text panels and four-foot-diameter opaque sphere with 20-in viewing port, (msc Release 69—73)
At msc news conference following Apollo 11 splashdown, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: . . we now stand at what is undoubtedly the greatest decision point in the history of this planet.” Apollo 11 had proved “that man is no longer bound to the limits of the planet on which for so long he has lived. We will return to the moon first in November and then at regular intervals in the coming year. But these trips are only the first step. . . . Will we press forward to explore other planets or will we deny the opportunity to the future? To me, the choice is clear. We must take the next step. . . . This is the time for decision. . . . The knowledge possessed by men is sufficient, the resources are adequate for the task of carrying out this next step. . . . “In this moment of man’s greatest achievement, it is timely for us to dedicate ourselves to the unfinished work so nobly begotten by three of us. To resolve that this nation, under God, will join with all men in the pursuit of the destiny of mankind will lead to the way to the planets.” In answer to questions, Dr. Mueller said next major step should be manned landing on Mars which would be possible “sometime after 1980.” l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo Program Director, told press Apollo team was “strongest team that’s ever assembled in the history of man. It has the strength of technical and engineering confidence, scientific competence, and management competence that’s unexcelled. It has the dedication that’s necessary to be able to tackle an almost impossible job and bring it through” and an exciting future in lunar exploration. Second manned lunar landing mission, Apollo 12, would be launched from ksc Nov. 14 toward touchdown on Site 7 in moon’s Ocean of Storms. Primary objective would be to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), explore and survey mare area, and return samples to earth. Secondary objective, if lm softlanded on target, would be to examine Surveyor III spacecraft (launched April 17, 1967), which was resting on moon near planned Apollo 12 touchdown point. Astronauts would have two periods for extravehicular activities (eva), during which they would explore surface and conduct experiments for over three hours and walk farther away from spacecraft than had Apollo 11 crew. Maximum lunar stay time would be 28—32 hrs. Schedule called for planning to fly follow-on missions through Apollo 15 at four-month intervals and missions after that at five-month intervals. (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (commander), Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), and Michael Collins (cm pilot) held press conference at msc. Astronauts were seated 50 ft from nearest newsmen and were partially enclosed in plastic booth as part of plan to limit crew’s contacts during 21 days immediately preceding flight and prevent development of illness. Collins told press that from CM viewpoint, Apollo 11 should not be very different from previous manned Apollo missions. He did not feel “slightest bit frustrated” about going to moon without landing on it: “I’m going 99.9 . . . percent of the way there, and that suits me fine.” lm flight plan would pick up where Apollo 10 left off with phasing maneuver, Aldrin explained. There would be number of “firsts”: “the ultimate test,” actual touchdown; 1/6 g environment; new thermal conditions; two-man EVA on lunar surface; sleeping in LM on moon; star sighting technique with alignment telescope on lunar surface; and powered ascent from moon with seven-minute engine burn. One of important early activities after exiting from lm on moon would be determining best pace for moving about: “. . . there have been several different techniques employed in the partial zero gravity training. And, it looks like you can walk conventionally one foot after another. It also looks as though you can do a two-footed hop—kangaroo style.” In training in aircraft flown at 1/6 g, “a fairly rapid pace” appeared quite easy to perform. “It looks like we shouldn’t have too much difficulty in moving at something like 6, 8, or 10 miles per hour.” Armstrong said crew would use “somewhat hybrid methods of manual and automatic” for descent to moon. “The predicted method at this point, although we have a great deal of flexibility and choice, based on the situation at the time, would he to maintain manual control of attitude and automatic control of throttle through the final descent from an altitude of somewhere between 500 and 1000 feet until such time as the automatic throttle rated descent was unsatisfactory, at which time we’ll go full manual on the throttle ... flying it in a manner like a normal vtol machine.” Code names for cm and lm had been selected as “representative of the flight, the nation’s hope,” Armstrong revealed, lm would be called “Eagle” for U.S. national emblem, and cm would be called “Columbia” for U.S. symbol, statue on top of Capitol, and Jules Verne’s fictional spacecraft, “Columbiad,” which flew to moon 100 yrs ago. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 7/6/69, Al) Borman and family visited Star City, home of cosmonauts outside Moscow, where he presented color film of Apollo 8. Cosmonauts presented Borman with model of Vostok 1, first manned spacecraft. Later Borman toured major space tracking station at Eupatoria near Yalta in Crimea. (AP, W Star, 7/5/69, A13; UPl, W Star, 7/7/69, A2)
Board of Investigation which probed Feb. 17 death of Sealab III Aquanaut Berry L. Cannon had concluded probable cause was carbon dioxide poisoning due to faulty diving gear, usn announced. Gear had lacked substance for filtering carbon dioxide from exhaled breath. Associated Press said Sealab III project had been “shelved” because of insufficient funds for FY 1970 and quoted USN spokesman as saying it would be continued later. Project had been suspended since Cannon death, (dod Release 794-69; W Star, 9/24/69, A9) *	Shawbury, England, innkeeper Jack Warner had asked U.S. Government for license to open first pub on moon, Associated Press said. He would call it “The Space Inn” or “The Lunatic Tavern.” (W Star, 9/24/69, A16)
nasa announced resignation of Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Dec. 10. No successor was named and Dr. Mueller did not reveal his plans for future. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Administrator, said: “It is due to Dr. Mueller’s creative leadership of the magnificent manned space flight organization that the flight of Apollo 11 . . . achieved the national goal set in May, 1961.	. . . We regret that Dr. Mueller has made the decision to return to private life, but recognize that decision comes at a time when the task he accepted is complete and a sound foundation for our future national space program has been established.” Dr. Mueller, who had directed manned space flight program for six years, had received nasa Distinguished Service Medal, achieved early operational flight schedule in Gemini program, formulated concept for thorough and comprehensive ground testing permitting all-up flight testing and early operational availability of Saturn-Apollo hardware, introduced improved techniques that established efficient management of nationwide industrial complex for first lunar landing and return on schedule and within cost, and formulated low-cost space transportation and operations which were basis for space shuttle and space station programs. (NASA Release 69—151)
NASA announced it would conduct 26 major launches from etr and WTR during 1969. First launch was Oso V Jan. 22. Launches from etr would include five manned missions: Apollo 9, scheduled for Feb. 28, would place three-man crew in earth orbit for 11 days to flight-test lunar module; Apollo 10 would place three astronauts in lunar orbit and two would fly lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface; and Apollo 11 would land two members of three-man crew on lunar surface. Two additional lunar landings would be conducted if first landing was successful. Unmanned launches from etr would include two Intelsat III comsats, two Mariner-Mars missions, Tiros weather satellite, Biosatellite carrying monkey, Pioneer E interplanetary spacecraft, Applications Technology Satellite (ats), Orbiting Solar Observatory (oso), Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao), and two U.K. comsats. wtr launches would include three Tiros weather satellites, Explorer (imp—g), Canadian International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (isis), Nimbus weather satellite, and Thor-Agena (ogo—f) mission to test experimental ion-thruster, (ksc Release 19—69; NASA ossa)
Washington Post reported interview with l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director. Space shuttle was samso’s top priority program. New family of spaceships was being roughed out on drawing boards. “From a military standpoint, we need to be aggressive advocates of the capability to take a look at and deal as necessary with space vehicles of another country.” usaf and NASA were dividing labor on space shuttle program, which would cost estimated $1 billion. Pace of program would depend on progress toward development of reusable rocket engine which would not burn itself out as it hurtled into space, LeRoy E. Day, Chief of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, said. (Wilson, W Post, 10/15/69, A3)
Washington Evening Star editorial said of success of Dec. 21—27, ,1968, Apollo 8 mission: “Modern science undercut man’s bland belief that he was the center of the universe, and modern philosophy reduced him to a trivial atom of matter in the larger cosmos. To be able to sail around at will in that vast cosmos may give man back some of the confidence he once had, not the arrogance of thinking that he understands the whole pattern, but the quiet sense that he will not flinch from what he may yet learn.” (W Star, 1/1/69, A15)
NASA began distribution of IS pounds of lunar material to scientific investigators in the United States and eight other countries for on ay sis. The rock above, one of the samples collected by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, ft., on the moon July 29, teas studied at msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory. stroyed during experiments; residues and remaining 5.1 kgs would be returned to NASA. Results of analyses were to be reported early in 1970. Among measurements to be made were those of physical properties of rocks or soil to help in understanding optical observations of moon from earth and future seismic experiments; mineralogy and petrology to show mineral content, amount of water present when rocks crystallized, and how surfaces were eroded by particles; chemical composition of rocks and fines to determine concentration of 92 elements occurring on earth and in meteorites, times of crystallization of igneous rocks, and periods rocks had lain on lunar surface. Studies of rare gases in soil would furnish first data on isotopic compositions of solar materials. Biologists and organic chemists would determine structures and abundances of carbon compounds in and on lunar surface and their origin, catalog microstructures in terms of organized elements and microfossils, and define presence or absence of viable lunar organisms. {NASA Release 69—130)
Apollo 11 cm was being readied at North American Rockwell plant in Downey, Calif., for tour of 50 state capitals and final resting place at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., Associated Press reported. NASA was sponsoring tour. {CSM, 11/20/69)
New York City held ticker-tape parade for Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, followed by presentation at City Hall Plaza of Medals of City of New York, luncheon at Lincoln Center, appearance at U.N., and Waldorf-Astoria dinner attended by 2,500 political leaders and guests. (NYT, 1/10/69, 30; Aarons, W Post, 1/11/69, Al; AP, B Sun, 1/11/69, A4)
Apollo 11 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility (mqf) , arrived at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, where they were greeted by 12,000 cheering people and Mayor of Honolulu Frank F. Fasi. MQF was then transported to aircraft which would carry it to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. At lrl, scientists opened first of two boxes of lunar samples and made preliminary examinations of samples in one box. (Wooten, Wilford, NYT, 7/27/69, 47, 1)
Dept, of Commerce, dod, Dept, of Interior, DOT, AEC, NASA, and nsf released News from BOMEX, report of Barbados Oceanographic and Meteorological Experiment to be conducted in May, June, and July in cooperation with government of Barbados. Scientific study of joint behavior and interactions of atmosphere-ocean system in subtropical and tropical waters was part of Federal Air-Sea Interaction Research Program and major U.S. contribution to Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp). bomex would study continuous exchange of energy, momentum, gases, particulates, and electrical charges at air-sea interface and study ways in which energy and other properties were transported from area by atmosphere and ocean. NASA would test concepts of satellite sensors for weather and oceanographic observations. Its experimental weather and communications satellites (Ats III, Nimbus III, and essa satellites) and devices being developed under Earth Resources Survey Satellite program would be directly engaged in bomex. Photos taken by Apollo 9 astronauts with hand-held Hasselblad camera of 900 sq mi of equatorial Atlantic Ocean off Barbados would be used in project. (Text; NASA News; Science, 3/28/69, 1435-6)
American Airlines began showing NASA color film of Apollo 11 and distributing free copies of CBS News recording “Man on the Moon” and free cut-out lunar modules for children on “Americana” flights between East Coast and California through Sept. 23. (NYT, 8/18/69, 23)
Philadelphia Inquirer cited possible danger to Apollo spacecraft from “drifting junk” in space. “One notable sidelight to the Apollo 10 flight came in a report that the spaceship brings the number of man-made objects in space to 1691. Although the chance of Apollo 10 colliding with any of the objects is infinitesimal, it is significant that there is so much hardware floating around in space 12 years after Sputnik I. . . . “U.S. and Soviet scientists should find ways of bringing back or destroying rockets and satellites and their separate components after they have become inoperable. If some sort of solution isn’t found, it may not be long before a tragic collision will occur.” (P Inq, 5/20/69)
Welcome back to earth: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left to right inside the mobile Quarantine facility), were greeted by President Nixon aboard the V.S.S. Hornet after their splashdown. is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base, and leaving behind a replica from our Apollo 11 patch with an olive branch.” LM docked with CSM at 128:03 get. Crew transferred with samples and film to csm, and LM ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit. SM reaction-control-system separation maneuver placed CSM into orbit with 72,0 mi (115.9-km) apolune and 63.0-mi (101.4-km) perilune, where crew rested and prepared for return to earth. cm separated from SM on schedule at 194:49 GET. Because of deteriorating weather in nominal landing area, splashdown point was moved 247.4 mi downrange, where weather was excellent. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 11 splashed down in mid-Pacific at 12:51 pm edt July 24, 15 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Hornet, 195 hrs 19 min after launch. Swimmers attached flotation collar and seven-man raft to spacecraft and helicopter dropped biological isolation garments, which were donned by astronauts inside CM and by one swimmer. Two other swimmers moved upwind of CM on another large raft. Postlanding ventilation was turned off and CM powered down, and astronauts climbed out and helped swimmer close hatch. Swimmer then decontaminated all garments, hatch area, flotation collar, and area around postlanding vent valves with Betadine disinfectant. Helicopter carried astronauts to recovery ship, where they entered 32-ft-long mobile quarantine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. They were congratulated by President Nixon and Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, who were on board ship. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory (lRl) in Houston July 27. cm was retrieved, placed in dolly on board recovery ship, moved to MQF, and mated to transfer tunnel. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, mqf engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to lrl. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Johnston Island and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 11 mission objective—to perform manned landing on moon and return—and all detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor, corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits and proficiency were major factors in mission’s success. Accomplishments included first manned lunar landing and return; first lunar surface EVA; first seismometer, laser reflector, and solar wind experiment deployed on moon; first lunar soil samples returned to earth; largest U.S. payload ever placed into lunar orbit (72,037.6 lbs at lunar orbit insertion); acquisition of numerous visual observations, photos and TV transmissions of scientific and engineering significance; and first operational use of mqf and lrl. Apollo 11 was eighth Apollo mission to date, fifth manned Apollo mission, and first manned lunar landing mission. Mission acquired major quantities of data for subsequent Apollo flights. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distance and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of lm to operate in space under manned conditions. Apollo 10 (May 18—26, 1969) had successfully operated complete Apollo spacecraft on lunar orbital mission and had provided major quantities of scientific and training materials for Apollo 11. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-83K; NYT, 7/16-25/69; W Post, 7/16-25/69; W Star, 7/16-25/69; B Sun, 7/16-25/69; PD, 7/28/69, 1016)
In telephone call to Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong on eve of, Apollo 11 astronauts’ round-the-world tour, President Nixon asked astronauts to invite foreign countries to become “partners in space” with U.S. He also invited astronauts and wives to White House dinner Nov. 5. (upi, W Star, 9/29/69, A3)
In Sydney, Australia, during world tour of Apollo 11 astronauts, Astronauts Michael Collins said NASA might someday send women on space flights, “nasa has never barred women,” he told news conference. “Flying background is usually what has prevented the young ladies from participating.” (AP, W Post, 11/2/69, 18)
In fourth big city welcome within one week, Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders received tribute from estimated 1.5 million persons in Chicago reception at which they were made honorary citizens of city, (upi, NYT, 1/15/69, 1)
In international reaction to Apollo 12 moon walk Moscow Radio announced landing eight minutes after touchdown, followed with brief progress bulletins, and broadcast seven-minute film on event seven hours after lm landed on moon. Foreigners in Moscow said BBC broadcast was jammed by two stronger stations just before lunar touchdown. Pope Paul VI at Vatican watched astronauts on TV, then knelt for short prayer. He sent message to President Nixon: “Many, many congratulations to you and the American nation on yet another magnificent step for the human race.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, saluted “precision and accuracy” of Apollo 12 lunar landing. He said, “Until the Russians achieve a rocket with the thrust of the order of Saturn 5, or greater, it is unlikely they will be able to stage any manned flight comparable with Apollo.” London’s morning newspapers put Apollo 12 story well down on front pages in contrast to Apollo 11 banner headlines. In Helsinki, Finland, Soviet diplomats attending strategic arms limitation talks toasted Apollo 12 crew. Tokyo TV dealers expressed unhappiness because repeat of run on color sets after Apollo 11 landing failed to materialize. West German Foreign Minister Walter Scheel said Apollo 12 was an invitation to Europe to organize its own space potential. Egyptian newspapers gave Apollo 12 second billing to continuing conflict with Israel. In Poland millions watched lunar landing by direct TV transmission. In Sweden TV reception was poor and viewer interest lagged. Former Argentine President Arturo U. Illia, in Buenos Aires, called lunar landing “a victory for democracy.” Australians watched landing 10 secs before U.S. because of time lag. In France many viewers were unable to watch landing because of electric utility strikes. Moon walk was one of few programs shown on Italian TV during day of general strike. Shah of Iran sent congratulations to President Nixon and Apollo 12 crew for “untiring endeavor.” Landing was shown live on Iranian TV. West Germany’s Wickert Public Opinion Institute estimated 82% of German adults watched TV shots of lunar landing, 92% watched Apollo 11. It concluded Apollo 12 lacked suspense that attended first moon shot. (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 30; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
Washington Post editorial said: “The fact that the Russians may be able to complete a floating [space] station substantially before the United States is ready to attempt it should be of no great concern. Although the psychological impact of knowing that men are up there looking down on us constantly is bound to be great, this should be more than offset by the successes of the Apollo program. The important things are for the American space effort to proceed in a logical fashion designed to reap the largest possible scientific benefits and to remain largely under civilian control.” (W Post, 1/22/69, A26)
naa announced Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders would receive 1968 Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics, as representatives of “entire United States space flight team for the successful and flawless execution of the first manned lunar orbit mission in history.” Trophy would be presented by President Nixon at Washington, D.C., luncheon May 7. (naa Release)
President Nixon announced appointment of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong as Chairman and member of Peace Corps National Advisory Council to succeed W. Thomas Johnson, Jr., who resigned May 27. (PD, 12/8/69, 1696)
Sen. Robert J. Dole (R-Kans.) introduced S.R. 167 “providing for the display in the Capitol Building of a portion of the moon.” Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. {CR, 12/9/69, S16142)
Second largest lunar sample shown to public to date—67.7-gm moon rock—went on display at usia “Education—U.S.A.” exhibit at Sekoniki Park in Moscow. One of 14 moon rocks thus far released by NASA for publicity tours, rock later would travel with usia exhibit to Tashkent, Baku, and Novosibirsk, where it would become first U.S. exhibit ever shown in Siberia. Other moon rocks had been scheduled for showing at 30 U.S. museums. Largest lunar sample—Smithsonian Institution’s 478.8-gm rock—was expected to be only permanent display. NASA also had approved display of samples entrusted to U.S. scientists who wished to show them in their home towns. (Lardner, W Post, 11/24/69, Al; usia pio)
U.S. newspaper editorials hailed Apollo 11 launch. Miami News: “All America, represented by three lonely men in space, is on its way to the moon. In fact, this is a people’s effort, arousing the interest and participation of all the people of this country. This is evidenced by the more than one million persons on hand at Cape Kennedy . . . for the start of the moon voyage and by the many millions who join in the adventure by television. Today’s magnificent launch, and the elan stirred in our people by it, makes this one of America’s most splendid hours.” (Miami News, 7/17/69, A16) Washington Evening Star: countdown which culminated in Apollo 11 liftoff, “regardless of NASA’s official records,” had begun, “when primitive man first looked up into the night sky to gaze at the moon, and to feel the first stirring of wonder.” (W Star, 7/16/69, A22) Huntsville Times: Manhattan Project had climaxed with July 16, 1945, explosion of world’s first successful atomic bomb. “Men, it seems, can only pray that the consequences of the quest of the planets may be better than those born in the irreversible explosion on a New Mexico desert 24 years ago.” (Huntsville Times, 7/16/69) Chicago Sun-Times: “Man has always looked upward to the stars, first in fear and awe, then in need to know. Today the first great step to the firmament will be taken. If it is successful man will stand on the threshold of outer space—and standing there will reach outward.” (C Sun-Times, 7/16/69)
NASA awarded General Electric Co.’s Aircraft Engine Group $18.7-million, fixed-price contract with performance-award provision to construct and test two experimental quiet jet aircraft engines. To cut development costs, CF—6 and TF—39 engines developed for DC—10 and C—5A aircraft would be used as core of new engine. Engines would produce 4,900-lb thrust at cruise and 22,000-lb thrust for takeoff. Work was part of oart’s Quiet Engine Research Program to develop turbofan engine with noise level 15—20 db below present engines. Contract would be managed by LeRC. (nasa Release 69—103) Crew conducted two unscheduled color TV broadcasts—for 16 min beginning at 10:32 get (taped for 11:26 get transmission) and for 50 min beginning at 30:28 get—and one scheduled 36-min transmission beginning at 33:59 get. Broadcasts were very clear and showed earth, onboard computer keyboard, and crew. At 55:08 get (4:40 pm edt July 18) crew began 96-min color TV transmission with excellent picture resolution, coverage, and general quality. Viewers in North America, South America, Japan, and Western Europe saw live pictures of csm and lm interiors, CSM exterior, and earth and watched crew removing probe and drogue, opening spacecraft tunnel hatch, preparing food, and housekeeping lm. Apollo 11 passed into moon’s sphere of influence at 61:40 get, 214,546.8 mi (345,205.8 km) from earth, traveling at 2,990 fps relative to earth. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 70.5-mi (113.4-km) perilune at 75:56 get (1:28 pm edt July 19) after first sps burn. During second lunar orbit, live color TV transmission showed spectacular views of lunar surface and approach path to Site 2. Armstrong pointed out lunar landmarks and described unexplained glow near crater Aristarchus which some scientists believed to be volcanic activity. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 75.6-mi (121.6-km) apolune and 61.9-mi (99.6-km) perilune. Aldrin transferred to LM for two-hour housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check.
At opening day ceremonies of American Bible Week in New York, sponsors, Laymen’s Committee of American Bible Society and Catholic Biblical Assn, of America, awarded citation to crew of Apollo 8 for reading from Genesis as they orbited moon during Dec. 21—27, 1968, mission. (NYT, 11/22/69, 40)
New York Post published results of Louis Harris poll which showed American people favored manned lunar landing by 51% to 41%. In February poll public opinion had been opposed by 49% to 39%. Harris attributed change to feeling “if we have gone this far, we ought to finish the job.” He said 56% of 1,607 adults polled from June 16 to 22 were opposed to annual $4-billion ouday for space program, while 37% favored it—little change from 55% for to 34% against in February. Reaction to Apollo 10 flight had been generally favorable. (NYT, 7/15/69, 20)
During Apollo 11 celebration, credit should be given to former nasa Administrator James E. Webb, “whose organizational skill, vision and drive played a major part in its success,” mit Provost, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, and mit physicist Jerrold Zacharias said in letter to New York Times. “There never was any question regarding the technical feasibility of a manned lunar landing. The real question was whether or not we could organize and manage so large and complex a program on the time schedule laid down by President Kennedy.” Webb had organized, defended, and managed program, “and as the world celebrates this great technical and human achievement we should also honor the man who directed its accomplishment.” (NYT, 8/5/69, 32)
In response to telephone inquiry by Astronaut Frank Borman, Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, sent telegram guaranteeing that Luna XV, orbiting moon, would not interfere with Apollo 11 mission and assuring Borman that he would be notified of any changes in spacecraft’s course. Under 1967 U.N. Outer Space Treaty, U.S. and U.S.S.R. were bound to furnish each other this kind of information. (Wilford, NYT, 7/19/69, 1)
McDonald Observatory in Texas successfully recorded its first hits on laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts at 9:30 pm cdt. Scientists said distance at that moment was 232,271.406 mi and moon was 131.2 ft farther from earth than previously believed. Lick Observatory in California had recorded first hits Aug. 1 and had estimated earth-moon distance to be 226,970.9 mi at that time. (AP, W Star, 8/21/69, A3)
Analysis of lunar surface would provide key to earth’s history by indicating whether moon’s origin was catastrophic or noncatastrophic, Dr. H. Alfven and Dr. G. Arrhenius of Univ. of California at San Diego said in Science. Radiometric dating of igneous lunar rocks might provide information on time of their solidification. If catastrophic alternative was correct, rocks should date to less than 4.5 eons, minimum age of moon, and predominant age should be approximately 0.7 eon, with major surface and subsurface features less than 0.7 eon. If noncatastrophic alternative proved correct, predominant age of lunar rocks should exceed 4 eons, at least, since it was likely moon predated earth. {Science, 7/4/69, 11-7)
Leonard Mandelbaum in Science briefly examined history of U.S. decision to adopt Apollo program. “Cautious approach” to manned space flight gave way after impact of April 12, 1961, “Russian spectacular” —flight of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—and U.S. Cuban foreign policy fiasco, Bay of Pigs. “Congress acted without hearing testimony of compelling military need. The Apollo decision was made without reference to any comprehensive and integrated national policy designed to maximize the use of scientific and technological resources for social objectives. ... It was a typical Cold War reaction.” (Science, 2/14/69, 649)
Scientists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory opened last box of Apollo 11 lunar samples containing charcoal-gray dust and assorted rocks ranging from gravel to size of orange. NASA geologist Dr. Jeffrey L.	Warner described rocks as “different from anything we have on earth.” Some of rocks had flat faces and appeared to have been broken off larger chunks of material. Rocks in first box of samples had been rounded. Some rocks contained unidentified crystals that sparkled; others had “an unusual smattering of what appeared to be metallics,” possibly ilmenite (iron-titanium mineral oxide), important source of titanium, (upi, W Post, 8/5/69, A6; AP, B Sun, 8/5/69, Al)
President Johnson in message transmitting FY 1970 budget to Congress said major recommended decreases in budget authority from 1969 to 1970 included $235 million for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which “will provide for a program level equal to 1969 when combined with prior year funds.” Major increases included “522 million for airway modernization, highways, and other activities” in DOT. Of estimated $11.6 billion increase in total budget outlays, $0.5 billion was for national defense, “largely for improvements in our strategic forces, modernization of our tactical air forces, and other increased research and development efforts needed to assure sufficient deterrent power in the future. These increases will be substantially offset by reduced outlays for Vietnam resulting from changing combat patterns and revised supply requirements. ... In keeping with national priorities, major social programs account for largest portion” of increase. President said: “The record of achievements of the past 5 years is an impressive one. We have witnessed a period of unprecedented economic growth, with expanded production, rising standards jof living, and the lowest rates of unemployment in a decade and a half. Our military forces today are the strongest in the world. . . . Last month saw man’s first successful flight to the moon. In domestic matters, the legislative and executive branches, cooperatively, have forged new tools to open wider the doors of opportunity for a better life for all Americans. “This Nation remains firmly committed to a world of peace and human dignity. In seeking these goals, we have achieved great military strength with the sole aim of deterring and resisting aggression. We have continued to assist other nations struggling to provide a better life for their people. We are successfully pushing forward the frontiers of knowledge to outer space and promoting scientific and technological advances of enormous potential for benefit to mankind.” {PD, 1/20/69, 70-90; CR, 1/15/69, S195-208)
Controversy was building up over astronauts’ future, Apollo program, and manned space flight generally, Harry Schwartz said in New York Times. Three major debates were over whether engineer-astronauts or scientist-astronauts should be sent on future Apollo missions; who should control mission schedules and astronaut activities, “nasa hierarchy” or ground-based scientists in NASA; and whether U.S. should emphasize unmanned probes or crash program to put men on Mars in early 1980s. “The fact that it is the scientists who have been resigning while astronauts with test pilot backgrounds have been receiving unprecedented public acclaim makes it evident where the balance of power lies for the moment within nasa. But the issue is far from settled, since NASA itself must and does use the prospect of scientific advances as a key argument in seeking appropriations for space activities. Hence the dissident scientists could have substantial leverage if they teamed up with Congressmen and others who oppose the space appropriations for other reasons. It would not be surprising ... if nasa sought to ease the scientists’ irritation by satisfying some of their demands.” {NYT, 8/17/69, D2)
Moon was twin planet of earth, formed from same whirling gas cloud, in early view of two lrl scientists studying Apollo 11 samples. Dr. S. Ross Taylor of Astri National Univ., Canberra, Australia, said, “Moon’s composition is unlike the earth’s. But it is not outside our experience. It is like the material you would expect if the earth and moon were formed as a double planet.” He thought moon was younger twin, while Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of State Univ. of New York thought it might be equally old. Age of two lunar rocks had been estimated at 3.1 billion yrs, “give or take . . . 200 million years,” by measuring proportion of argon 40 to potassium in rocks, Dr. Schaeffer said. Lunar highlands might be 4.5	billion yrs old. Moon, he thought, never grew big enough to melt internally and produce geologic activity to change lunar surface and leave younger rocks. Dr. Taylor’s studies had shown unusually high amounts of refractory material and absence or low concentration of volatile materials, implying volatile material had boiled away in melting process. He inferred rock chemistry was different from deep mantle of earth and from cosmic abundances—distribution of elements that would be expected in distant, more primitive planet captured by earth. (Cohn, W Post, 8/28/69, Al)
erc Director James C. Elms discussed NASA’s role in computer R&D at Spring Joint Computer Conference in Boston. While Apollo guidance computer was best known among major computer activities undertaken by NASA in its first decade, other onboard computer developments “of considerable technical challenge” had been pursued. Versatile test-bed multiprocessor exam was oriented toward use of “hierarchy of memories” to increase capability to evaluate advanced technology for very large bulk-storage systems, particularly for spaceborne computers. trim—for Transformation of Imagery—was experimental tool for advancing state of art in imagery processing; computer-driven flying-spot scanner with color capability had auxiliary display terminal permitting man-machine-interactive operation, sofix—for Software Fix—was coordinated university research program on problems in developing computer software at same pace as hardware. (Text)
Atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair—on behalf of herself, her husband Richard O’Hair, and her “Society of Separationists”—filed suit in Austin, Tex., District Court against NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to prevent U.S. astronauts on duty from practicing religion on earth, in space, or “around and about the moon.” She objected specifically to Apollo 8 Christmas Eve 1968 Bible reading by Astronaut Frank Borman and placing by Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., of disc containing microfilmed prayers on moon July 20. (upi, W Post, 8/7/69)
Full-color lunar photos from Apollo 11, including one of man first setting foot on moon, would be released by NASA to press and TV four days after splashdown, following two-day decontamination of film, NASA announced. Superintendent of Documents, gpo, was taking orders from public for photos to be filled in late August. Series of reproductions of paintings by American artists recording space program, “Eyewitness to Space,” also would be released. (NASA Release 69-83J)
Every scientist-astronaut except one—geologist Harrison Schmitt—had been removed from NASA’s lunar landing training list, Victor Cohn reported in Washington Post. Report was later denied by nasa. Cohn said remaining scientists had been assigned to train for iong-duration, earth-orbiting Apollo Applications missions beginning in 1972. {W Post, 8/21/69, Al; 8/22/69, A18)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines said: “Considering how very little he had to do with the whole enterprise, it is remarkable how much political mileage President Nixon got out of the flight of Apollo 11. The plaque, the phone call and the trip to greet the returning heroes all were benefits Nixon inherited rather than earned.” Official NASA space age history This New Ocean, published by GPO in 1966, mentioned Nixon only once in 648 pages “and there hardly as an aggressive champion of manned space flight.” Book said Nixon, as Vice President and as presidential candidate running against John F. Kennedy, had defended Eisenhower Administration’s attitude toward space which ruled out manned flights to moon in foreseeable future. “The new President’s belated enthusiasm blurs memories of the olden days,” Hines said. “But ‘This New Ocean’ remains, proving perhaps that all government-sponsored history books should be armed to self-destruct whenever a change of administration occurs.” (W Star, 1/21/69, E4)
Apollo 11 astronauts and wives on world tour had private audience with Pope Paul VI at Vatican and later met with bishops from around the world. During Papal audience, 200 dissident bishops attending “shadow synod” near Vatican issued denunciation of meeting. Pope had previously refused to see them. Priests said poor people of world would interpret astronauts’ audience with Pope to mean “that the Church is ready to link itself with power, of which the astronauts are the symbol, and that she refused to accept direct contact with weakness, of which our modest assembly is a symbol.” (AP, P Bull, 10/16/69)
Biggest engineering problem facing 108-yr-old mit at close of 1960s was one of identity, Eric Wentworth said in Washington Post, “namely the increasingly disputed place of war-related research within its academic confines.” mit ranked first among U.S. universities in receipt of dod funding, which in 1968 accounted for almost half of Institute’s $17-million budget. Since March 4 day-long work stoppage by students and young faculty members protesting mit’s heavy military involvement, President Howard W. Johnson and other mit leaders had moved to reassess mit’s role. They had declared temporary halt on accepting new contracts for classified research at Instrumentation Laboratory and Lincoln Laboratory and established commission to review laboratories’ role. Commission had recommended continuing basic dod research but avoiding advanced development of weaponry, reducing secrecy, and shifting efforts toward meeting domestic and social needs. Meanwhile, Instrumentation Laboratory had already “come to the end of an era.” Its founder and head, Dr. Charles S. Draper, had been “eased out of his job as director although he may continue in other capacities.” His accomplishments with laboratory had included onboard guidance navigation systems “that took Apollo 11 spacemen to the moon last summer.” (W Post, 11/10/69, 2)
Hughes Aircraft Co. executive team held press conference aboard private yacht near Cape Kennedy, Fla., to announce company President Howard R. Hughes’ intention to rename Surveyor 111 “Hughes Automated Lunar Observer” (halo). Hughes’ assistant, Peter Maheuson, said Hughes was understood to have asked NASA to use acronym in all air-to-groUnd communications. Hughes Aircraft Co. had manufactured Surveyor III, which landed on moon April 19, 1967. Pieces of unmanned spacecraft were to be returned by Apollo 12 for examination at lrl. (Lannan, W Star, 11/12/69, Al)
Approximately nine hours of satellite time had been booked for TV coverage abroad of Apollo 11 astronaut events during coming week, ComSatCorp said. They included more than two hours live coverage of Aug. 12 MSC news conference, to be relayed via Intelsat-III F—2 to Western and Eastern Europe and, in part, to Tokyo and Sydney via Pacific Intelsat-Ill F—4. Nearly two hours coverage of New York ticker-tape parade and visit to U.N. would be transmitted to Europe Aug. 13. Ceremonial dinner in Los Angeles, later in day, would be taped for transmission to Europe Aug. 14. (ComSatCorp Release 69-50)
NASA named Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (.commander), Michael Collins (cm pilot), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), as prime crew of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission scheduled for summer 1969. Backup crew would be Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), William A. Anders (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot), (nasa Release 69—9)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 14 briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget at which Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, said $3,878-billion budget approved by President Johnson had been developed “to maintain an austere but balanced NASA aeronautics and space program aimed at major program goals of high national priority.” Goals were continuing advances in space applications, including initiation of experimental earth resources technology satellites and slightly decelerated research on space environment; achieving manned lunar landing and additional Apollo moon missions, with limited provision for studies—not for development—of equipment to achieve longer lunar stay-times and mobility for future exploration; proceeding with Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount; proceeding with Viking Project to land instruments on Mars in 1973; initiating in FY 1970 Mariner flyby in 1973 of Venus and Mercury; producing family of small planetary Explorers for orbiting Mars and Venus; making preliminary observations of Jupiter with previously approved Pioneer spacecraft; continuing work on unmanned orbiting astronomical observatories; continuing advanced aerospace technology work at about current levels; emphasizing noise reduction, with construction of special noise research laboratory; developing full potential of civil and military aeronautics; and undertaking NERVA project for development of flight-weight nuclear engine. Dr. Paine noted FY 1970 budget, as approved by President Johnson, “would halt a four-year downward trend in NASA budget.” It was “austere and does not make full use of the aerospace capabilities that the nation has developed. . . .” But it permitted “a balanced program of useful work in critical areas.” Budget left “the major new program decisions, especially in the manned flight area, for the next Administration,” and was “ ‘holding budget’ that provides for progress, but defers critical program and funding decisions to the new Administration.” (Transcript)
Scientists at Lick Observatory in California unsuccessfully tried for third consecutive night to bounce ruby laser beams off reflector left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts. They admitted difficulty in pinpointing reflector’s exact location and speculated that it might have been knocked down by lm exhaust during ascent. (AP, W Star, 7/23/69, A7)
In letter advocating postponement of decision on manned Mars landing [see Aug. 20] former Secretary of State Dean Rusk had “gone to the heart of what is bound to become a critical national decision,” Richard Wilson said in Washington Evening Star. “Now that we know we can and will do this thing does it make any difference in the eons of time yet to come when we do it? Fifty years from now might we not have developed far cheaper and more efficient' ways to do it? Mars will still be there. . . . The space men have shown us not only the moon, but what a beautiful planet we have in what may otherwise be a wholly desolate solar system—a beautiful planet that needs loving care to preserve it.” (W Star, 8/22/69, A15)
Rep. George A. Goodling (R-Pa.) introduced H.R. 13838 “to provide for the distribution to the several States, for display to the public . . . samples of the lunar rocks and other lunar materials brought back by the Apollo 11 mission.” {CR, 9/17/69, H8098)
Catastrophic contamination of earth by returning Apollo 11 astronauts and lunar samples was “extremely unlikely,” Philip H. Abelson explained in Science. “One argument is that a form of life adapted to the absence of H2O, O2, and organic compounds could scarcely be expected to survive on earth, much less infect earth’s creatures. The most compelling argument, however, is that the lunar-return experiment has been conducted many times in the past. It has been estimated that millions of tons of unsterilized lunar material have reached the earth as a consequence of meteor impact. . . . Sterile containment of lunar specimens during the journey to Houston is assured. . . . “Procedures involving the astronauts are more controversial. Careful effort to keep to a minimum the amount of adventitious material returned to earth is a substantial factor in the procedures that have been adopted. The astronauts face a difficult and dangerous mission. Were their procedures to be made even more complex because of panicky, last-minute objections, their chances of a safe return could he needlessly jeopardized.” (Science, 6/13/69, 1227)
Tom Barker, owner of bingo hall in Cardiff, Wales, had written to American and Soviet embassies in London for permission to open first amusement and bingo hall on moon, Reuters said. U.S. Embassy spokesman had replied: “There are no proposals to colonize the moon and many factors inhibit large-scale development.” (NYT, 5/9/69, 16)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), gave go-ahead to Apollo 11 lunar landing mission for launch July 16. Nine-hour flight readiness review had revealed only one major problem— in guidance system. “Although this problem is not completely resolved at this time,” Gen. Phillips said, “I am confident this will not become a constraint to the July launch.” (AP, W Star, 6/18/69, Al)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
Washington Post editorial praised Nov. 20 speech of RCA President Robert W. Sarnoff which called for use of space technology in “full-scale pilot program” to rehabilitate Washington, D.C.: Nation “needs to know whether the computer-age technology that sent us to the moon twice can be used to solve the problems of American cities. That question in a slightly different form has been plaguing the space community. Are vital national resources needed to meet the crisis at home being diverted to the moon and beyond?” Sarnoff speech “picks up from a series of addresses by Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, suggesting that modern technology can assist in solving the problems of cities, provided there is a national commitment to do so.” {W Post, 12/2/69, A18) December 3; Dr. George M. Low was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator. (NASA Release 69—159) •
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 11 and Mariner VI and VII: “The unprecedented advances in the study both of the moon and of Mars during the past few weeks have produced a stunning crop of surprises about both celestial bodies. On the closest examination yet, these neighbors in space have proved far more complex and strange than previous theories have led men to believe. And the magnificent, lifeless desolation of the lunar and Martian surfaces emphasizes more than ever how wonderful it is and how little science understands why it is that this third planet from the sun is so uniquely green, vibrant and overrunning with life.” (NYT, 9/16/69, 40)
Two boxes of lunar samples from Apollo 12 arrived at Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, where they would be examined and used in experiments. (AP, W Star, 11/26/69, A2)
Observers on earth would have two opportunities to see Apollo 12 after launch Nov. 14, NASA announced. During first opportunity, 57 min after liftoff, oxygen release from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) would be visible on east coasts of North and South America and western Europe and Africa. During second opportunity, about 15 hrs after liftoff, spacecraft would be visible during translunar coast through telescopes in U.S., Mexico, Central America, South America, Europe, and western Africa, (nasa Release 69—148C)
Wall Street brokerage houses were watching effect of Apollo 11 success on stocks as market resumed trading after July 21 holiday. Some firms believed lunar landing would generate enthusiasm, although its impact would be restrained by uncertainties over surtax extension, House committee vote to cut oil depletion allowance (major tax benefit of petroleum industry), and apparent standoff at Vietnam peace conference. (upi, W Star, 7/22/69, C7)
Year 1969 was one of critical decision and realignment of programs for NASA as primary goal of first decade was achieved through Apollo program. Post-Apollo planning had preceded the coming of the Nixon Administration and Apollo 11. Budget retrenchment accelerated throughout Government as cost of Vietnam war continued high and White House sought to lessen inflation by fiscal economy. Nationwide reevaluation of societal; priorities emphasized problems of pollution, poverty, and crime. Successful lunar landings of Apollo 11 and 12—seen and acclaimed worldwide—mushroomed U.S. enthusiasm for manned space achievement. NASA announced development of plans for further lunar missions and post-Apollo planetary exploration. But year was turning point, with completion of a major goal and examination of possible new goals and priorities for the next decade. Phasing down of Apollo program after climax brought shifts in program emphasis and in personnel. Most of initial Saturn V launch vehicles had been completed. Hardware requirements would decrease as missions slowed. Peak costs during 1960s had built NASA base of people, technology, and facilities as national capability to conduct space missions. Future space objectives and budget options were examined, within Government and outside, for .balance between more manned missions and more unmanned scientific exploration and applications of knowledge already gained. Criticism of past emphasis on engineering rather than on science was partly answered by decision to provide more time for scientific study and planning between the next Apollo lunar missions. Program plans included Apollo Applications, missions to Mars and Jupiter, long-range studies of Venus-Mercury mission and three-planet grand tours, development of permanent space station, joint NASA—DOD studies of space transportation system with reusable shuttle, and accelerated aeronautics activities. nasa FY 1970 appropriation of $3,697 billion was $181 million below budget proposed by outgoing President Johnson and $19 million below President Nixon’s amended request for $3,716 billion. Cutbacks in Government spending forced NASA to announce 1970 closing of Electronics Research Center and DOD to cancel Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told ERC employees in December that agency had to “effect reductions and consolidation across the board if we are to shape our programs to meet the nation’s future needs in aeronautics and space.” Reductions in work force—largely in contractor personnel—were brought by planned phasing out of Apollo program as well as by budget cuts. Year of man’s first landing on moon, despite its global impact, ended with space goals and levels of effort for the next decade an open question. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; A&A 69)
At ksc briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget for community leaders, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, said: “It is clear that we will continue the present pace of launch operations in the Apollo program until the first lunar landing has been accomplished. . . . The continuation of space effort, however, must somehow take into account the same constraints on Government spending which now affect the entire federal budget. . . . The total ksc budget is being revised from $455 million for all purposes to $410 million. I am taking action to accomplish this reduction without crippling the essential launch team capability or drastically impacting the local economy.” Savings would be effected by: gradual cutback in efforts of contractors supporting design engineering; phasing down of Boeing technical integration effort; deceleration of Apollo/Saturn V launch rate to three manned vehicles annually, reducing employment; and greater use of five-day week and two-shift schedule, permitting stabilization of employment level at 18,500 by June 30, 1970, instead of current 23,500. ksc strength would remain at 80% of current level, with reduction in support and stage contractors. Civil service cadre would drop from 2,920 to 2,880 by June 30, 1970. Employment already had been frozen at current level. Saturn IB Apollo Applications missions would require increased employment at Launch Complexes 34 and 37 in 1971, with estimated increase in contract jobs of 2,600 to handle nearly simultaneous or dual launches, ksc also would participate in earth orbital space station studies. (Transcript)
aec’s SNAP—3A nuclear generator, launched on board usn’s Transit IV—A navigational satellite June 29, 1961, completed eight years in orbit—three years longer than five-year design lifetime—after circling earth 40,530 times and traveling more than 1 billion mi. First nuclear generator to operate in space, 5-in-dia, 5]/>-in-high SNAP—3A converted heat given oft by plutonium directly into 2.7 w of electricity. Five snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) generators had been launched to date, including two on NASA’s Nimbus III (launched April 14). Atomic-fueled generator would be placed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts to power instrument package, (aec Release M—150)
Space Business Daily said poll of 1,400 U.S. adults conducted after Apollo 10 splashdown by A. Singlinger & Co. had found 51.3% in favor of lunar exploration program. Of those polled, 39% disapproved of program and 9.7% had no opinion. (SBD, 6/10/69, 174)
President Nixon submitted to Congress FY 1970 budget amendments [see April 12]. White House, DOD, and NASA released details. NASA funds were reduced $45 million from $3.878-billion Johnson proposal to $3,833 billion (recommended $3,716 in new obligational authority plus $117 million carried over from prior years). Apollo Applications program would be cut by $57 million but new obligational authority of $46 million for resumption of Saturn V rocket production and $40 million for lunar exploration would be added, for net increase of $29 million in manned space flight funds. Space science and applications would be cut by $41 million, to $517.8-million new total. Advanced research and technology would be cut $13 million, to total $277.4 million; and tracking and data acquisition, $20 million, to total $278 million. University affairs funding would remain at $9 million, technology utilization at $5 million, and NERVA funding under nuclear rocket program at $36.5 million. Funds proposed for construction of facilities and for research and program management remained unchanged. At NASA budget briefing, NASA Administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine said: “The reductions we have been required to make will make necessary difficult program adjustments and will result in reduced accomplishments in many areas. However ... in a context clearly requiring that Government spending be held to a minimum, the Administration has recognized the importance to the United States of a strong and continuing program in space and aeronautics. . . . Last January, I characterized President Johnson’s FY 1970 Budget as a ‘holding’ Budget . . . deferring to President Nixon’s Administration the decisions the nation faces on the future of manned flight programs.” President Nixon’s recommendations, “if approved by the Congress, will ensure that the nation can continue a scientifically effective program of manned lunar exploration and avoid foreclosing our ability to continue large-scale space operations in the future by allowing the capability to produce Saturn V launch vehicles ... to lapse beyond the point where it can economically be resumed.” dod spending was reduced $1.1 billion and requested new obliga-tional authority, $3.1 billion, including $51 million from MOL. Other science budget cuts: aec funding, $78.6 million; agricultural and natural resources conservation, $345 million; hew university facilities, $107 million; and nih, $47.4 million, nsf budget remained at $495 million. Nixon budget made available $92.7-million carry-over for SST r&d but no funds for prototype construction. Overall reduction in space and atomic energy funding was $140 million. (PD, 3/21/69, 561—3; nasa Budget Briefing Transcript; dod Transript; W Post, 4/15— 16/69; NYT, 4/16/69; Science, 4/25/69)
Senate confirmed nomination of former Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to be Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs. (CR, 12/12/69, D1201)
Australian marathon runner Bill Emmerton left Houston, Tex., on 1,034-mi jog to Cape Kennedy, Fla., where he would watch Apollo 11 launch. He would travel on foot approximately 40 mi per day, arriving morning of July 16. Purpose of run was to publicize benefits of physical conditioning, pay tribute to fitness of lunar crew, and commemorate Apollo 11 flight. (Spaceland News, 6/69, 11; pmr Release 916—69)
NASA said Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin had rejected U.S. invitation to watch Apollo 11 launch. U.S.S.R. originally had accepted, but Soviet Embassy in Washington said Dobrynin would be out of the country. (AP, W Star, 7/13/69, A9)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., appeared in nationally televised press conference. Interview with four newsmen was conducted over closed-circuit TV, with astronauts at ksc and press 15 mi away. TV cameramen allowed in auditorium with crew had undergone thorough medical examinations. Armstrong, mission commander, said that after decade of planning and hard work astronauts were “willing and ready to attempt to achieve our national goal. This is possible because very many Americans across the nation have dedicated themselves to quality craftsmanship and ingenuity.” In response to question on astronauts’ attitudes toward mission, Armstrong said fear was not unknown, but added: “Fear is characteristic particularly of a knowledge that there may be something that you haven’t thought of and feel that you might be unable to cope with. I think our training and all the work that goes into the preparation for a flight does everything it can towards erasing those kinds of possibilities and I would say that as a crew we . . . have no fear of launching out on this expedition.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/69, 1, 20)
Climaxing day of cross-country celebrations, President and Mrs. Nixon hosted formal state dinner at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles to honor Apollo 11 astronauts, their wives, and “historic achievement of the first manned landing on the moon.” Guests included other astronauts and wives; widows of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H.	White II; Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard; NASA and other space program officials; U.S. and international aviation pioneers; Cabinet members; Chief Justice and Mrs. Warren E. Burger; governors of 44 states; members of Joint Chiefs of Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations; Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, widow of former President; former Vice President and Mrs. Hubert H. Humphrey; and Congressional leaders. President asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to read citation of posthumous awards: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards posthumously to Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee the NASA Distinguished Service Medals for professional skill, courage, and dedication to duty in Project Apollo. They gave their lives in their country’s historic undertaking to realize the goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth.” President also asked Dr. Paine to read citation of NASA Group Achievement Award to Apollo 11 Mission Operations Team “for exceptional service in planning and exemplary execution of mission operational responsibilities for . . . first manned lunar landing mission.” Award was presented to Apollo Flight Control Engineer Stephen G. Bales, who bad made decision to proceed with lunar landing when computers failed just before Eagle’s landing on Sea of Tranquility, on behalf of 400,000 persons who had contributed to Apollo program success. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, as nasc chairman, presented Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, to Apollo 11 astronauts for participation in “a unique and profoundly important adventure. The accumulated scientific knowledge and technological ability of mankind made man’s first step on the moon practicable; the courage and skill of men like these made it possible. Their contributions to this undertaking will be remembered so long as men wonder and dream and search for truth on this planet and among the stars.” Replying to honors, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said: “What Apollo has begun we hope will spread out in many directions, not just in space, but underneath the seas and in the cities, to tell us unforgettably that we can do what we will and must and want to do.” During evening orderly crowd of peace and antipoverty protesters gathered outside hotel. (PD, 8/18/69, 1141—2, 1148—51; Roberts, NYT, 8/15/69, 14; B Sun, 8/14/69, Al)
DOD reported Soviet SS—9 missile had been test-fired with multiple reentry vehicles for first time over U.S.S.R.’s Pacific testing area at 5,000-mi range. Missile, of which U.S.S.R. had deployed 200, was capable of carrying warhead of up to 25 mt or three warheads of 5 mt and was only Soviet missile credited with hard-site destruction capability. Portions of its booster had been used in testing FOBS, (dod Release 310—69; Homan, W Post, 4/23/69, A26) D.C. William L. Sjogren, Paul M. Muller, and Dr. Peter Gottlieb reported discovery that brought to 12 total mascons mapped on moon’s near face and leading and trailing edges and that were expected to refine gravity model used in Apollo navigation. Dr. Gottlieb said latest gravity model produced significant agreement with analysis of tracking information from Apollo 8 mission Dec. 21— 27, 1968. JPL researchers were working with MSFC to predict accurately landing sites several orbits before spacecraft landing. Most data available had been taken from spacecraft in lunar orbit of about 60 mi. JPL team expected new and possibly higher resolution data from Apollo 10 when lunar module orbited at lower altitude, (jpl Release 514; NASA Release 69—61)
Apollo 12 spacecraft was lashed by 40-mph winds during second day of countdown demonstration test (cddt) at KSC. Officials said exercise proceeded without difficulty. (W Post, 10/25/69, A9; upi, NYT, 10/25/69)	'
Leningrad astronomer Nikolay A. Kozyrev called for lunar laboratories over, under, and on moon’s surface^ Soviet and American space exploration had made scientists “more confident that this is not a dead accumulation of rocks but a space body with a very interesting history whose life also continues today.” Lunar research goals were establishment of astronomical instruments on stable platforms in lunar orbit, permanent scientific laboratory on moon, spacecraft launching centers on moon for planetary exploration, and laboratory stations under lunar surface or in natural caves, “to give reliable protection from dangerous radiation and meteorite hits.” (upi, NYT, 8/13/69, 11)
Rep. Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.) proposed in House that Apollo 11 spacecraft be commissioned “The John F. Kennedy.” (CR, 6/10/69, H4639)
NASA’s 148-lb drum-shaped Pioneer E failed on 5:29 pm edt launch from etr by Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta (DSV— 3L) booster. Satellite had been intended for solar orbit to collect scientific data on electromagnetic and plasma properties of interplanetary medium near earth’s orbital path during six or more passages of solar activity centers. Jettison of three strap-on solid-propellant rockets, lst-stage Thor engine cutoff, and 2nd-stage ignition occurred as planned but vehicle began gyrating, veered off course, and was destroyed by Range Safety Officer at 8 min 2 secs get. Pioneer E and tetr c test and training satellite, carried as secondary payload to test Apollo communications network, splashed into Atlantic about 300 mi southeast of Barbados. Preliminary analysis of data indicated loss of hydraulic pressure during lst-stage burn had permitted engine nozzle to develop uncontrolled gim-baling and vehicle gyrations. Investigation would be conducted to determine exact cause and action to prevent recurrence. Pioneer E was last in series of five spacecraft designed to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space. Pioneer VI (launched Dec. 16, 1965), Pioneer VII (launched Aug. 17, 1966), Pioneer VIII (launched Dec. 16, 1967), and Pioneer IX (launched Nov. 8, 1968) had received 25,000	commands from ground and were still producing useful data from widely scattered positions in heliocentric orbits. Most recent Pioneer missions had provided new information on functions of magnetosphere, additional data on finding that diffuse solar plasma regions appeared to have attraction of their own, measurements of cosmic dust populations, data on changes in electrical and magnetic characteristics of solar corona, and targets for precision radar tracking which led to establishment of reliable value for earth-moon-mass ratio and sun-earth-mass ratio. Pioneer program was managed by arc under OSSA direction. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—116; SBD, 8/29/69, 213)
Atomic scientist Dr. Edward Teller thought nuclear explosion on moon would be scientifically useful, Associated Press reported after New York interview. Vibrations would be source of seismographic measurement for study of moon’s interior. “The best information on earth” came from nuclear explosions, “because the energy-generating event is confined very sharply both in space and in time.” Factors making moon extremely inhospitable to life—absence of air and water—were highly desirable to researchers, since “change that has taken place billions and billions of years ago is still visible today.” Dr. Teller also favored development on moon of research station powered by nuclear reactor that heated lunar rocks to high temperature and liberated oxygen for breathing purposes. There was probability rocks also contained water, which reactor could reduce to hydrogen and oxygen for making rocket fuel to power short-range rocket trips on moon and soft-landing interplanetary spacecraft. Moon’s environment might lead to advances in low-temperature physics and surface chemistry in electronics, which could result in development on earth of smaller, more efficient, and more sophisticated electronic equipment, particularly for information-storing and information-reordering. (Nicholson, AP, W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
With encouragement from President Nixon and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, NASA had “begun drumming up pressure for the huge sums required to send men to Mars in the early 1980’s,” New York Times editorial said. “But the latest Mariner information makes the probability of life on Mars much less than it seemed even a week ago, thus removing much of the original motivation for such a project. The shift of emphasis now proposed to unmanned satellites would be far cheaper; scientifically it would also be far more productive.” (NYT, 8/7/69, 32) On Aug. 11 Tass announced that spacecraft had circled moon on flight plan similar to that of Zond V (launched Sept. 15, 1968) and Zond VI (launched Nov. 10, 1968), had photographed lunar surface, and was returning to earth. Zond VII reentered atmosphere by skipping across outer layers of atmosphere to reduce its entry speed and then descended and softlanded in predetermined area near Kustanay in northern Kazakhstan Aug. 14. (SBD, 8/11/69, 120—1; 8/18/69, 152; NYT, 8/9/69, 26; 8/12/69, 6; 8/15/69, 14; gsfc SSR, 8/15/69)
Apollo 9 prime crew—Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot)—held press briefing at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. Describing 10-day mission scheduled to begin Feb. 28 as primarily engineering evaluation of lunar module, McDivitt said: “. . . we will be giving the . . . lm hardware a very close scrutiny. We don’t expect to find anything, but our job is to go up there and look for it. Now after we have discovered that the lm is a good vehicle, we have ... to prove the joint operations techniques that we’ve tried to develop on the ground over the last 3 years. It’s one thing to fly one spacecraft in orbit, and have it controlled by the ground, but when you get 2 of them up there, they are trying to look at 2 vehicles simultaneously so that . . . you find the ground talking to 2 spacecraft and 2 spacecraft talking back to each other and also to the ground, and it becomes a rather unwieldly communications effort.” He added reminder that “only one of these vehicles has the capability to land— safely, I guess I should add. They both have the capability of landing. We only have one set of parachutes and one heat shield.” He described lm as “a tissue paper spacecraft,” explaining it did not have to reenter earth’s atmosphere and there was no atmosphere on moon. Scott said they now had “a new vehicle ... a command module lm combination ... a particularly unique situation, in that ... we have to do the lunar orbit insertion [in lunar mission] with the two vehicles joined together with a very large mass on the end of the command module, so it’s a completely new guidance task” to be checked out. McDivitt explained separation of lm from cm on rendezvous day, with two vehicles pulling away from each other and performing maneuvers, moving up to 100 mi apart: “The object ... is to evaluate our systems from a propulsion standpoint, electrical standpoint, the staging sequence, all of the components that we can and still get back safely to the command module.” In response to question on relation of Apollo program to life on earth, McDivitt replied: “. . . if you’re not moving forward ... the rest of the world is and they’re going to pass you by. We’re gaining something and we’re gaining knowledge. . . . We’re going to move forward on all fronts, we’re not moving forward on just the space front. . . . Any organized system of intelligence moves forward in all directions, and . . . that is what we are doing.” (Transcript) 0 Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) and British Science Research Council payload to 73.3-mi (118-km) altitude to obtain atmospheric data by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Flight, last in series of four [see Jan. 23], was successful; 24 of 25 grenades detonated and were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
President Nixon addressed U.S. Embassy staff in London during eightday goodwill visit to European heads of state: “You have had a very distinguished visitor to this country, Frank Borman, a few days ago. .. . I recall when I was at the White House I was congratulating him in a toast for what he and his fellow astronauts had done. ... He said, ‘We appreciate the remarks you have made about us.’ But, he said, ‘I want to point out that there are 400,000 Americans who, in one way or another, contributed to the building of the Apollo spacecraft and to this program.’ He said, ‘I want to point out that there are 2 million parts in an Apollo spacecraft. So, if something went wrong with one of those parts, which had been created by these 400,000 Americans, that tremendous, exciting journey around the moon could not have been possible.’ That, of course, is what government is about.” {PD, 3/10/69, 341-2)
Apollo 11 booster, spacecraft, and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., completed final countdown rehearsal test. Astronauts achieved simulated liftoff at 9:32 am edt—exact time of scheduled July 16 launch. Final countdown for manned lunar landing mission would begin July 10. (AP, B Sun, 7/4/69, A10)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star commented on “deadly dullness” of last five days of Apollo 9 mission: “The flight plan of Apollo 9—which most people do not see and therefore do not understand— was carefully divided into six ‘activity periods,’ of which five were each about 24 hours long and the sixth five days in duration. “It is no criticism of the . . . crew that after five days of brilliant spacemanship they took it easy for the rest of the flight. Nor is it criticism of the space program to say that the last half of Apollo 9 was dull. It was planned that way, and if it had turned out otherwise the United States very likely would not be attempting a moon landing in July.” (W Star, 3/23/69, C4)
Pope Paul VI received Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family for 17-min audience in Papal library. Pope said in English, “Man’s reaching out to unravel the mysteries of the universe reveals more and more the wonders of God’s work and shows forth His glory.” Pope Paul sent personal greetings to Astronaut James W. McDivitt who had audience in 1967. (upi, W Star, 2/16/69, C5)
NASA named flight crews for Apollo 13 and 14 lunar landing missions. Prime crewmen for Apollo 13 were Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), Thomas K. Mattingly II (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot). Backup crew was composed of Astronauts John W. Young, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Apollo 14 prime crewmen were Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Joe E. Engle. Both missions would include lunar exploration and deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiment packages (alsep) . Total lunar surface stay time would include two EVA periods of three hours each and would not exceed 35 hrs. Flights would be first for Astronauts Mattingly, Haise, Roosa, and Mitchell, (nasa Release 69—115)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory held press conference on Apollo 11 samples and expressed surprise at discovery of tiny glasslike crystals in lunar dust. Analyses had revealed samples were crystalline, igneous, fragmented, scoriaceous, and vesicular. They confirmed theory based on Surveyor V data that lunar material contained titanium and indicated presence of number of minerals. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Paul Gast said, “The most exciting discovery to date has been that of the glass. There is something going on on the moon far different than on the earth.” He said scientists speculated impact of meteoroids on moon had vaporized lunar material and caused it to rain back on surface in small drops which formed tiny yellow, brown, and clear pieces of glass few tenths of millimeter in diameter. (Lyons, NYT, 7/29/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 7/29/69, Al)
In Paris during world tour Apollo 11 astronauts were made chevaliers of French Legion of Honor by Premier Jacques Chaban-Delmas and met with French President Georges Pompidou. Paris Mayor Etienne Royer de Vericourt presented them with city’s Gold Medal, (upi, C Trib, 10/9/69)
SNAP—27 nuclear generator placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts had continued to operate during first 28-day-and-night lunar cycle despite temperatures from —291 °F to +283°F, AEC announced. It was producing more than 70 w of electricity to power five instruments deployed Nov. 19 to transmit lunar data, (aec Release M-274)
hud Secretary George W. Romney addressed International Platform Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “I do not propose that we now abandon our efforts to extend man’s reach still further beyond our planet, any more than we abandoned our domestic goals while we were reaching for the moon. But I do believe the time has come for a revision— in fact, a reversal—of our national priorities. I believe that in the decades ahead, the public interest and indeed our national survival require us to assign our housing and urban goals a high priority-—at least comparable to the priority we gave our space program in the decade just ending.” (HUD News; Hutchens, W Star, 1/22/69, A6)
NASA announced establishment of task group on manned space station under Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and of task group on space shuttle under Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Reporting to Dr. Mueller would be LeRoy E. Day, former Director of Apollo Test. His group would develop NASA material for report on space shuttles to President’s Space Task Group by June 15. Frank Borman, former Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc and Apollo 8 commander, would report to Mathews as Field Director for Space Station effort. (NASA Release 69—70)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said time was “ripe” for NASA reorganization, “not merely the firing, promoting and transferring of officials, but the functional restructuring of the agency as well.” There was some suspicion that no place existed for Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, who was “not only a Johnson-administration holdover, but a card-carrying Democrat as well.” Some observers believed Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, “the President’s current darling and space confidant,” might be next NASA Administrator. “The idea of putting astronauts in charge of the space program may seem incongruous, but it is clearly not beyond the realm of possibility in the image-conscious Nixon regime.” Paine’s fate would determine that of Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. With lunar landing, Apollo had changed from developmental to operational effort. Christopher C. Kraft, Director of Flight Operations at msc, would likely transfer to Washington as Apollo Program Manager—possibly “controlling all space missions for NASA.” Hines saw possibility of Apollo Program Director, George H. Hage’s moving into position being vacated by l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, who was rejoining usaf. “George M. Low, Apollo chief at Houston, may replace the Houston Center director, Robert R. Gilruth, if Gilruth can be prevailed upon to retire.” There was talk about moving msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun to Washington “to do what he does best: charm money out of Congress.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, “may retire to make way for Rocco Petrone. . . .” (W Star, 8/10/69, G4)
nasa announced new quarantine procedures for Apollo 12 lunar landing mission scheduled for launch Nov. 14. Procedures had been recommended by Interagency Committee on Back Contamination. If astronauts’ condition was normal at splashdown they would don fresh flight suits and oral-nasal masks instead of biological isolation garments (big) used on Apollo 11. big would be available in case of unexplained crew illness. Swimmer would swab hatch and adjacent areas with liquid decontamination agent and crew would be carried by helicopter to mobile quarantine facility (mqf) on board recovery ship. Subsequent crew quarantine procedures would be same as for Apollo 11. Spacecraft would be returned to Hawaii by recovery ship, where team would deactivate pyrotechnics and flush and drain fluid systems (except water). It would then be flown to Lunar Receiving Laboratory for storage in special room until release from quarantine Jan. 7, 1970. (nasa Release 69—148A)
Washington Sunday Star editorial said: “Apollo 11 has cast a harsh light on life on earth, showing man’s failures in sharp contrast to his breathtaking technical achievements. It is a vision that should ... be exploited as an incentive to get the vitally needed jobs done on earth.” But, the U.S. could not withdraw from space. “The complete Apollo program . . . should be funded. Beyond that, serious consideration should be given to the establishment of permanent manned stations on the moon so that we may truly explore and perhaps exploit the new world that we have already conquered. The manned orbiting station that NASA has proposed should be provided to test the ability of men to live and work for long periods in weightlessness. And far more emphasis should be placed . . . on unmanned probes of the planets.” Minimum requirement should be enough momentum in program to prevent it from falling apart through disuse. Every effort should be made “to enlist the cooperation, the technical help, and the financial support of any nation that is willing to contribute to the adventure that must, finally, be seen as the collective achievement of all mankind.” (W Star, 7/27/69, El)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in by Vice President Spiro T, Agnew ,as NASA Administrator in ceremony in Vice President’s office. Dr. Paine said: “I am particularly anxious to see that in the second April 3; Dr. Thomas O. Paine (right) was sworn in as Administrator of the National Aeronautics anil Space Administration by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. decade of space we bring down to the people on earth more of the benefits that can be obtained from this wonderful new technology. . . . Such areas as navigation, communications and particularly earth resources are things that are very much on our minds as we look out to the moon and beyond.” (nasa Hq WB; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/4/69; AP, W Post, 4/4/69) * National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal for research, exploration, and discovery was presented by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A, Anders in Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C. Vice President Agnew said: “The possibilities of space exploration are so infinite they overwhelm the mind. The speed with which we have reached this new threshold of hope itself is awesome. Less than half a century has passed since the Hubbard Award was presented to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh for his solo flight from New York to Paris. Less than a decade has passed since Colonel John Glenn was awarded the first Hubbard Medal for exploration in space.” Award, one of Nation’s highest honors, had been given only 24 times in 63 years, for outstanding achievement in geography and exploration. First medal had gone to Robert E. Peary in 1906 for Arctic explorations. Earlier in day at National Geographic headquarters, Apollo 8 astronauts had received General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1968, awarded to military or civilian usaf member making most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release )
Washington Evening Star special supplement, “Voyage to the Moon,” commented: “Hanging in the sky, attracting man’s attention for untold generations, the moon has been the reputed home of gods and goddesses of all religions, primitive and modern. If all these deities lived there at any one time, the reasons for its battle-scarred appearance would be obvious. But assuming that none did . . . that pock-marked face still poses more questions than it answers.” (W Star, 7/14/69)
Trans World Airlines filed first application with Civil Aeronautics Board for routes between earth and moon. Airline said it had received 1,200 reservations during final four days of Apollo 11 mission, (twa Release)
First decade in space corresponded with early years of aviation following Wright brothers flight at Kitty Hawk, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, told Annual Kiwanis Dinner in Milledgeville, Ga. “I recently calculated the costs per seat mile of their first flight for comparison with our Apollo flight to the moon. They probably had ten thousand dollars invested in first Kitty Hawk flight that went one fifth of a mile, giving a cost per seat mile for Orville of fifty thousand dollars. We will have about twenty-four billion dollars invested in our first five-hundred-thousand-mile trip for three astronauts to the moon, giving a cost of only about sixteen thousand dollars per seat mile. We are ahead of the Wright Brothers— but we have a long way to go to catch up with the DC—8 or 707. If subsequent flights to the moon cost two hundred million dollars each, that’s less than one hundred and fifty dollars a seat mile, so we are going in the right direction.” (Text)
In Houston, Tex., press interview Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Capt., usn), said he had turned down offers for Naval promotion to admiral and NASA Hq. executive position, to become president of Regency Corp. in Denver, Colo., financial complex leasing industrial equipment worldwide. One of original astronauts and only veteran of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions, Schirra said he did not want to “stick around as a half astronaut.” He had rejected aerospace offers because “I might be limiting the contribution of which I feel I’m capable.” (AP, W Post, 3/12/69, A8)
Rep. William G. Bray (R-Ind.) introduced H.J.R. 844, providing for distribution of Apollo 11 lunar samples to Governors of 50 states. (CR, 1/29/69, H6486)
In ceremony at msc, NASA presented awards including 12 Distinguished Service Medals, recognizing contributions to Apollo 8 space mission by groups and individuals in NASA, dod, and industry. dsm, NASA’s highest award, was presented to Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, ksc; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director, msc; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations, msc; George M. Low, Manager, Apollo Program Office, MSC; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Rocco A. Petrone, Director of Launch Operations, ksc; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, NASA Apollo Program Director; Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Deputy Director (Technical), msfc; Arthur Rudolph, Manager, Saturn V Program Office, msfc; William C. Schneider, Manager, Apollo Applications Program; Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, MSFC. Exceptional Service Medals were awarded to 62 persons and Public Service Awards to 22. Group Achievement Awards went to U.S.S. Yorktown (CVS—10) and Embarked Air Group, Manned Space Flight Network, and NASA Office of Public Affairs. Public Service Group Achievement Award was presented to Apollo 8 Communication Network and Certificate of Appreciation was awarded to University-NASA Scientific and Technology Advisory Committee (stac). (nasa Special Release 1/13/69; NASA pao)
Apollo 8 mission (Dec. 21—27, 1968) was adjudged successful by NASA. All objectives of manned circumlunar mission were attained, as well as four detailed test objectives not originally planned, (nasa Proj Off)
Special message to Apollo 10 crew from five Soviet cosmonauts was released by Soviet Embassy: “We Soviet cosmonauts followed your difficult work very closely. We sincerely admire the high accuracy with which you carried out all the maneuvers planned, your excellent preparedness and courage.” Message was signed by Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Andrian G. Nikolayev, Aleksey Leonov, Georgy Beregovoy, and Vladimir Shatalov. (upi, W Post, 5/28/69, A13)
Soviet Academician, Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, conceded that competition with U.S.S.R. might have been major factor in U.S. determination to reach moon and said that in space there was no way to declare a winner, Space Business Daily reported. “I don’t preclude the idea that such a boosted preparation of the Apollo project was in some measure the result of competition with us. Basically a healthy competition is no obstacle to success. . . . Science is boundless in its development and it cannot be compared to a horse race—there is no finishing line. The interests of science are bound to win anyway. . . .” U.S.S.R. would continue research in “several major scientific areas,” make “extensive use of automatic devices for exploring outer space,” and pay “due attention” to moon and to both manned and unmanned missions. Cosmos, Zond, and Proton spacecraft would continue to be used for research and Soyuz spacecraft would be converted into “modules of orbital space laboratories designed for research in lengthy flight.” (,SBD, 7/31/69, 79)
Apollo 11 might signal end to KSC area’s economic boom, Wall Street Journal said. NASA had announced slack in Apollo launchings and cut in ksc employment from 23,500 to 18,500 persons. Brevard County (site of ksc) housing construction had fallen some 40%, from 3,438 units in 1967 to 2,080 in 1968, and was currently down another 40%. (Prugh, WSJ, 7/3/69, 28)
Preliminary investigation had revealed leak in small fuel line on Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC—II) No. 3 engine had caused June 26 fire, msfc announced. Board had been convened to conduct further investigations and recommend preventive measures. Stage’s No. 3 and No. 5 engines would be replaced; other three engines received minor damage and would be repaired in place. Accident would not affect launch preparations for Apollo 11 mission; inspection of Apollo 11 vehicle SA—506 had confirmed that its high-pressure fuel lines were in good condition. (msfc Release 69—156)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), as Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, had forced NASA to pay $5,522 for usaf jet to transport 32 committee members and wives to Aug. 13 Apollo 11 state dinner in Los Angeles, Rowland Evans and Robert Novak said in Washington Post. NASA also had to pay $19,342 for chartered commercial jet for space officials and $2,800 for Aug. 12 Houston luncheon, and White House was charging agency with most of estimated $75,000 cost of state dinner. (W Post, 8/17/69, B7)
New York Times editorial asked: “Why should lunar research be limited to what this country can afford? Even if the Soviet Union is unwilling to cooperate, there are very substantial human and material resources in Western Europe, Japan and other areas that could be mobilized for the task of lunar exploration and settlement that lies ahead. President Nixon could demonstrate high statesmanship by offering to turn the National Aeronautics and Space Administration into the International Aeronautics and Space Administration if others will join to help carry the burdens of the effort and provide additional talents for the job. And if NASA became IASA, even Moscow—after its recent space disappointments—might see advantages in joining the common effort to make the moon a lever for uniting mankind.” (NYT, 11/18/69)
Economist said of Soviet Soyuz “fiasco” U.S.S.R. had tried “highly ambitious link-up of the components of a permanent, orbiting space station, something the Americans will be in no shape to do for perhaps five years. The fact that the Russians apparently failed must have been humiliating to them, and gratifying to the Americans, but it is unlikely to be more than a temporary check to a programme that has rolled with considerable success since the Russians put the world’s first satellite in orbit more than a decade ago. The slow progress reflects the state of Soviet industry, but is steady progress with few loose ends. The American programme, trimmed and squeezed by political pressure and public opinion, is trailing appreciably more loose ends; despite the victory on the moon Nasa will have to set about tidying them up. And it is then that the Russians will have the last laugh.” (Economist, 10/25/69, 20)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of nasc to succeed Dr. Edward C. Welsh. It was highest Government post ever offered to an astronaut. {PD, 5/19/69, 705; Kirkman, W Post, 5/15/69, A25)
New York Times editorial: “On that eventful day when the first men walk on the surface of Mars, they will find much ‘magnificent desolation’ akin to that seen by Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin when they strolled on the moon last month. That virtual certainty emerges from the brilliantly successful exploration of the red planet just completed by Mariners 6 and 7. Their expedition lacked the human drama of Apollo 11, but the scientific information they returned may well qualify the two Mariners as the most scientifically productive enterprise men have yet carried out in space.” (NYT, 8/11/69)
President Nixon’s post -Apollo 11 tour of Asia and Romania July 25— Aug. 3, plus his remarks and reactions aboard U.S.S. Hornet at splashdown and during welcoming ceremony for astronauts, were recorded in New York Times Magazine article by Max Frankel and Robert B. Semple, Jr. Authors were among press accompanying President and Mrs. Nixon on tour. President and party had basked “in reflected moonglow.” When President walked toward reviewing stand in Guam, spectator had remarked, “that’s his moon walk.” Apollo 11 had given President “new exuberance.” [NYT Magazine, 8/17/69, 26—9, 76—80)
Man has three sets of capabilities that make him extremely hard to replace by any machine,” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said in address before nrc Engineering Div.’s annual meeting in Washington, D.C.: “1) he has a very wide-band set of sensors for acquiring information; 2) he has in his head a built-in memory and computer that cannot yet be matched by our largest and fastest machines; and finally he has a remarkably versatile capability for action, and physical operations with his body, hands, and tools. These three capabilities make man such a valuable element in space science and applications that we need to take advantage of him at the site of operations whenever this is feasible. . . . With the prominence that manned flight has gained, it is surprising to ■ realize that while 589 unmanned satellites have been launched, there have been only 29 manned flights, eleven by the USSR and eighteen by the USA. These few experiments have shown that we have the capability to extend man’s genius into the new dimension of space, as far out as the moon. In the years ahead I expect that man will exploit his bridgehead into space and use this new territory for his own good on earth.” (Text)
nas—nrc Space Science Board published Lunar Exploration: Strategy for Research 1969—1975. Best use of manned lunar-landing capability in lunar exploration would entail shift of emphasis from technological development to exploitation of existing Apollo technology for scientific objectives. Board recommended: immediately focusing lunar program on optimizing returns on investment already made in Apollo through maximum use of existing Apollo technology; giving priority to current Apollo lunar-exploration phase should choice be necessary in early 1970s between funding major new manned exploration technology and funding extensions of Apollo lunar technology; periodic reevaluation of NASA’s proposed lunar landing sites; earliest possible extensions of Apollo technology to increase scientific returns and increasing interval up to six months between missions to allow incorporation of improvements; early provision of roving vehicle to transport astronauts at least 3.1—6.2 mi (5—10 km) from LM; inclusion in Apollo 16 to 20 time frame, in high-inclination orbit, of experiments in gravimetry by satellite-to-satellite tracking technique, altimetry, magnetometry, x-ray and gamma-ray spectrometry, and medium- and high-resolution photography; and increase in supporting research in orbital sensing techniques, both active and passive. Board also recommended high-priority consideration for long-distance, remotely controlled, traversing vehicle for later missions; careful review of Apollo program management structure to increase role of scientists in influencing basic policy and mission hardware; specific support to lunar experiment definition as integral part of Apollo program and more substantial investment in developing experiment packages easily modified and interchanged even shortly before flight; and high-priority attention to management, handling, distribution, and analysis of lunar samples brought to earth. (Text; nrc Release)
New York Times editorial on Aug. 12 Apollo 11 news conference in Houston: “What came through most clearly in yesterday’s enthralling first-hand report by the Apollo astronauts was the infinitesimal margin by which Eagle escaped either catastrophe or a decision to abort the moon landing. Either of the two major problems that emerged in those nerve-wracking moments before touchdown—the overburdened computer and the near-exhaustion of their fuel supply before Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin found a suitable landing spot—might have forced a very different ending to the historic mission. That all turned out perfectly is a tribute to the astronauts’ skill, courage and poise as well as to the ability of the back-up personnel at Mission Control in Houston.” (NYT, 8/13/69, 40)
Worldwide program to provide widest display possible of Apollo 11 lunar samples was announced by NASA. Of 15 moon rocks weighing between % and 2% oz, 8 were for U.S. display and 7 had been released to usia for overseas showing. In addition to Smithsonian Institution display, exhibits would include rock traveling with Apollo 11 cm on tour of 50 state capitals and two-month showings in 30 museums and planetariums during year, usia would show six stones on world tour, and seventh at Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan, (nasa Release 69—155)
Washington Post published results of July 30—Aug. 4 Harris survey of 1,577 U.S. households to determine attitude toward spending $4 billion annually for decade to explore moon and other planets. While 53% of those polled approved funding for lunar landing, narrow plurality of 47% was opposed to further $4 billion annually; 44% favored. Persons under 30 favored extension of space program 60% to 34% but those over 50 opposed it 59% to 30%. Black citizens were opposed 68% to 19%. ( W Post, 8/25/69) Among 400 scientists from 19 countries attending meeting were NASA Apollo Applications Program Director William C. Schneider; Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director of Flight Operations, and M. P. Frank from msc; Herbert A. Wilson, Jr., Chief of Applied Materials Div., from LaRC; ogo Project Manager Wilfred E. Scull from GSFC; Dr. Thomas Vrebalovich. from JPL; and Leon C. Hamiter, Jr., msfc engineer. Hamiter presented paper on increased computer capacity and lighter weight flight hardware. Prof. Masahiko Kido of Japan’s Ehime Univ. said legal status should be developed for moon before disputes arose over lunar real estate. Other participants urged steps to outlaw military use of moon. Dr. Werner J. Kleen, Director of European Space Research and Technology Center, said ESRO had been given permission to put comsat into orbit and would start work in autumn. Japan announced its space development corporation would begin operations Oct. 1 and would launch MS—4 three-stage rocket in early 1970, followed by comsat launch. (Shabecoff, NYT, 8/26/69, 11; msfc Release 69—181; nasa Int Aff)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified in FY 1970 authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that he believed “the greatest significance” of President Nixon’s decision to include in budget amendment amounts for continued lunar exploration after first Apollo landings and for continued Saturn V production was “that it recognizes the fundamental fact that the United States should not and does not plan to stop its further development and use of manned space flight.” Early manned lunar landing would allow additional savings of perhaps as much as $39 million in amended Apollo budget. Budget included funds for improved scientific equipment for more advanced missions to moon and for limited Apollo Applications program. Fund cuts would mean some program reorientation as well as delay in Workshop, previously scheduled for mid-1971. Amended budget supported continuation of plans for 1971 and 1973 Mars missions and first mission to Mercury in 1973, with Venus swing-by. In space applications, “where we are placing special emphasis,” Earth Resources Technology Satellite program would enable NASA, with other agencies, to test practical use of space to gather information on water levels, crops, forests, and other resources. “Despite the sizable overall reduction ... we have not reduced the earth resources project.” Budget included funds to proceed with nerva development and continued to give “high priority to our work in aeronautics.” New construction would include Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory at LaRC, “unique national facility for studying the fundamentals of noise generation and reduction.” U.S.S.R. was continuing vigorous program in both aeronautics and space. “The Soviet commitment represents . . . the application of resources at about the same rate as that we have averaged in recent years,” with “significantly higher percentage of the gross national product.” Soviets were “proceeding in manned space flight programs directed both at sending men to the moon and at substantially enlarged and extended manned operations in earth orbit. . . . Automatic rendezvous and docking flights with Cosmos 186—188 and 212—213 and the manned Soyuz 4—5 mission in January, with manned docking and crew transfer, demonstrated the increasing Soviet capability. . . . They appear to be pointed to a future capability for assembly in earth orbit of large space stations and of manned spacecraft to send to the moon and beyond.” U.S.S.R. had “made attempts to launch one or more spacecraft to the planets at almost every opportunity—three or four times the number of attempts we have been able to make.” (Testimony)
NASA named Brian M. Duff, Vice President for Communications of National Urban Coalition, as Public Affairs Officer for msc. He would succeed Paul Haney who was named Special Assistant to Julian Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, NASA Hq. Duff had been Director of Special Events in NASA Office of Public Affairs before going to National Urban Coalition. In new position, Haney would coordinate development of news media materials, with concentration on Apollo manned lunar landing. Haney later told press he had been ordered to new position because of personal differences with Scheer. “I’m definitely uncertain whether to go and have consulted a lawyer,” he said. Scheer said on April 23 transfer was not personal matter but “case of using two very good people where they can best serve our needs.” (nasa Release 69—59; H Chron, 4/22—23/69; H Post, 4/23/69, 1; W Post, 4/23/69, A3)
Two boxes of lunar samples from Apollo 11 arrived at Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, where they would be examined and used in experiments. (Wilford, NYT, 7/26/69, 1)
NASA officials ordered technicians to repaint Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) after they discovered old coating had begun to peel. Thermal paint would help protect super-cold hydrogen fuels from sun’s heat. Repainting of stage, scheduled to boost manned Apollo 11 spacecraft toward moon July 16, would not affect launch date. (AP, W Star, 7/5/69, A13)
More than 2,000 Americans had made reservations with Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines on first commercial trips to moon, said Joe McCarthy in This Week. Downpayments were not being accepted, but lunar reservations were being confirmed, acknowledged by letter, and placed in order on waiting list, paa spokesman had said, “It will undoubtedly be an expensive trip. When we finally start asking the passengers for money, a lot of them will probably drop off the list.” (This Week, 3/16/69, 9—10)
In his fourth reference to Apollo 11 within week, Pope Paul VI said at summer palace, Castel Gondolfo, Italy: “Catholic faith, not only does not fear this powerful confrontation of its humble doctrine with the wonderful riches of modern scientific thought, but it desires it . . . because truth although diverse on various levels ... is one and because such a confrontation is of mutual advantage to faith and to study in every field.” (AP, W Post, 7/24/69, A15)
Americans had generated only “scant enthusiasm” for Apollo 12 launch, New York Times said. In contrast to Apollo 11, July 16, “television sets in bars and business offices drew only small, languid crowds. . . .” Collective sense of anticlimax was “perhaps predictable considering the intense national emotion spent on the first moon landing four months ago.” Contributing to indifference might have been “the mounting preoccupation with the war in Vietnam, the peace rallies, the controversy surrounding Vice President Agnew and earthly social problems.” However, “there were no reports of the kind of demonstrations that protested the Apollo 11 flight.” Marchers in antiwar protests had appeared “to show little interest” in Apollo 12. (Reinhold, NYT, 11/15/69)	_
Completion of multimillion-dollar electron microscope, twice as powerful as any previously existing, at Laboratory of Electronic Optics in Toulouse, France, opened question “Will we ever be able to look into the very heart of things?” Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. Instrument, without its accelerator, weighed 22 tons and stood 10 ft tall. Interviews with U.S., French, and U.K. scientists had revealed wide feeling that “before long it may be possible ... to see individual atoms and ‘read’ the genetic message in a strand of dna (deoxyribonucleic acid).” Univ. of Chicago biophysicist Dr. Humberto Fernandez-Moran had said when that stage was reached, it might be possible not only to predict, but also to design life at the molecular level. {NYT, 11/30/69, E9) During November: It was “no government secret” that NASA, “preoccupied with putting men on the moon,” had neglected aeronautics in favor of space, C. V. Glines said in Armed Forces Management. But pressures generated by “airways crisis of 1st year, an ever-growing divergence between civilian and military aeronautical R&D requirements and applications and concern for loss of U.S. preeminence in aeronautics are demanding that attention be given to national aeronautical research and development policies.” Effects of Nixon Administration “study timetable” for long-range NASA—DOT civil R&D program would affect dot—FAA 1972 budgets. Meanwhile, “quiet gains are being made in the aeronautics side of the NASA house.” NASA aircraft technology budget would increase from $94.9 million in FY 1969 to over $100 million in FY 1970, with further increase in FY 1971 and new high in FY 1972, “when the long-range study gives new directions for aeronautical research.” (Armed Forces Management, 11/69, 34-8)
President Nixon arrived at Guam International Airport after flight from carrier Hornet. He said, “As I stand here and think of what happened today, the completion of that historic flight to the moon and the landing on the moon, I can say that I am sure all of us—all of the American citizens around the world—are proud today of what has happened_____” {PD, 8/4/69, 1033)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Co. Aerospace Group to receive 119million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to design, develop, test, and deliver four flight-qualified lunar roving vehicles and related test and training equipment. Four-wheeled vehicles would be carried on board Apollo lm descent stages in 1971—72 to transport astronauts on lunar surface and store equipment and lunar samples, (nasa Release 69—147)
Leading lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey told conference on nuclear energy at Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago he was “pleased” at discovery that age of lunar rocks might range between 3 billion and 4.5 billion yrs [see Aug. 23] and had “expected this for a long time. . . . But I’m not making any more bets on the moon’s origin.” He was “puzzled” by once-molten iunar sea material; it might have been formed by huge meteor or asteroid impacts rather than volcanism and moon might have originated out of cluster of such aster-oidal debris. (Cohn, W Post, 8/29/69, A3)
Space Task Group report to President on post-Apollo space program [see Sept. 15] was released at White House press conference by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Space Task Force Group members Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser; and William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary. Vice President Agnew said Task Group had rejected “crash program of the magnitude that would turn loose every bit of our technological ability” to achieve quickest possible manned Mars landing because “there are competing priorities in a difficult time of inflation.” Task Group had also rejected “foregoing the substantial benefits that have come out of the Apollo program, the benefits of National prestige.” Dr. Paine said all three options recommended to President in report would enable NASA to “hold together the team” and provide “major challenge.” Dr. DuBridge said all three options held “heavy emphasis on earth applications, satellites, for studying the geology, the geography, the atmosphere of the oceans of the earth and bringing space technology directly and immediately to the benefit of the people on earth. All three programs also . . . include heavy emphasis on scientific programs, to extend our scientific knowledge of the earth itself, of the moon, through additional lunar expeditions, interplanetary space and additional scientific information about the moon and the planets.” He also cited emphasis on international collaboration. (Transcript) NASA released America’s Next Decade in Space: A Report for the Space Task Group. Major points had been incorporated in Task Group report. (Text)
The notion has occurred to more than one person that NASA, having reached the moon and now fearing its way to the planets possibly blocked by budgetary obstacles, might find the requisite new worlds to conquer right here, at home,” William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. It was “fundamental precept of modern technology that anything which can be imagined can be accomplished. A cure for cancer, an end to poverty, a cleanup of the environment, termination of the Vietnam war, even effective nuclear disarmament? If it is conceivable it is achievable.” While nasa could be depended on to give good account of itself in scientific and engineering situations, “its ability to handle problems with a big ‘people’ component is largely untested.” Since “people-problems” were predominant these days, maybe NASA wouldn’t work out so well after all. “But on the second thought, no other government agency is showing much flair for coping with the human element, either.” (W Star, 9/21/69, C4)
msc announced award of $4.1-million modification to IBM Corp. contract for design, development, implementation, maintenance, and operation of real-time computer complex (rttc) which supported Apollo lunar landing missions. Modification definitized requirements to support Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) and continued work under multi-inventive arrangement covering cost, performance, schedule, and equipment management, (msc Release 69—69)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 12’s man-made lunar quake: “It seems that when the lunar lander was sent rocketing down to crash on the Ocean of Storms, it left the moon ‘ringing like a gong’ for some 30 minutes. This, in the words of one ecstatic scientist, constitutes ‘a major discovery . . . quite beyond the range of our experience.’ ” Scientific curiosity “is a good thing—provided it’s kept within reasonable limits. ... Just suppose that their first reading was right, and that the moon really is some sort of celestial gong. Remember what happened when people got too enthusiastic with the Liberty Bell.” (W Star, 11/24/69, A12)
At White House, President Nixon proclaimed July 21 National Day of Participation. “Apollo 11 is on its way to the moon. . . . Never before has man embarked on so epic an adventure. ... As the astronauts go ... we on earth will want, as one people, to be with them in spirit . . . and to support them with prayers that all will go well.” All Executive departments and Government agencies would be closed and U.S. flag would be displayed on public buildings. With many members at Cape Kennedy, Senate and House met briefly and conducted only routine business. Congressional Record was filled with comments on Apollo 11 and wishes for Godspeed to astronauts. (PD, 7/21/69, 997-8; CR, 7/16/69)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented paper “Space-Age Management and City Administration” at 1969 National Conference on Public Administration in Miami: “Mobilizing modern science, technology and management to accomplish bold ventures in space is clearly far simpler than better organizing the extraordinarily complex human interactions that comprise a modern metropolis. NASA’s spectacular advances in space are undoubtedly exacerbating public frustration with urban failures, but . . . they are encouraging the nation to tackle its more complex human problems with greater confidence on a bolder scale. If America can go to the moon, it can indeed do much better here on spaceship earth. “NASA’s range of management approaches is nearly as broad as the range within an urban complex.” Urban manager, like NASA manager, “can and should directly manage only a limited part of the complex interacting human enterprise for which he has responsibility. For the important remainder he must structure a ‘Darwinian Discipline’ system to encourage essential contributions from industry, from universities, and from the entrepreneur, the free wheeler, the scientist, the brilliant innovator, the gifted teacher, and other committed individuals. . . . The greatest single achievement of the space age may have been the formation of NASA; the rest followed as the energies and talents of America were released and given direction.” (Text)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 11 lunar landing and Mariner VI Mars mission: “Future generations may well regard the last two weeks of July 1969 as the most revolutionary and significant fortnight of the entire twentieth century. Not for 300 years has any comparable quantum leap in man’s knowledge of the cosmos taken place in so brief a time.” (NYT, 8/2/69, 10)	,
NASA was allowing Apollo 12 crew and colleagues to take part in Jewish National Fund dinner Dec. 14 in Houston “after years of guarding against the use of its astronauts as fund-raisers,” Associated Press said. Proceeds of $100-a-plate affair honoring Apollo 12 and other astronauts would be used to plant trees in Israel. (AP, W Post, 12/13/69, A12)
Surprise had been expressed over enthusiastic reception in Moscow of U.S. lunar rock exhibit, Washington Evening Star editorial noted. There was really nothing surprising, however. “From a narrowly nationalistic point of view, the Russian people and the Soviet government can claim that, were it not for the early Russian successes in space, that piece of rock would still be resting on the moon. But it is more likely that the Russians, and the other peoples of the Earth, see the first moon landing for what it truly was: A triumph for the collective ingenuity of Man.” (W Star, 12/17/69)
From summer residence, Castel Gondolfo, Pope Paul VI asked Christians worldwide to pray for Apollo 11 astronauts and said mission showed man was a “giant.” (AP, B Sun, 7/14/69, A5) At White House religious service the Rev. Paul H. A. Noren of Mount Olivet Church in Minneapolis led 300 people in prayer: “We ask Thy divine protection for our space pioneers who will soon make footprints on the moon.” (AP, NYT, 7/14/69, 23)
White House announced Apollo 11 astronauts would make 22-nation tour starting Sept. 29, to stress U.S. willingness to share space knowledge. Itinerary would include Mexico City; Bogota, Colombia; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Las Palmas, Canary Islands; Madrid; Paris; Amsterdam and Brussels; Oslo; Cologne, Germany; Berlin; London; Rome; Belgrade, Yugoslavia; Ankara, Turkey; Kinshasa, Congo; Teheran, Iran; Bombay, India; Dacca, Pakistan; Bangkok, Thailand; Darwin and Sydney, Australia; Guam; Seoul; Tokyo; Honolulu; and return to Houston, Tex., Nov. 5. Additional trip to Ottawa and Montreal, Canada, was planned for December, (upi, NYT, 9/20/69, 5)	_
nasa issued RFPs for design and planning studies of 12-man, earth-orbital space station for 1975 with 10-yr operational life, subject to resupply of expendables and crew rotation with logistics vehicles. Work also would include conceptual design of 50-man space base of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s and comparable to scientific and technical research, development, and operations center on earth. Modified Apollo and Gemini spacecraft would be considered as initial logistics systems if space shuttle did not become available in early phase of space station operations. Data from studies would be available for final design of future space station if program were approved for development. Proposals were due June 9. (nasa Release 69—65)
San Francisco Board of Supervisors had voted to negotiate with Texas millionaire Lamar Hunt on lease of 22-acre Alcatraz Island, United Press International reported. Hunt planned underground museum in tribute to Apollo 11, while restoring island’s historic buildings. (W Star, 10/20/69, B4) weather satellite itos that would be launched in prototype by NASA later in 1969 and in operational form by ESSA in early 1970. “It combines in one spacecraft both the stored-data and direct readout cameras of the present two-satellite [tiros] arrangement. Fewer launches will be required to keep the system in operation. The design allows for growth and the capacity to accommodate a variety of instruments to meet new and developing needs.” System would contain high-resolution infrared radiometer for “nighttime observations approaching daytime pictures in resolution and quality” thus providing 24-hr weather satellite coverage. “This step will enable us to meet fully the first national program objective—providing twice-daily observations of the entire earth, both by stored and direct readout systems, day and night.” (Text) Fifty years of transatlantic flight—from usn NC—4 flying boat’s Lisbon arrival May 27, 1919, to June 3, 1969, maiden Atlantic crossing of Boeing 747—was traced in paper by Dr. Richard K. Smith, Ramsey Fellow at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. During “the Heroic Years on the North Atlantic between 27 May 1919 and 27 May 1939, there were 175 flights across the Atlantic; 142 were by airplanes, 33 by airships. ... It is confidently believed that all the persons who flew the Atlantic by airplane during that period could be accommodated aboard a 747, perhaps with some seats to spare. However, at least three more 747s would be required to lift those persons who flew by airship during 1919—1937!” (Text) msc Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said Apollo program might be extended to 1973 to allow NASA to fly three space station training missions in 1972. “It’s going to be some time before we settle it. But it’s going to be difficult to handle both Apollo and Apollo Applications from an operational point of view as well as a people point of view in 1972.” Revised launch schedule set Apollo 19 landing back to November 1972 and Apollo 20 to May 1973. Between Apollo 18 launch Feb. 11, 1972, and Apollo 19 were three orbital flights preparatory for establishment of first U.S. permanent space station in 1975. These flights could come just after Apollo 18, in May 1972 and in September 1972. Further reason for Apollo landings delay was possibility they would be made in remote lunar areas like crater Tycho, almost 1,000 mi below moon’s equator and rated among top-priority landing sites. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/23/69, A21) Dr. Arthur D. Code, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer, reported discovery that relatively young stars in constellations Orion and Scorpius were generating heats of 45,000°F—5,000° hotter than had been thought. Finding, from data obtained by NASA’s Oao II satellite (launched Dec. 7, 1968), suggested young stars might be more massive and maturing faster than originally believed and supported theories of thermonuclear processes in stars’ interiors that generated such heats. Oao II data also showed younger stars had more complex chemical composition than stars formed near universe’s beginning. They contained fairly large amounts of carbon, silicon, magnesium, and heavier elements, as well as predominant hydrogen and helium. Other Oao II data indicated particles in interstellar space were variety of complex matter, much of which might be debris ejected from stars. (Wilford, NYT, 10/21/69, C19) msc Director of Engineering Development Maxime A. Faget outlined concept of space vehicle with two reusable stages—booster rocket and orbiter craft—both with fixed wings, long fuselages, and rear rocket engines. Vehicle would be 225 ft high and weigh 2.5 million lbs at launch. Orbiter vehicle, capable of carrying 25,000 lbs of cargo and passengers, would be attached pickaback to booster stage’s upper half. Booster, burning liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, would elevate orbiter to fringe of space, separate, drop away, and cruise to landing like jet airliner. Booster probably would be piloted by two astronauts. Orbiter would ignite rocket engine to continue upward to space station orbiting at 300-mi altitude. After link-up with space station, transfer of cargo or 12 passengers, and pickup of new load, orbiter would be steered by pilot into atmosphere and controlled glide to landing on 10,000-ft runways used by aircraft. Key to reentry would be orbiter’s “angle of attack” when hitting atmosphere. Faget proposed 60° angle with nose up, so flattened bottom would catch airflow to slow descent. Small jet engines would be fired to help control final descent phases of both orbiter and booster. Outer surface of vehicles would be made of metal alloys that could sustain temperatures to 2,700°F. (Wilford, NYT, 10/24/69, 43) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed dod space activities: “In communications, meteorology and surveillance . . . we are actively pursuing increased capability. . . . Tactical communications using satellite relays are presently being intensely tested and show great promise in improving control of field units and increasing . . . cooperation between land, sea and air forces. In surveillance, our efforts have produced results. Of first importance is a new satellite early warning system that will do a great deal to further insure our ability to deter nuclear attack.” Savings in space travel costs “must be linked to the recovery and reuse of space vehicles. . . . Since major improvement in our ability to use space environment would be of direct assistance to both NASA and the military, we are jointly planning our research and development towards this objective.” (Text) Major aiaa awards presented included Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to George M. Low, former Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, currently on special assignment to msc Director, for “his leadership role in bringing the Apollo Program to fulfillment, and to the thousands of engineers who dedicated their careers, without public recognition, to the conquest of space.” Daniel Guggenheim Medal for 1969 was presented to retired arc Director H. Julian Allen for “personal contributions to outstanding research and development leading to vastly improved re-entry bodies, missiles, satellites, and spacecraft, and for leadership in directing and inspiring a large group of research men at Ames Laboratory.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given Edgar C. Lineberry, Jr., Chief of Orbital Mission Analysis Branch, msc, for “significant advancement in the field of rendezvous mechanics through his development of the space maneuver logic and associated control techniques, and his formulation of the mission plans which contributed decisively to the success of all rendezvous operations conducted during United States manned space flights.” De Florez Training Award was given to Gifford Bull, Principal Engineer and Engineering Pilot at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, for “establishing the use of variable stability airplanes as flight dynamics training vehicles for engineering test pilots.” New aiaa Award for Spacecraft Design was awarded Otto E. Bartoe, Jr., Vice President, Aerospace Div., Ball Brothers Research Corp., for “concept and preliminary design of the Orbiting Solar Observatory spacecraft configuration and control systems, the first embodiment of the spin-despin design.” Aerospace Communications Award was awarded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency and former JPL Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, for “development of phase lock systems for space communications, guidance and control, and for contributions to the design, development and operation of NASA’s Deep Space Network.” (msc Release; aiaa Releases; aiaa Booster, 10/20/69) Honored as new Honorary Fellows at Honors and Award Banquet Oct. 23 were Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Among 29 new Fellows were: Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, Deputy Director, Flight Crew Operations Directorate, msc; former gsfc Director, Dr. Harry J. Goett, Chief Engineer, Space and Re-Entry Systems Div., Philco-Ford Corp.; Najeeb E. Halaby, President, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Samuel L. Higginbottom, Vice President, Operations Group, Eastern Airlines, Inc.; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director; John G. Borger, Chief Engineer, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Walter Haeussermann, Director, Astrionics Laboratory, MSFC; Dr. John C. Houbolt, Vice President and Senior Consultant, Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, (aiaa Release) During third aiaa President’s Forum, Under Secretary of Interior Russell E. Train said, “Photographs of Earth, taken by our astronauts from the vicinity of the Moon, bring home more forcefully than the words of all scientists of all times the fact that we live on a finite planet with finite but poorly known resources.” (A&A, 2/70) October 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIV into orbit with 760-km (472.2-mi) apogee, 742-km (461.1-mi) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69)
In Madrid during European goodwill tour, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman placed wreath at statue of Columbus and met Cristobal Colon de Carvajal y Maroto, 17th duke of Veragua and hereditary “admiral of the ocean sea,” title created in 1537 for explorer’s son, Diego Columbus. (AP, C Trib, 2/18/69)
President Nixon welcomed returned Apollo 11 astronauts aboard U.S.S. Hornet: “I think I am the luckiest man in the world . . . not only because I have the honor to be President of the United States, but particularly because I have the privilege of speaking for so many in welcoming you back to earth.” Washington had received messages from more than 100 foreign governments: “Emperors, Presidents, Prime Ministers, and Kings, have sent the most warm messages that we have ever received. They represent over 2 billion people on this earth, all of them who had the opportunity, through television, to see what you have done.” Week of mission had been “the greatest week in the history of the world since the Creation, because as a result of what happened in this week, the world is bigger, infinitely, and also, as I am going to find on this trip around the world ... as a result of what you have done, the world has never been closer together before.” (PD, 8/4/69,1032-3)
NASA’s 363-ft-tall Saturn V launch vehicle, tipped with Apollo 12 spacecraft scheduled to carry astronauts toward moon Nov. 14, was placed on launch pad at KSC. (AP, W Post, 9/9/69, A2)
Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia toured msc during five-day visit to U.S. (Reuters, W Post, 7/10/69, A23; Apollo Status Rpt; NASA pao)
San Francisco Mayor Joseph Alioto urged San Franciscans to fly U.S. flag from Apollo 11 blastoff to splashdown and to sound every bell, siren, and whistle in the city at splashdown. (AP, W Post, 7/17/69, A27)
White House announced Apollo 11 crew on way to moon was carrying Soviet commemorative medals brought back to U.S. by Astronaut Frank Borman, who had received them from widows of Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Vladimir M. Komarov during his Moscow visit. Apollo 11 also carried Apollo 204 crew patch and commemorative medals struck for families of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee before astronauts died in Jan. 27, 1967, fire. President Nixon said, “The names of Gagarin and Komarov, of Grissom, White, and Chaffee, share the honors we pray will come to Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. In recognizing the dedication and sacrifice of brave men of different nations, we underscore an example we hope to set: that if men can reach the moon, men can reach agreement.” (PD, 7/21/69, 999)
Recording by seismometer on moon of seven external impacts near Apollo 12 landing site since astronauts left moon Nov. 20 was reported by Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo program’s seismic research. Each impact had produced tremors. Dr. Latham said meteors might have struck Ocean of Storms, whose surface resonated when hit. Lack of internal quakes indicated moon had not been heated substantially for about 4.6 billion yrs. (AP, W Star, 12/9/69, A6)
Post Office Dept, announced delay in delivery of moon landing stamp first day covers because of “unprecedented number of requests.” Processing crew of 100—more than twice number normally employed— were working longer shifts with more special canceling equipment than ever before to handle “response from people all over the world.” (PO Dept. Philatelic Release 50)
President Nixon, accompanied by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, visited dod employees at Pentagon. President recalled reference made by Astronaut Frank Borman at White House Apollo 8 briefing Jan. 30 to “400,000 men and women in the Nation who at one time or another had played a part in making this great, spectacular feat possible.” President said, “I was glad to see Colonel Borman bring it home that way. Four hundred thousand made it possible for this magnificent achievement to occur. I trust that all of you can convey that kind of spirit to those who work in the Defense Department.” {PD, 2/3/69, 194)
Teletype from German ship Vegesack reported numerous pieces of Saturn V	launch vehicle from Apollo 11 were sighted dropping into sea around ship. Vegesack had been at position some 375 mi east-northeast of Cape Kennedy when Apollo 11 lifted off toward moon July 16. (W News, 2/3/70)
Scientists monitoring seismometer left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts told press at msc five-minute event recorded July 22 was either meteoroid strike or moonquake similar to mild California earthquake recorded on East Coast, mit geologist, Dr. Frank Press, said tremor would have magnitude of four or five according to Richter scale, on which major earthquake registered seven or eight. Seismic reading was strong indication that moon was layered with outer crust and inner mantle like earth and supported theories that moon was formed near or torn from earth. Layering, he said, “would imply that at one time there was enough heat so that the heavier rocks went to the interior and the lighter ones to the surface.” (McGehan, B Sun, 7/24/69, Al; Lyons, NYT, 7/24/69, 1)
nasa established 14-member Apollo Orbital Science Photographic Team to provide scientific guidance in design, operation, and data utilization of photographic systems for Apollo lunar orbital science program. Chairman was Frederick J. Doyle of U.S. Geological Survey. (Apollo Prog Off)
As part of NASA and Washington National Gallery of Art program, Eyewitness to Space, group of artists attended Apollo 11 launch to paint facets of mission. Program originated in 1963 when artists were invited to cover Mercury 9 mission. Among those commissioned to record Apollo 11 were Peter Hurd, Robert Rauschenberg, Lamar Dodd, and James B. Wyeth. Since program started, 25 artists had produced more than 500 sketches and paintings. (Casey, W Post, 7/13/69, Gl; Hicks, NYT, 7/15/69, 33; W Star, 7/17/69, A12)
At state dinner in Manila, Philippine President Ferdinand E. Marcos exchanged toasts with President Nixon and commented on Apollo 11: “. . . we participate in the celebration of this achievement as man aspires for the steers, the stars outside of this world and the stars within himself and within his spirit. It is the hope of humanity, as it is the hope of the Philippines, that this vision and this genius, this courage and this ingenuity shall be utilized for the solution of man’s problems.” {PD, 8/4/69, 1036-7)
Paul Haney, described by press as “Voice of Apollo,” announced resignation after 10 yrs with NASA following NASA Hq. discussion of his April 22 appointment as assistant to Associate Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer. Haney said decision to resign resulted from personal differences with Scheer, who told press he had tried to persuade Haney to remain with agency. (AP, NYT, 4/26/69, 2; O’Toole, W Post, 4/29/69, A3)
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
NASA announced withdrawal of three Apollo range instrumentation ships —usns Redstone, Mercury, and Huntsville—from tracking network supporting Apollo flights. Remaining tracking ship, usns Vanguard, would be continued on station in Atlantic about 1,000 mi southeast of Bermuda. NASA said reduction of Apollo ship support was based on high success of Apollo missions, particularly their excellent “launch on time” record, (nasa Release 69-133)
usaf promoted Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to full colonel. In congratulatory message Gen. John P. McConnell, Air Force Chief of Staff, said Apollo 11 mission was “indeed a momentous achievement” and promotion was “token of appreciation for the part you played.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 28)	<
President Nixon sent to Senate nomination of Dr. George M. Low as NASA Deputy Administrator. Manager of Apollo spacecraft at msc since 1964, Dr. Low had served space program since 1949, when he joined naca. He was recipient of NASA’s Outstanding Leadership and Distinguished Service Awards and had received Arthur S. Flemming Award in 1963 as one of the 10 outstanding young men in Government. {PD, 11/17/69, 1597)
Number of eminent selenologists had confirmed dating of Apollo 11 moon rocks at 4.5 billion yrs or more, to presumed formation of solar system, indicating lunar surface was far older than any material originating on earth’s surface, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. Same lunar scientists had “lashed out” at what they claimed were NASA’s “restrictions on the free flow of scientific information.” Lunar investigators would present findings at January symposium but many felt “information of such significance should be published immediately through normal scientific channels.” Counterargument was “that ail the investigators get an even break this way.” (W Star, 11/7/69, Al)
Europeans were “as excited as many Americans” about Apollo 11 launch, New York Times reported. But “only the sharpest observer of the Soviet news media could guess, as he went to bed tonight, that Americans will try to send men to the moon tomorrow,” according to Baltimore Sun. Last mention of Apollo 11 in Soviet press had been July 9 meeting of President Nikolay V. Podgorny with Astronaut Frank Borman. In U.K., bbc and commercial TV were planning extensive Apollo 11 coverage, some live via comsat. British newspapers were competing with special space supplements and guides. Exceptions to generally “adulatory” reportage was The Times of London article in which philosopher Lord Russell had said: “Men will not be content to land upon the moon and try to make it habitable. They will land simultaneously from Russia and the United States, each party, complete with H-bombs and each intent upon exterminating the other.” American Embassy in Warsaw was packed every day with Poles viewing space films. Spain’s Evening Daily Pueblo had sponsored contest to send 25 readers to Apollo 11 launch. In France 22-page space supplement issued by France-Soir had sold 1.5 million copies at $1 each. Bild Zeitung in Germany had noted 7 out of 57 Apollo supervisors were of German origin. Austrian press had lionized Dr. Wernher von Braun during recent visit to Salzburg. Volume of Western European newspaper space devoted to lunar landing mission rivaled that in U.S., New York Times said, and “the whole story of the moon effort is improving the ‘prestige’ of the United States. . . . But. .. respect voiced by individuals is often for America’s technological power, not her humanity or civilization.” (Lewis, NYT, 7/16/69, 20; B Sun, 7/16/69, A8, Mills, A9)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean achieved mock liftoff at 11:22 am edt-—exact minute planned—completing final phase of initial countdown demonstration test (cddt) for Nov. 14 launch to moon. No major problems arose in spite of gusty winds and rain that would have delayed actual launch. (W Post, 10/30/69, A8)
Within 76 hrs after Apollo 11 splashdown, Bantam Books and New York Times published We Reach the Moon, 416-page paperback account of U.S. space program from 1961 through Apollo ll’s success. Early publication was effected by nearly 2% yrs of planning. Book went to press immediately after July 24 splashdown while aerospace reporter John Noble Wilford was completing text. Final copy was telexed to Chicago printer July 25. First printing comprised 375,000 copies. Hardcover edition would be published by W. W. Norton & Co. in September. (NYT, 7/29/69, 16)
NASA announced selection of Chester M. Lee as Apollo Mission Director, succeeding George H. Hage, who had been elected vice president for product development with Boeing Co. Lee, retired USN captain who had served in Polaris missile program and in Directorate of Research and Engineering in Office of Secretary of Defense, had been Assistant Apollo Mission Director since August 1966. (nasa Release 69—122)
Astronaut Alan L. Bean described plans for Apollo 12 extravehicular activities to press at KSC. Mission, to begin Nov. 14, would include two 3Vs>-hr eva periods on moon. For first EVA main objective was to deploy alsep, deploy TV camera and take photos, deploy lunar equipment conveyor, take contingency sample, deploy S-band antenna and solar wind experiment, and collect lunar material. After rest in lm astronauts would return to lunar surface for second eva period, to collect good documented sample and document geologically interesting features with photographs, samples, and description. “There’s not going to be a lot of time to pick up a rock and think about it . . . but there’s going to be time to look at the craters and try to determine what kind they are and where they came from, if this one’s different from that one, what part of the crater you want to sample. . . . We’re going to take photographs as we see all of it. And when this is finished we’re hopefully going to be over near Surveyor.” Examination of Surveyor 111 (launched April 17, 1967) was second objective. Crew would retrieve parts for evaluation of how materials withstood long-term exposure in space. Final surface experiment would be conducted after liftoff from moon when crew crashed LM ascent stage onto surface. Crash would be recorded by seismometer and was expected to provide data from which scientists could make inferences about moon’s internal structure. (Transcript)
At msfc ceremony, NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented awards to 117 center employees and industry representatives, mostly in recognition of exceptional service to Apollo program. Employee awards included NASA Medal for Distinguished Service to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun; Deputy Director, Technical, Eberhard F. M. Rees; Deputy Director, Management, Harry H. Gorman; Director of Science and Engineering Hermann K. Weidner; Vice Commander, Aeronautical Systems Div., m/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) ; Director of Program Management Lee B. James; and Deputy Director of Science and ^Engineering Ludie G. Richard. NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement was presented to James A. Downey, III; Erwin Fehlberg; Gerhard B. Heller; Robert J.	Nauman; and Joseph L. Randall. Other awards received were NASA Medal for Exceptional Service by NASA employees and NASA Certificate for Distinguished Public Service by industry personnel, (msfc Release 69—222)
msfc announced $7,384,543 modification to contract with Chrysler Corp. Space Div. for assembly of two boosters for Saturn IB rockets 2l3 and 214 for use in Apollo Applications program, (msfc Release 69—93)
Following successful Apollo 9 launching, President Nixon issued statement: “The successful launching of the Apollo 9 spacecraft marks another milestone in the journey of man into space. The hopes and prayers of mankind go with Col. James A. McDivitt, Col. David R. Scott, and Mr. Russell Schweickart on their courageous mission. The genius of the American scientist and technological community, which created and designed the Saturn V, the command ship, and the lunar module, once again stirs the imagination and gratitude of the world. We are proud of this American adventure; but this is more than an American adventure. It is an adventure of man, bringing the accumulated wisdom of his past to the task of shaping his future. The 10-day flight of Apollo 9 will, we hope, do something more than bring America close to the moon; it can serve to bring humanity closer by dramatically showing what men can do when they bring to any task the best of man’s mind and heart.” {PD, 3/10/69, 356)
Soviet scientist Nikolay A. Kozyrev told Soviet Committee for Inventions and Discoveries he had discovered active volcano on moon. He had detected glowing rocks in Aristarchus crater in 1955 and obtained spectrogram of crater’s gas in 1958. Comparing spectrogram with others obtained from active volcanos in Soviet Far East, he had found them similar, (upi, W News, 12/31/69, 9)
Report of President Nixon’s Task Group on Space [Sept. 15] and Apollo astronauts’ speeches to Congress [Sept. 16] had brought some “rationality back to the discussion of whither the space program,” Washington Post editorial said. Acceptance by President of recommendation “would eliminate talk of abandoning manned space flight, which would be a foolish course of action, or of proceeding toward Mars in a crash effort to get there as quickly as possible.” It was important “for the nation to push ahead on the immediate recommendations of the Task Group— exploring the moon, developing the tools that are needed for systematic exploration of our space travel capability, and extracting from the space program more benefits for those of us who are earthbound.” (W Post, 9/19/69)
Apollo 9 mission had gathered new evidence of clearer visibility-in space and “marvelous” acuity of human eye, Associated Press reported. Astronauts had told officials onboard recovery ship after splashdown they could see much farther in space than in earth’s atmosphere—both with telescopes and with naked eye. They had tracked several orbiting space objects up to 1,600 mi away with telescope and had tracked jettisoned 2%-ft-long, 14-ft-dia LM ascent stage to 1,000 mi. (W Star, 3/17/69, A4; W Post, 3/17/69, A4)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., quarantined in lrl, discussed lunar surface activities with about 40 scientists and geologists over closed-circuit TV. Astronauts said lunar surface was rich with interesting rocks. They described small, lyalnut-size fragments which appeared translucent or transparent, with reflecting surfaces like quartz crystals; spatters of glass on rocks, especially on rocks on bottom of craters; and rocks shaped like automobile distributor caps, which appeared to be weathered or eroded and sculptured at top in cylindrical shape. Astronauts said they regretted not being able to retrieve more lunar rocks and suggested that future Apollo astronauts be equipped with extra pocket or shoulder bag so they could collect interesting rocks as they saw them. (W Post, 8/7/69, A4; AP, B Sun, 8/7/69, A8)
U.S. and Spain exchanged notes in Madrid confirming 10-yr extension— to Jan. 29, 1984—of 1964 agreement establishing NASA space tracking and acquisition facility near Madrid. Since June 1965, facility had supported all Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter flights to moon, four Mariner flights to Mars and Venus, four Pioneer interplanetary probes, and all manned Apollo flights. It would support Apollo 11 and passage of Mariners VI and VII near Mars during summer; 210-ft-dia parabolic antenna for tracking and communication in interplanetary space would be built during next three years. (NASA Release 69—97)
“We have entered a new era,” Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press in Houston following Apollo 11 lunar landing. “The significance of the trip is that mankind is going to establish places of abode outside of his planet earth.” In telephone call to White House, Dr. Paine had told President Nixon, “It is my honor on behalf of the entire NASA team to report to you that the Eagle has landed on the Sea of Tranquility and our astronauts are safe and looking forward to starting the exploration of the moon.” Dr. Paine said President Nixon had spoken with “excitement and awe in his voice” and mood was that of “considerable tension relieved.” NASA planned tentative six additional manned lunar missions over next few years. Dr. Paine praised U.S.S.R.’s cooperation in providing Luna XV information to Astronaut Frank Borman [see July 18]. He also said if Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong had not assumed manual control of lm to steer it from crater during lunar landing, “we might . . . have had considerable- difficulty.” (McGehan, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al)
In Science, JPL scientist Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe said despite successful landing of seven unmanned spacecraft on moon controversy over density of lunar surface material continued. Further analysis of data showed relation of density of lunar surface layer to depth was best determined from spacecraft measurements of bearing capacity as function of depth. Comparison of these values with laboratory measurements of bearing capacity of low-cohesion particulate materials as a function of percentage of solid indicated bulk density at lunar surface was approximately 1.1 gr per cc at depth of 5 cm. (Science, 6/27/69, 1514-6)
Apollo 10 mission would be launched May 18, one day later than originally planned, nasa announced. Change from first to second day of launch window would permit observation and collection of data on Apollo landing site 2, as area of primary interest, and observation of site 3 after sunrise on moon. Final decision on specific nature of mission would be made after review of Apollo 9 mission. (NASA Release 69-41)
Apollo 11 astronauts on world tour arrived in Tokyo. Tight security measures prompted by fears of possible attack by radical students protesting Japan’s defense treaty with U.S. permitted public exposure for only half hour. Police estimated 120,000 people watched brief parade down Ginza, Tokyo’s main street. Later astronauts and wives were received by Emperor Hirohito and Empress Nagako. Astronauts were presented cultural medal by Prime Minister Eisaku Sato—first time medal had been presented to foreigners. (Pepper, B Sun, 11/5/69, A2)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 12 Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., to wish crew good luck on eve of launch. {PD, 11/17/69, 1604)
Original equipment of field-sequential color TV system which would be used by Apollo 11 to transmit pictures from moon [see April 5] was presented to Smithsonian Institution by inventor Dr. Peter C. Goldmark, President of cbs Laboratories. Apollo 11 would carry three-pound miniaturization of system in Westinghouse camera. (Schaden, W Star, 7/8/69, Bl)
As NASA prepared for Apollo 11 lunar landing, space contractors, engineers, and scientists cited thousands of “space technology transfers,” down-to-earth rewards from space program, Wall Street Journal said. Side benefits ranged from medical innovations and safer highways to new management techniques, commercial products, and industrial tools. They included liferaft with bucket keel to prevent capsizing in rough water and inner tube that inflated automatically to keep craft afloat if outer skin was punctured, computer system to track down fathers behind in child support payments, inertial navigation systems that were standard equipment on new 360- to 400-passenger Boeing 747, and thermal mapper developed for satellites, being used to seek oil formations, diagnose cause of sinking airport runways, and find sources of water pollution. Other space age spinoffs were plastic resin marketed as commercial laminates, adhesives, and coatings; devices to monitor internal stress in dams during earth tremors; data-processing techniques to record train traffic and to match power-generating capacities to demand; electromagnetic hammer that smoothed and shaped metal without weakening it; and luminous devices for aircraft exit signs, map reading, and gun sites. Medicine was benefiting from miniaturized electronic devices in cardiac pacemakers, remote-handling and manipulation equipment that had improved prosthetic devices like artificial limbs, space-helmet-like hoods to measure oxygen consumption while patient exercised, and computer to provide sharper x-ray photos. (Tanner, WSJ, 7/6/69)
At Andrews afb, on return from world tour, President Nixon said: “In Bucharest I noted that so many, particularly of the young people, held up a newspaper picture of the astronauts landing on the moon, and everywhere we went it was the same. Some way, when those two Americans stepped on the moon, the people of this world were brought closer together. ... I really feel in my heart that it is . . . the spirit of Apollo, that America can now help to bring to all relations with other nations. The spirit of Apollo . . . can bring the people of the world together in peace.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1071—2)
Hungary and Romania had issued souvenir stamps commemorating Apollo 8 mission and astronauts, U.S. newspaper philatelic columns announced. Photograph taken from Gemini IV of Arabian coast provided design for new stamp in sultanate of Muscat and Oman. (Faries, W Star, 2/9/69, D10; AP, W Post, 2/9/69, K8)
Glazing discovered on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts was analyzed in Science by Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., senior investigator for close-up photography. Glossy surfaces similar to glass found clumped in centers of small lunar craters appeared to have been swept in after craters had been formed. Glazed areas were also concentrated toward tops of protuberances and, in some cases, droplets appeared to have run down inclined surface and congealed on sides. Glazing might have originated from effect of exhaust of lm descent stage, splashing of liquid drops from larger impact elsewhere, shock heating or volcanism on moon, same impact that created craters in which glazing was found, or intense radiation heating. Intense radiation was most probable cause, Gold said. Source could have been impact fireball on moon, impact fireball on earth, or most likely, solar outburst in geologically recent times. (Science, 9/26/69, 1345—9)
At dedication ceremony in Houston for Apollo 8 stamp, Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said: “The fact that this is the fifth stamp the Post Office Department has issued commemorating accomplishments of the space program signifies the extent to which space exploration has captured the imagination of the American people. . . . The nation’s concerted effort to reach the moon and outer space reflects two traditional aspects of our national character. One is scientific: the search for truth, knowledge, discovery. The other is psychological: the strong urge for adventure—an urge kindled by the unknown. We are all explorers at heart. The space program has made an entire nation explorers in fact. The flight of Apollo 8 around the moon and back was perhaps the greatest technological achievement of man to date. Certainly it was the most dramatic.” (Text)
William R. Frye described magnificence of Apollo 10 liftoff in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “TV cameras do not do it justice. It is like 100 claps of thunder, each following the other with machine-gun speed. “The flame that leaps from behind the rocket could have come straight from Dante’s inferno. It is too bright to be seen with comfort by the naked eye. The earth trembles beneath the feet, two miles away. Then the towering rocket, nearly twice as high as Niagara Falls, twothirds the height of the Washington Monument, creeps with agonizing slowness the first few feet off the ground, enveloped by a white cloud. “Then it is gone—and man is left to wonder and to pray.” (P Bull, 5/19/69)
nasa announced Apollo 12 lm guidance-system targeting for Site 7 landing point on moon’s Ocean of Storms had been changed to improve crew’s ability to observe landing point during late portion of descent. Crew would attempt to land close to Surveyor 111 spacecraft at 2.990 south latitude by 23.204 west longitude. Original aiming point was 2.982 south latitude by 23.392 west longitude—1,118 ft northeast of Surveyor 111. (nasa Release 69—148B)
Several thousand gallons of fuel escaped from prevalves in Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC) while it was being prepared for Apollo 10 countdown demonstration test (cddt) at ksc. Prevalves opened while leak was being repaired in nitrogen pressurization system on mobile launcher, cddt, scheduled to begin April 28, was delayed 24 hrs while vehicle was examined for damage. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/29/69, A3; Marshall Star, 4/30/69, 1)
nasa awarded Grumann Aircraft Engineering Corp. $3,438,400 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lunar module contract. Modifications—to documentation and reporting procedures for lm test and checkout, to flight and ground test hardware, to test and effect analyses, and to crew safety hardware—brought total value of contract to $1.6 billion since January 1963. (msc Release 69—14)
Apollo 11 launch brought mood of reflection across Nation, New York Times said. Dawn was breaking in western U.S. when blastoff occurred. Workers in San Francisco’s open air fish markets stood in silence to hear radio report. In San Diego motorists crossing U.S.-Mexican border listened to countdown on car radios. In mid-America, classes were postponed at Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo., while cadets watched launch on TV. Cowhands at northern Wyoming ranch, inaccessible to radio or TV, interrupted work to honor Apollo 11. Ranch owner Dr. Oakleigh Thorn II said, “We feel so close to the moon shot out here, because we’re so close to the stars and sky.” In Biloxi, Miss., harbor fishermen paused on wharf to hear countdown. In Tennessee, tobacco farmers listened to transistor radios in fields. Washington, D.C., schoolteacher said, “The astronauts didn’t just go to the moon. All our minds went to the moon and intellectually man’s horizons have jumped leaps and bounds beyond the historical situation they’ve always been confined to.” (Fosburgh, NYT, 7/17/69, 1)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., practiced splashdown and anticontamination procedures they would use after return from moon in July. Astronauts donned plastic-coated biological isolation garments and sprayed each other with Betadine disinfectant before leaving dummy spacecraft in Gulf of Mexico, (upi, W Star, 5/25/69, A6)
Tom Wicker commented in New York Times on suggested detonation of nuclear device on moon [see Dec. 15]. “Aside from the obvious questions about the effects of nuclear fallout in the moon’s atmosphere, what might be the total environmental consequences of such an explosion— for the moon itself, for those who will be visiting it from earth, for other objects in the solar system?” Past performances had indicated “some unexpected and probably unwelcome result.” Indus and Ganges River irrigation systems had contaminated soil in India with salt that rose from earth with water and Aswan Dam was spreading disease with irrigation waters in Egypt and damaging fertile Nile delta by interfering with ancient silting process. In U.S., oil leaks from ocean floor set off by scientific drilling techniques had ruined Santa Barbara, Calif., coast. “Monstrous engines” of Boeing 747, Concorde supersonic airliner, C—5A Galaxy jet, and sst would “spew their poisons on mankind.” Could man master anything that really mattered? “Certainly not nature, and least of all himself; rather it is altogether likely that if the Biblical flood someday engulfs the earth, it will flow from seeded clouds. That might even be a fitting end.” (NYT, 12/18/69, 46) December 19: Results of Apollo 11 experiment to trap atomic particles from solar wind on lunar surface [see Aug. 18] were reported in Science by originator Dr. Johannes Geiss and Univ. of Berne, Switzerland, team. Helium-4 solar wind flux during Apollo 11 excursion was 5.1 million to 7.5 million atoms per sq cm per sec. Solar wind direction and energy were essentially not perturbed by moon. Evidence for solar wind albedo had been found. (Science, 12/19/69, 1502—3)
On arrival in Saigon, Republic of Vietnam, President Nixon said: “I am happy that the moon landing, which in its universality signifies a symbolic drawing together of all mankind, has provided an occasion for me to meet with President Thieu in the capital of his country.” Later, after discussions with President Nixon, President Nguyen Van Thieu said, “The Vietnamese people fully concur in the message of peace which the three brave American astronauts deposited on the moon for all mankind.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1051—4)
At Explorers Club symposium in New York scientists, educators, community leaders, and students discussed significance of Apollo 8 mission. William Booth, Chairman of Commission on Human Rights in New York, said, “I still am quite disturbed by the fact that we’re dying at home, people are about to starve. There’s overpopulation and underproduction of food in the world. We haven’t been able to solve these problems and here we are going off to the moon.” Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said flights were “a means of concentrating our energies toward building a technological capability.” Moon flight had played “same role as Lindbergh’s flight to Paris” in that it demonstrated new capability. Space program was paying economic dividends in communications, mineral exploration, and new materials. Dr. Maynard M. Miller, Chairman of Explorer Club’s World Center for Exploration Foundation, said, “The word ‘impossible’ has a different meaning after Apollo'8. Perhaps its real contribution will be as a symbol of man’s willingness to dare to do something great.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/5/69, 26)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
Rep. Edgar F. Foreman (R-N. Mex.) introduced H.C.R. 464 for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum, Roswell, N. Mex., as memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, “who pioneered in rocket experimentation and contributed to America’s success in landing men on die moon.” (CR, 12/8/69, H11865)
NASA announced it was proceeding with plans and preparations for launch of Apollo 18 manned lunar landing mission to Fra Mauro on March 12, 1970. Decision was based on review of photos taken of Fra Mauro area and successful demonstration of pinpoint landing techniques by Apollo 12. Fra Mauro was flat, vast highland area about 110 mi east of Apollo 12 landing point on Ocean of Storms, (nasa Release 69—162)
NASA Associate Administrator, Dr. Homer E. Newell, and Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop presented paper “Planning Space Technology for the 1970’s” to National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C. Technology readiness for manned missions beyond the moon depended “very heavily upon (1) carrying the technology through proof-of-concept or prototype phase in order to assure long-life, reliable flight equipment and operations, and (2) precursor missions, particularly an Earth orbiting laboratory and lunar exploration that provide an opportunity to obtain the needed technology.” Technology needed for manned Mars exploration “represents capabilities that are very useful in many space missions and for some non-space applications as well, particularly with regard to long-life equipment and man’s performance under stress.” (Text)
Chemical analysis of moon rocks at Lunar Receiving Laboratory had disclosed their age might range from 2 billion to 4.5 billion yrs—far greater than most scientists expected—lunar scientists in touch with lrl colleagues said. It was “almost conclusive evidence that it has been billions of years since these rocks crystallized.” Finding might settle difference between geologists who had viewed lunar surface as having had continuous history and those like Dr. Harold C. Urey who believed moon was ancient, undisturbed place made of material which would help unfold history of early planets. Later, msc Director of Science and Applications, Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, said Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer and Dr. John Funkhouser of State Univ. of New York, Dr. Joseph Zahringer of Max Planck Institute in Heidelberg, and Dr. Donald Bogard of msc had measured solar particles trapped in lunar rocks to determine lunar material’s age. (Cohn, W Post, 8/24/69, Al; upi, W Star, 8/25/69, A4)............................
President Nixon signed H.R. 11271 (P.L. 91—119), $3.715-billion NASA FY 1970 Authorization Act. It provided for R&D: Apollo, $1,691 billion; space flight operations, $225.6 million; advanced missions, $2.5 million; physics and astronomy, $117.6 million; lunar and planetary exploration, $138.8 million; and bioscience, $20.4 million. Space applications R&D authorization was $128.4 million. Also authorized were $112.6 million for launch vehicle procurement, $9 million for sustaining university program, $27.5 for space vehicle systems, $33.5 for electronic systems, and $22.1 million for human factor systems. Act allocated $20.2 million for hasic research, $36.9 million for space power and electric propulsion systems, $50 million for nuclear rocket, $22.8 million for chemical propulsion systems, $278 million for tracking and data acquisition, and $5 million for technology utilization. For construction of facilities, law authorized $8 million for erc, $670,000 for gsfc, $12.5 million for KSC, $4.7 million for LaRc, $1.7 million for Msc, and $500,000 for Wallops Station. Act authorized $637.4 million for research and program management. (PD, 11/24/69, 1643; PL 91-119)
nasa named Rocco A. Petrone, Director of Launch Operations at ksc since 1966, to succeed l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of Apollo Program, effective Sept. 1. He would be succeeded by Deputy Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan. Petrone had been Saturn Project Officer and Apollo Program Manager. His awards included NASA Exceptional Service Award for direction of Apollo 7 checkout and launch and nasa Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest award, for direction of Apollo 8 checkout and launch. (NASA Release 69—124)
Sequence of five color photos of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., performing extravehicular activities on lunar surface were released by NASA. Vivid sequence showed Aldrin descending ladder to surface, walking near LM, posing near U.S. flag, deploying seismometer, and walking with Armstrong’s reflection visible in his visor. NASA also released two-part 16—mm film which showed moon fading away as LM ascended and Lm’s rendezvous with CSM in lunar orbit. It also showed Astronaut Michael Collins shaving inside CSM. (W Post, 8/1/69, A7; Witkin, NYT, 8/1/69, 16)
Dr. Mose L. Harvey in Science and Public Affairs, bulletin of atomic scientists, discussed lunar landing and U.S.-Soviet equation: “The capability of the United States to continue in space, and otherwise keep pace with the scientific-technological revolution, depends entirely on continued public faith in the ‘military-industrial complex’ and the ‘scientific and technological elite,’ if one wishes to keep using these unfortunate terms. It was only because we were able effectively to organize and use a genuine and mutually rewarding partnership between industry, universities and government that we were able to effect the moon landing and to do the other near-miraculous things we have done in space and in other fields involving advanced science and advanced technology. It is precisely on this partnership that the superiority of the American way over the Soviet way has so far rested.” IScience and Public Affairs, 9/69, 28—35)
Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov said in Pravda: “The Americans have not been entirely rational in adapting aviation control panels to the needs for space flight. The control system of the Soyuz ship, for example, seems to me to be simpler, more logical and therefore more perfect.” Feoktistov, who toured U.S. Oct. 20 to Nov. 4, congratulated his new acquaintances in U.S. on Apollo 12 lunar landing and wished them “complete success.” (AP, W Star, 11/20/69, A6)
Apollo 11 preparations were proceeding well toward launch to moon at 9:32 am edt July 16, Apollo Mission Director George H. Hage told Washington, D.C., press conference. Hypergolic propellant loading would begin June 18, wet phase of countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin July 1, and crew participation in cddt without propellants would begin July 2. After landing on moon astronauts would descend ladder to lunar surface. When Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong reached second rung of ladder, he would pull D-ring to activate camera for TV coverage of descent to lunar surface. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., would descend about 15 min after Armstrong. Entire 21/£-hr period during which astronauts explored lunar surface, set up experiments, and collected lunar samples within 100 ft of landing site would be telecast live to TV viewers on earth. (Transcript)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would be first man to step on moon, according to NASA plans for July 16 Apollo 11 mission, Apollo Program Manager George M. Low told msc press conference. Armstrong, mission commander, followed by Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., lm pilot, would leave LM and spend 2 hrs 40 min walking on lunar surface, gathering rock samples, setting up experiments, and taking pictures within 100 ft of LM. Astronauts would not go farther, Low said, because “all that we need to carry out in deploying the experiment in doing all of the activities that we have to do on the surface the first time . . . can be done within the first 50 or 100 ft from the LM and we see no reason to go any further and use up a lot of energy walking as opposed to doing those things that we would like to do. . . .” (Transcript)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1968 was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A, Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Statler Hilton Hotel ceremony in Washington, D.C. National Aeronautic Assn, award was made annually for greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. toward improving performance, efficiency, and safety of air or space vehicles, (naa News; W Star, 5/8/69, A3)
At Moscow meeting of Franco-Soviet Grand Commission, formed in 1967 to boost cooperation, France and U.S.S.R. signed protocol to join in attempt to put laser reflector on moon. French laser reflector would be launched by Soviet rocket. (Reuters, B Sun, 10/18/69)
Apollo 11 astronauts lunched with King Olav of Norway in Oslo before spending weekend at cottage of Norwegian Defense Minister Otto Greig Tidemand during world tour, (upi, W Star, 10/10/69, A9)
Washington Post published letter from Irene S. Rubin in Lampang, Thailand. Real impact of Apollo 11 success in Thailand had been “on the group of educated men who have some effect on government. Their primary reaction was not one of shared accomplishment but of shame in the gap thus dramatized between themselves and the developed countries.” Though U.S. could not hide technological capacity, “I think we should be more aware of the context into which news of the Apollo mission is received. Far from bringing the world closer together with such performances, we may be arousing bitterness and obstinacy in the misallocation of development funds.” (W Post, 8/21/69, A18)
AFSC Neuisrevieui editorial commented on Apollo 11: “If, like the early Vikings or Columbus at the shores of the New World, Amundsen at Antarctica, Hillary at the peak of Mt. Everest—our astronauts stood alone with their thoughts on unknown soil, they were not alone. With them was the invisible presence of the most extensive, highly trained, professionally competent, and thoroughly dedicated task force we have known. We in the Air Force Systems Command salute the astronauts on their accomplishment. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to their magnificent achievement.” (afsc Newsreview, 8/69, 2)
In New York news conference, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said U.S. was (in danger of going “out of the manned spaceflight business” unless more funds were provided in Federal budget for projects beyond Apollo. He said U.S.S.R. probably would surpass U.S. in space exploration in 1970s. Current Soviet space expenditure was “about 50 percent greater than ours.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/29/69, 11; NY News, 1/30/69)
Apollo 11 astronauts were welcomed by estimated 100,000 persons in Bangkok, Thailand, after flight from Dacca, Pakistan, during world tour. (C Trib, 10/29/69)
Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov said in Moscow interview: “Exploration of moon and planets is a most noble task and our generation can rightly be proud it has opened the space era. Any scientific achievement accomplished in any country in die long run becomes an achievement of world science. Space efforts of the United States and the USSR sometimes complement one another.” (upi, P Bull, 6/22/69)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham was named a director of American Systems Inc., Los Angeles electronics firm. Cunningham, lm pilot on Oct. 11—22 Apollo 7 mission, would continue duties as astronaut. (Reuters, W Post, 4/10/69)
Mascons might be excess mass deposited by water and supported by internal strength of rigid moon, jpl scientist Paul M. Muller said in address before American Physical Society in Washington, D.C. Muller was codiscoverer of mascons [see April 25]. Mascons probably were not floating on liquid lunar interior as were earth’s continents and mountains, but were held there by moon with structural strength. He illustrated with photos taken by Lunar Orbiters and Apollo 8 theory that lunar features might have been cut by primordial lunar water. (nasa Release 69-62; jpl Release 515)
Scientists at msc, monitoring seismometers left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts, recorded five-minute tremor they said could have been internal activity—moonquake—or meteoroid strike on surface. Scientists expressed concern that seismometer was overheating, probably because of damage to protective cover from lm exhaust, and might not survive heat of lunar moon. (McGehan, B Sun, 7/23/69, Al; Cohn, W Post, 7/24/69, A15)
While there was some “feeling of dejavu” at Cocoa Beach, near Apollo 12 launch site, some residents, especially local business men, believed interest in Apollo 12 was “just as keen as in any other launching,” New York Times said. Manager Hal Saunders of Cape Kennedy Hilton Hotel had said, while pace seemed calmer and more organized, people were no less excited than before. He felt there were more tourists at Cape Kennedy this week than in July bcause “fewer were scared by press reports . . . that all facilities would be jammed.” Many were seeing launch for first time “and it is still a thoroughly thrilling experience.” (Blakeslee, NYT, 11/14/69, 33)
Apollo 11 astronauts placed wreath at Christopher Columbus monument in Madrid and later met Gen. Francisco Franco and Prince Juan Carlos during world tour, (upi, W Star, 10/7/69, A6)
Jack C. Swearingen, former Chief of Program Control in msfc Apollo Applications Program Office, became Assistant Director in Science and Engineering. (Marshall Star, 11/12/69, 1)
Apollo 12 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility, arrived at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, where they were greeted by huge crowd, Marine band, civic and military officials, and hula troupe. (Rossiter, W Post, 11/29/69, A3)
Apollo 12 countdown demonstration test (cddt) began at KSC in preparation for launch to moon Nov. 14. (upi, NYT, 10/25/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received first Pere Marquette Discovery Award of silver medal from Father Marquette Tercentenary Commission of Marquette Univ. (CR, 12/4/69, E10223)
National Assn, of Government Employees President Kenneth T. Lyons told House Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee landing on moon would soon be safer than landing at most U.S. airports. “Do we have to have NASA take over from the FAA in order to get a little sense into our airport and aircraft traffic management jumble?” (Bentley, B Sun, 7/29/69, A5)	, As spacecraft neared and swung around Mars it took 24 close-up pictures from about 2,000 mi at closest point. Pictures were so sharply defined and detailed that they were shown live on TV instead of being refined and released later in photographic prints as originally planned. Pictures—enhanced by computers at JPL to clear out static, highlight images, adjust contrast and brightness, and exaggerate features—were spectacular. They showed that Mars was heavily cratered and looked very much like moon. One photo showed 11-mi-dia crater closely resembling moon’s Copernicus crater and diagonal ditch resembling lunar rifle. During closest approach, onboard TV cameras took 12 high-resolution and 12 medium-resolution pictures, stored some on board for later playback, and transmitted some immediately to ground stations for conversion to images at JPL. Three of four onboard experiments—TV to take pictures, uv spectrometer to identify and measure gases in upper atmosphere, and infrared radiometer to measure planet’s temperature—functioned satisfactorily. Only anomaly was failure in cooling of one channel on infrared spectrometer, designed to identify gases in lower Martian atmosphere, which prevented proper acquisition of data. JPL controllers temporarily lost contact with second Mariner, Mariner VII, en route to Mars, at 6:00 pm EDT July 30. Engineers speculated that spacecraft had been thrown out of alignment when struck by micrometeoroid traveling at 40 mps and had locked on planet Jupiter or another bright object. Contact with Mariner VII was regained seven hours later by switching from one antenna to another and proper attitude was restored by rolling spacecraft around until it locked on star Canopus. Although some of data being transmitted appeared to be abnormal, flyby mission was still expected to succeed. Mariner VI would continue taking pictures and play back recorded near-encounter data during final phase of mission. Data would be compared with data from Mariner VII (launched March 27), which would fly past Mars polar region Aug. 4. (nasa Release 69—26A; Sullivan, NYT, 8/1/69, 1; Auerbach, W Post, 8/1/69, Al; Lannan, W Star, 7/31/69, A5; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
Plans for proposed $l-million Neil A. Armstrong Aerospace Museum at Apollo 11 astronaut’s birthplace, Wapakoneta, Ohio, called for completion in 1970, Ohio Historical Society Director Daniel R. Porter said, (upi, W Post, 7/26/69, B7)
Montreal, Canada, Gazette commented on Apollo 11 mission: “Lyndon Johnson, more than any other man, is responsible for meeting the moon-shot deadline this week. . . .” (Am Consul, Montreal)
Pakistan President Yahya Khan sent “hearty felicitations” to President Nixon and American people on Apollo 12 success. “May your endeavor lead to increasing expansion of the bounds of human knowledge and bring forth newer possibilities of lasting peace and progress on earth.” (AIT, 11/26/69, 24)
msfc announced award of $1,712,000 contract change to Bendix Corp. for construction of three additional control computers for Apollo Telescope Mount project, to be delivered from April 1970 through July 1970. (msfc Release 69-141)
Meteor Crater, Arizona, 640-acre site containing crater three miles in circumference and 570 ft deep, was attracting 200,000 visitors annually as “finest example on earth” of what Apollo 11 astronauts found on moon. (Arline, W Star, 10/16/69, A21)
Man’s knowledge of Venus, Mars, and moon had been enormously enhanced by unmanned Mariner missions, New York Times editorial said. They were relatively inexpensive and did not risk human lives. “Nevertheless, American political leadership has been so obsessed with sending a man to the moon that unmanned probes of the planets became the stepchildren of the national space program. There were times when even the continued existence of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—the center for these unmanned flights—seemed in doubt. Now, in the new phase of American space exploration begun in the wake of Apollo IPs historic achievement, the major cost-benefit advantages of Mariner type unmanned flights need to he more fully appreciated by Washington policy makers, and even more intensively exploited than in the past, even as the manned exploration of the moon continues.” (NYT, 7/31/69, 32) During July: NASA-appointed Astronomy Missions Board recommended long-range program in space astronomy to NASA. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director, had been appointed in 1967 to propose programs for 1970s. NASA published Board’s report in November [see Nov. 9]. (Text; NASA Release 69—149; NASA ossa)
usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn., had “brought much of the universe down to pocket-size” for scientists working on Apollo 10, Henry J. Taylor wrote in 1Washington Daily News. Tests to establish spacecraft’s ability to withstand lunar environment were under way in Center’s 216,000-hp wind tunnel, which produced 8,000-mph winds and was “largest hypersonic wind tunnel in the free world.” {W News, 5/14/69, 31)
Eleven scientists and technicians joined Apollo 12 astronauts in quarantine at Lunar Receiving Laboratory after accidental exposure to lunar samples, (upi, NYT, 12/2/69, 49)
Scientist Dr. Edwin C. T. Chao, quarantined with Apollo 12 astronauts at LRL, said mound on moon photographed by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., during Apollo 12 moonwalk could be crushed rock ejected from crater, msc geologist Dr. Robin P. Brett said 1.5-lb rock among Apollo 12 samples had been formed far beneath surface and could be deepest piece of lunar material man had yet studied, (upi, NYT, 12/4/69, 17)
Soviet astronomer Dr. Nikolay A. Kozyrev had revealed detection by Pulkovo Observatory of volcanic activity on moon, Space Business Daily reported. Two spectrograms of Aristarchus crater’s western side taken April I had shown “an unusual red spot of approximately 102 kilometers [63.4 mi]” which was “result of the emission of gases— molecular nitrogen and cyanogen.” Emissions, which had occurred one day after earthquakes in U.A.R. and Japan, affirmed link between tectonic phenomena on earth and moon and showed “that the moon had ‘responded’ to this terrestrial phenomenon.” (SBD, 5/15/69, 67)
Moon was gray and colorless, rather than orange from oxidation of ferrous oxide in rocks by photolytically liberated oxygen, ucla geophysicist Dr. Willard F. Libby noted in Science. He suggested reason “lies in the solar wind’s bringing in atomic hydrogen to replace that lost by the photolytic decomposition of water vapor.” (Science, 12/12/69, 1437-8)
New York Times editorial: “Apollo 12 must not be taken for granted. It is another extremely important step in man’s exploration of earth’s natural satellite, a venture accompanied by great risk yet promising large rewards in additional knowledge. The mere fact that the Apollo 12 astronauts are scheduled to spend almost three times as long walking on the moon as their predecessors and to bring back to earth part of Surveyor 3—which landed in 1967—emphasizes how much more complex and ambitious this mission is.” Second moon landing might seem less glamorous than first, “but it requires great bravery and skill from all involved, and, if successful, could move lunar science ahead substantially.” (NYT, 11/9/69, 14)
Estimated 1.5 million persons lined streets of Bombay, India, to welcome Apollo 11 astronauts. It was largest reception given to astronauts and wives during 22-nation tour. (AP, B Sun, 10/27/69, A3)
Former NASA Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), received Distinguished Service Medal from Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in Pentagon ceremonies. Award was for achievements with NASA from December 1964 to August 1969. Gen. Phillips had left NASA to become commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) in Los Angeles. (AFJ, 9/27/69, 8)
Space Task Group presented report The Post-Apollo Space Program: Directions for the Future to President Nixon at White House. It recommended basic goal of balanced manned and unmanned space program conducted for all mankind, with emphasis on increased utilization of space capabilities for services to man through expanded space applications program; enhancement of U.S. defense posture for world peace and security through exploitation of space techniques for military missions; continuing strong program of lunar and planetary exploration, astronomy, physics, and earth and life sciences; development of new systems and technology for space operations, emphasizing commonality, reusability, and economy through development of new space transportation capability and space station modules; and promotion of world community through program of broad international participation and cooperation. As focus for development of new capability, Task Group recommended U.S. accept long-range goal of manned planetary exploration with manned Mars mission before end of century. Activities leading to goal should include initial concentration on exploiting existing capability and developing new one while maintaining program balance within available resources; operational phase using new systems and capabilities in earth-moon space, with men living and working in that environment for extended periods; and manned exploration missions out of earth-moon space, using experience of earlier two phases. Schedule and budgetary implications of phases were subject to Presidential choice, with detailed program to be determined in normal annual budget and program review. Report outlined three possible NASA programs for manned Mars landing before century’s end. Option I would launch manned mission in mid-1980s and would establish orbiting lunar station, 50-man earthorbiting space base, and lunar surface base. Funding would rise from current $4-billion level to $8- to $10-billion level in 1980. Decision to proceed with development of space station, earth-to-orbit shuttle, and space tug would be required in FY 1971. Option II would include Mars mission launch in 1986, allowing for evaluation of unmanned Mars mission results before final designation of landing date and require about $8-billion maximum annual expenditure in early 1980s. Option III would include initial development of space station and reusable shuttles, as in Options I and II, but would defer decision on manned Mars landing date while maintaining goal of after 1980 but before close of century. Concurrent development of space transportation system and modular space stations would require rise in 1976 annual expenditures to $5.7 billion, while their development in series would entail $4- to $5-billion funding level. Recommended DOD options were: (A) program of full military space capability in case of overt threat to national security, (B) development of efforts to counter known and accepted projections of security threat and increase in development activities if threat increased, and (C) program of lower level system deployment with technology and support effort necessary for contingency planning on assumption that lessening of world tensions would reduce emphasis on national defense. At White House briefing following presentation, press secretary Ronald L. Ziegler said President Nixon had concurred in Task Group’s rejection of two other, extreme space programs, one to land men on Mars as soon as possible, regardless of cost, and one to eliminate manned flight program after completion of Apollo. He did not know when President would make decision on course to follow, but budgetary considerations would be major factor. (Text; PD, 9/22/69, 1291; NYT, 9/16/69, 1)
LaRC had awarded 10-mo, $155,000 feasibility study contract to North American Rockwell Corp. to design two-man, lunar emergency, escape-to-orbit vehicle which could be carried aboard LM on Apollo missions. (SBD, 3/27/69, 125; nar Skywriter, 4/4/69, 1)
In Look, science writer Arthur C. Clarke, Nobel Prize nuclear physicist Dr. Isidor I. Rabi, novelist C. P. Snow, and Catholic theologian Prof. Leslie Dewart wrote personal reactions to Apollo 8 mission. Clarke said: “The Apollo 8 mission marks one of those rare turning points in human history after which nothing will ever be the same again. The immense technical achievement is already obvious to every one and has been universally praised; yet the psychological impact may be even more important and will take some time to make itself fully felt. We no longer live in the world which existed before Christmas 1968. It has passed away as irrevocably as the earth-centered universe of the Middle Ages.” Dr. Rabi said: “It would be misleading to talk of the events that led to the journey of Apollo 8 in terms of the vast sums of money that are involved, even though it cost several times as much as the development of the first atomic bomb. What is more important and more impressive is that Apollo 8 represents the cooperation of hundreds of thousands of people over a period of years in a gigantic effort with no clearly set practical goals, except perhaps the profound desire of mankind to prove to itself that it had the knowledge and the ability to overcome its earthbound limitations.” Prof. Dewart said: “Man has taken his first, halting steps into the cosmos beyond that earthly world in which he was born and within which he had always lived. The impact of Apollo 8 in other areas of human experience is obvious; in religion, it is much less immediately evident. And yet, in the end, it may be more significant for the development of man’s religious consciousness.” {Look, 2/4/69, 72—8)
Apollo 9, carrying Astronauts James M. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39A at 11:00 am est Feb. 28, NASA announced. The 10-day earth orbital mission would include simulated translunar insertion; CSM separation, transposition, and docking with LM; onboard LM systems evaluation; extravehicular maneuvers between lm and CM; manned LM active rendezvous; and six sps burns, (nasa Release 69—3)
Apollo 11 astronauts and wives arrived in Mexico City for start of 39-day tour of 22 countries [see Sept. 19]. (AP, B Sun, 9/30/69, Al)
London Times published four-page space supplement On the Edge of the Moon. Man had been traveling to moon for centuries in transport which was “romantic, ingenious, foolish and brilliant: chariots of swans, giant guns, artificial clouds and enormous metal springs; even rockets.” Journeys, “dreams that ranged between ludicrous fantasy and prophetic imagination,” had not been recorded much before second century A.D. “But later, as writers discovered science fiction and the appetite men had for it, the stories proliferated.” At times, either by luck, reasoning, knowledge of science, or uncanny inspiration, they foresaw details of voyages like Apollo 10’s and that planned for next month.” Article traced 1,800 yrs of space travel “from dream to reality.” Supplement also described stage sequences planned for NASA’s lunar landing, specifications of lunar module and its achievements, data which scientists hoped to extract from lunar explorations, and possible construction of lunar observatory. Costs of observatory would be justified “only as part of a space programme much larger than what is envisaged for the immediate future, and too large, perhaps, for the resources of any one nation.” (London Times, 6/3/69, I—IV) June 3—5: NASA held Spacemobile Conference in Washington, D.C., to familiarize all personnel with Vice President’s Summer Space Education Program for the Cities conducted by NASA in cooperation with President’s Council on Youth Opportunity. (Program)
Univ. of Texas astronomers reported second unsuccessful attempt to bounce laser beam off reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. McDonald Observatory Director, Dr. Harlan Smith, said he expected eventual success. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69, A8)
New York weathermen were being deluged with calls blaming 10 days of rain and overcast weather in northeastern U.S. on Apollo 11, Associated Press said, wcbs radio news meteorologist Dr. Robert Harris had said, “We’ve had an abundance of calls from all sorts of people who are absolutely certain, through their Bible studies, that the Lord has taken the sun away from us.” (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69, A6)
While spaceborne, Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt was selected to receive Ancient Order of Hibernians’ John F. Kennedy Medal for National Civic Service. Award would be presented by Irish-descent society in Newark, N.J., May 10. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/10/69, Al; W Post, 3/10/69, A5)
Economist commented on lunar investigation: “Scientists, unlike engineers, are not at this stage interested in whether the moon can be made habitable; but this, rather than its age, or peculiarities of its composition, is what the astronauts went out to the moon to find. The results are more encouraging than anyone but the confirmed star gazers could have hoped. Space is not unfriendly; nor is the moon, superficially barren though it looks. What we need are more assurances about sources of water which space planners continue to be convinced is trapped in, and can be extracted from, the rocks. Also more data on those surprising experiments where plants have thrived on moon soil. . . . And some idea about whether it will be possible to protect man from ultraviolet radiation up there, without having to put him in a protective pressure suit.” (Economist, 9/20/69, 17)
Press in U.S. and around the world underscored Apollo IPs landing on moon and man’s first steps on another planet. St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “There is no doubt that the United States should continue to support a substantial spacefaring program. Anything else would be a denial of the scientific spirit of the century and the qualities that have made America what it is. But its scope should be measured by findings and probabilities—and one other factor. Future spacefaring ought to be a co-operative effort of all nations able to participate, with the benefits to be shared by all.” (St. Louis P—D, 7/20/69) Washington Sunday Star: “A creature that can stand where Armstrong and Aldrin stand tonight—that can, in the future, move among the spheres and literally explore new worlds ... is unlikely to give up on the hard task of perfecting himself and his life in his natural environment on earth. The God who brought him thus far from a blob of squirming protoplasm ... is unlikely ... to let man blow it all now. Here . . . must be the answer to the national debate as to whether we go ahead in space, or whether we tend to our knitting at home. We are bound to do both. . . . The progressive expansion of the physical and spiritual domain of man inevitably will intensify our determination and ability, in concert with other nations, to build a home world where hunger, fear and violence no longer have a place.” (W Star, 7/20/69, Gl) William Hines in Washington Sunday Star: “One cannot question the majesty of conception or magnitude of effort that made Apollo 11 possible.” But one could ask, “Is this trip really necessary?” One saw in Apollo “that fundamental failing called hubris, which got so many protagonists into hot water in the old Greek mythology. Hubris in English is usually taken to mean prideful arrogance; in ancient Greek the word meant simple insolence. The Apollo enthusiast rejects the concept of hubris; he says we go to the moon not because we are arrogant, but because we are driven, and thereby implicitly rejects the concept of free will and substitutes sappiness for sassiness. The majority asks, ‘But if we didn’t go, what?’ and the minority responds, ‘If we didn’t go, so what?’” (W Star, 7/20/69, G2) Humorist Art Buchwald in Washington Post: “Sometimes one gets the feeling that the right hand germs in the Government don’t know what the left hand germs are doing. This was brought home to me . . . when I read about the millions of dollars that were being spent to see that the astronauts did not bring back a single germ from the moon. Unfortunately, across the page from that story was another that the Army was going ahead with open air testing of nerve gases and germ warfare.” (W Post, 7/20/69, B6) Los Angeles Herald-Examiner: “America’s moon program has benefited all mankind. It has brought better color television, water purification at less cost, new paints and plastics, improved weather forecasting, medicine, respirators, walkers for the handicapped, laser surgery, world-wide communications, new transportation systems, earthquake prediction system and solar power. . . . The Mars goal should bring benefits to all mankind even greater than the tremendous contributions of the moon program.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/20/69) Baltimore Sun: “. . . it is still almost incredible that in the afternoon of a Sunday on earth two humans found themselves within a vehicle resting on the surface of the moon. Nothing could quite prepare one’s mind for that, or for the subsequent moment of climax, the actual setting of a human foot on the substance of our barren satellite. One of the mysteries that had engaged the infinitely inquisitive mind of man is now made tangible. Others remain beyond our planet and upon it.” (B Sun, 7/21/69, A16) Chicago Daily News: “These have been moments to savor—moments in which uncounted millions have shared the immediacy of a turning point in history. This time there was no lapse of weeks or months, waiting for the event to be confirmed. We were all there, bound together by the miracle of communication that intertwined all the other miracles of technology that marked man’s first step on a celestial body.” (C Daily News, 7/21/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Superlatives pale before the magnificence of the achievement. . . . but how many years before the astounding performance of Armstrong and Aldrin will seem as primitive as the pioneering work of the Wright brothers?” (MJ, 7/21/69, 14) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Man’s store of scientific knowledge will be vastly enriched by the landing on the moon. In no other single event in history has there been greater opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the universe.” (Plain Dealer, 7/21/69) London Daily Sketch: “America’s moon triumph offers this old world’s bickering and jealous people a parable of hope.” (B Sun, 7/22/69, Al) Montreal Star: “The deepest hope for a world starved for some form of symbolism, of an attempt at harmony in place of selfishness and narrow nationalism, came from the astronauts,” CFOX Radio, Montreal, broadcast. “Eliminate war? Yes! Eliminate poverty? Yes! But the exploration of space will help us, not impede us, in reaching these goals.” (Am Consul, Montreal) Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden (principal organ of Social Democratic Party): “No Soviet politician has ever before used such conciliatory tones toward the U.S.A. as did Foreign Minister Gromyko recently in his speech before the Supreme Soviet. . . . This Russian position seems generally to be based on fears of a confrontation with China. . . . One of the side effects can be increased Russian interest in broader scientific cooperation in space research. Nothing else could be better designed for global cooperation, since nothing else gives us clearer testimony that we live in one world.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Into the New Realm,” exhibit of documentary history of U.S. Government in space from early balloon ascensions to origination of Apollo program, opened at National Archives in Washington, D.C. Exhibit included original of National Space Act of 1958, which created NASA, and copies of correspondence on establishment of U.S. space program from President Eisenhower; President Kennedy; first NASA Adminis
Aquanauts Dr. Larry Hallanger, Dr. David Youngblood, Wally Jenkins, and Richard A. Waller had successfully completed two-day experiment in first self-contained undersea laboratory 50 ft below Atlantic near Riviera Beach, Fla., Associated Press reported. Hydro-Lab, 16 ft long and 8 ft in diameter, supplied its own electricity from fuel cell similar to cell used for power in Apollo spacecraft. It was built by Perry Oceanographies, Inc. (W Star, 10/20/69, A3)
Apollo 11 was producing noticeable effect on business and consumer products, Washington Post said. Snoopy the Astronaut dolls were selling out; sales of color TV sets had risen in some stores; and sales of “moon maps and globes, as well as toy rocket ships and lunar exploration vehicles had also lifted skyward.” Two Washington, D.C., department stores were offering Japanese telescopes ranging from $19.99 to $1,000.00. One toy store manager said sales of space-related toys had jumped 70% or 80% in two months. Rockets propelled by solid-fuel inserts sold for $1.50 to $5.00 complete with recovery parachute. One Washington store had sold out supply of $10 spacesuits. Demand for rental of color TV sets in Washington area had been “terrific,” according to area dealer. (Cushing, W Post, 7/16/69, Dll)
ksc announced selection of Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, to receive 1969 Career Service Award of National Civil Service League at Washington, D.C., banquet June 13. Citation said: “The development of Complex 39, the installation from which the Apollo program launches take place, is the crowning achievement of Dr. Kurt H. Debus’ career. His leadership was pivotal in both the design and construction of the famed Apollo launch complex. Further, he has been responsible for many of the technical advances in launch technology, and for the formation of the government-industry launch team which has carried out more than 150 successful launches, including several notable firsts.” Award—consisting of $1,000, inscribed gold watch, and citation—was one of most prestigious for which civil service career employees were eligible. Also among 10 selected was George S. Moore, Associate Administrator for Operations, FAA, for “an extraordinary record in the development of up to date methods of evaluation of aircraft worthiness.” (ksc Release 154-69; W Star, 4/30/69, A2)
Successful Apollo 11 mission was expected to spur reservations on first lunar passenger flight, Washington Evening Star said. Before launch Pan American World Airways held 30,000 reservations and Trans World Airlines, 5,000. Pan Am spokesman said rush began after film “2001: a Space Odyssey” was first shown in 1968. In letters acknowledging reservations, Pan Am was saying, “Starting date of service is not yet known. Equipment and route will, probably, be subject to government approvals.” twa was saying, “We will be in contact with you again, as soon as technological advances develop to the point where we can project departure date.” (W Star, 7/23/69, A7)
Apollo 12 congratulatory telegrams at msc suggested “crew members of Apollo 12 will not be lacking their own fan club,” Washington Post article said. Meanwhile, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 8 crew continued to receive fan mail. Biggest fans of space program appeared to be “little children and supporters of prayers in outer space.” (Lardner, W Post, 11/22/69, A6)
Apollo Program Management: Staff Study was submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. It identified key concepts contributing to successful evolution of NASA-industry management team and areas where additional studies would be useful in application of its expertise. Key factors included clear definition of primary objective, monitoring and auditing systems that allowed vertical and horizontal information flow, refinement in program-control techniques using incentive contracts, correlation and definition of multiple-program interfaces by use of systems-oriented staff groups, real-time and flexible management reporting system, and balance between governmental in-house capability and industrial capability. (Text)
Christian Science Monitor editorial asked, “Would it not he possible, as America’s eventual space aim, to see the moon treated much as Antarctica today is treated?” That is “as a ‘continent’ where nationality does not play a significant role. There could be a research station on the moon, manned the year around—not merely by Americans but by invitation to the scientists and technicians of other interested nations.” (■CSM, 1/7/69)
Apollo 12 astronauts and wives attended Sunday services at White House and later were guests at informal dinner given by President and Mrs. Nixon. They stayed overnight at White House. {PD, 12/22/69, 1763; AP, B Sun, 12/22/69, A3)
Proximity of probable date of lunar landing to date of arrival of Mariner VI and VII cameras near Mars surface would provide U.S. TV viewers with “double space feature,” NASA said. Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, credited feat to advances in electronics through which streams of signals could be returned from moon and from Mars into tracking centers and switching points on earth, thence via comsats into TV networks throughout globe. Apollo 11 mission would include eight color telecasts from spacecraft. Lunar telecasts would be black and white since lm would lack power for color TV. Mars telecasts from Mariner VI would produce 50 photos; Mariner VII would deliver 91. Best resolution from closeup would be 900 ft; it had been 2 mi in 1965 Mariner IV photos and was 100 mi by best optical means from earth, (nasa Release 69-831)
In Life, Hugh Sidey said: “It was just exactly eight years ago that John Kennedy set the moon goal and called the nation into ‘the exciting adventure of space.’ There have been great space moments in these years, but they have faded rather rapidly as the earth problems pressed in. Now there is a lasting excitement which will build to the big launch [Apollo 11] this summer and probably will linger for months or years. . . . History suggests that man, despite his obvious and obsessive miseries, craves something to lift him beyond himself. War too often has been one outlet. Americans in particular have needed a quest, across the mountains or the continent, into the sky and the sea, to the poles or inside the atom.” This pointed up “classic dilemma in presidential leadership.” Did national pride in space achievement and its technological and military benefits mean more to nation than plans for aid to education, welfare programs, or feeding the hungry? “It could be that the world’s ills are not too great to allow such dreams. It could also be that Americans cannot live without them.” (Life, 6/6/69, 4)	•
At LeRC technical conference on plasmas and magnetic fields, LeRC Electromagnetic Propulsion Div. Chief Wolfgang E. Moeckel said, “Man has reached the Moon and there is now some talk about going to the stars, but we are not yet ready with propulsion systems that are suitable for exploring our own solar system.” Manned flights to distant planets would become reasonable only with advanced nuclear propulsion systems. Thermonuclear fusion rocket, if feasible, could reduce manned Mars mission to four to five months and journey to Jupiter or Saturn to under three years. Solar electric rockets looked promising for unmanned probes to planets as remote as Jupiter. (LeRC Release 69-58; LeRC pao)
msfc announced $48,142,823 modification to contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. to provide for 14-mo extension of S—II program as part of overall Apollo program stretchout. S—II was 2nd stage for three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle. MSFC also announced $1,896,916 modification to Apollo Applications program contract for further Harvard College R&D of modified uv scanning spectrometer to fly in space on Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), (msfc Releases 69—76, 69—77)
Astronaut promotion policy seemed “certain to discomfit someone after the end of Apollo 12 no matter whether it’s followed or ignored,” Washington Post said. President Johnson had decreed in 1965 that each military astronaut would get one spot promotion after his first space flight. Apollo 12 commander Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., and cm pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had both received promotions to commander, usn. Apollo 12 LM Pilot Alan L. Bean, also commander, USN, now rated promotion to captain, but was junior crewman in age, service in grade, and space experience. Bean promotion might “irritate” others but would be fair to Bean. Promotion for all three astronauts would be “unfair to other astronauts who have flown twice or three times and only promoted once.” President Nixon might have to make “sticky” decision. (W Post, 11/21/69, A17)
Space/Aeronautics described 1969 as U.S.S.R.’s “most active and most frustrating” year in space. “In the fall of 1968 it was possible to believe . . . that the Soviet Union might fly men around the moon before the United States. A year later it was possible to ask: ‘Where are the Russians?’” Most failures were in attempts to prepare man’s way to moon. “The inglorious performance of Luna 15, just as America was landing men on the lunar surface, could almost be called the least of Russia’s lunar problems. By far the worst . . . must be repeated technical troubles with the long-awaited ‘super booster,’ the rough equivalent of Saturn 5. If semi-official rumors are to be accepted as accurate, the Russian vehicle is in a great deal of difficulty. “The . . . launchings of Soyuz 6, 7, and 8 were impressive in many ways—but Western officials still counted the group flight as a disappointment to the Russians. . . . The most skeptical Western estimates now are that the Russians may have abandoned the big booster, that they will not land men on the moon before 1972 . . . and that no large Soviet station will be assembled in orbit before the last half of the ’70s.” {Space/Aeronautics, 12/69, 24—6)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna XV (launched July 13) had landed on moon at 6:45 pm Moscow time (11:45 am EDT) and had ended its work, Tass announced. Spacecraft had “reached the moon’s surface in the preset area” after 52 revolutions around moon and 86 communications sessions during which “the work of the new systems of the station was checked, the parameters of the trajectory of the movement was measured, and scientific research was conducted.” Tass said Luna XV had demonstrated capability to land on various areas of lunar surface by changing selenocentric orbit and that mission had yielded important data on spacecraft systems. Sir Bernard Lovell, Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, said signals from spacecraft had ended suddenly and estimated craft might have landed in Sea of Crises, about 500 mi from Sea of Tranquility. “If we don’t get any more signals, we will assume it crash-landed. But we don’t make that assumption at the moment.” (Gwertz-man, NYT, 7/22/69, 1, 29)
TOR—shok energy-absorbing system designed for Apollo program was being installed by State Highway Commission of Kansas along major arteries in and about Topeka, Republic Steel Corp. announced. Developed by Ara, Inc., system used multiple-telescoping, lightweight, high-strength steel tubing to attach guardrail to its mounting posts, concrete abutments, or other roadside objects. When car struck guardrail, most of impact force was transmitted from rail to tor—shoks, rings that absorbed shock by turning inside out. (Republic Steel Release R—1053)
Pride Inc. Operations Director Marion Barry called on black community to work during July 21 National Day of Participation declared by President Nixon in honor of Apollo 11 lunar landing. During Washington press conference he said, “Why should blacks rejoice when two white Americans land on the moon when white America’s money and technology have not even reached” the inner city? “Why should blacks celebrate Monday . . . when President Nixon didn’t feel that Dr. Martin Luther King’s assassination deserved to he observed?” (Paka, W Post, 7/19/69, A9)
U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov would arrive in New York Oct. 20 to begin two-week visit to U.S. as guests of astronauts, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman announced. He had extended invitation during his July tour of U.S.S.R. Beregovoy had flown Soyuz 111 mission, Oct. 26—30, 1968; Feoktistov was scientist aboard Oct. 12, 1964, Voskhod I flight. Itinerary was expected to include msc, Grand Canyon, California, Detroit, and Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 69-141; AP, W Star, 10/21/69)
In Aviation Week Robert Hotz wrote: “There need be no tears shed over the passing of the U.S. Air Force manned orbiting laboratory (mol).” Program “has been so stretched out by funding cuts and low keyed management that its technology has become obsolete and its costs astronomical. It is a classic example of what happens to a major technical development program that is not permitted to pursue its goals at the maximum pace possible. In contrast, the icbm development and Apollo lunar landing programs have proved what can be achieved in a relatively short period at relatively economical funding.” (Av Wk, 6/30/69) During June: nasa’s plans for two three-planet Grand Tours—8- to 11-yr missions to outer planets—were described by Jpl scientist James E. Long in Astronautics and Aeronautics. Envisioning 1,200-lb spacecraft launched by Titan-Centaur, Long described missions that had been identified and analyzed: four-planet missions, including Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, from 1976 to 1979 (earth-launch dates), with 1977 and 1978 giving best combination of closest-approach altitude, flight time, and launch energy; three-planet missions to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto from 1976 to 1979, with 1977 and 1978 preferred; and three-planet missions to Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune from 1977 to 1980. Long said, “The fortuitous concurrence of mission technology and experience suitable for the challenges of missions to the outer planets, with a unique outer-planet alignment in the 1976—80 period, should make exploration of these planets, as a class, a high-priority candidate for program support.” {A&A, 6/69, 32—47; nasa Release 69-84)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Apollo 9 mission: “In the first Apollo launchings, it was the taming of sheer, brute power that awed the on-looker. “At the moment of ignition, it was not what lay beyond the astronauts that gripped the millions watching TV. It was the question whether the huge Saturn V booster would respond to command, whether it would hurl the astronauts into orbit or collapse, toppling slowly into a furnace of its own making. “But with yesterday’s flawless Apollo 9 launch, the Saturn V booster seemed to emerge as a proven piece of space hardware. The preoccupation now is with the complexity, sophistication, the intricate workings of the most complicated of the several machines the United States has put together for the conquest of the moon. ... In its sophistication and vulnerability, [the LM] is ... an extension of man himself.” (P Bull, 3/4/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and 20 otjier persons quarantined in Lunar Receiving Laboratory were released shortly after 9:00 pm cdt—four hours earlier than planned. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, Msc, said astronauts, who had been confined since July 24, showed no signs of any possible infection from exposure to moon. He cautioned that astronauts might become ill after release— not from lunar contamination, but from earth organisms to which they were highly susceptible after long period of isolation. Report on health of persons under quarantine would be presented by NASA Aug. 11 to Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, which had approved early release. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/11/69, Al; AP, W Post, 8/10/69, A7) _
Baltimore Sun noted Apollo 10’s first day in space enabled men to be “as near as they will ever come to being in two places simultaneously— there in their own living rooms with their television sets before them and, at the same moment more than 22,000 miles away, observing the planet on which they live. “What we saw with such marvelous cold clarity was, of course, a round and mottled swirl of blue, brown and white, a small fragment of the cosmos which until less than a decade ago had fixed absolute limits upon all of mankind’s history. Now suddenly we saw it as a unity, a whole, as the habitation common to all of us, just as it would be seen by a non-human visitor approaching it as the astronauts are approaching the moon, silent, mysterious and seemingly lifeless and motionless. The observer had to remind himself that this was indeed the earth he knew. .. .” (B Sun, 5/20/69)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory held press conference on Apollo 12 lunar samples and expressed surprise at samples’ differences from rocks retrieved by Apollo 11. Preliminary examination of samples showed they were crystalline and larger than anticipated. Dr. Jeffrey L. Warner, MSC geologist, said rocks returned by Apollo 11 contained up to 12% titanium oxide, but those from Apollo 12 contained only about 2%—amount consistent with terrestrial rocks. He said geologists were very puzzled by absence of breccia rocks in Apollo 12 samples because 75% of rocks from Apollo 11 were breccia. Crystalline rocks were similar to volcanic rocks found by Apollo 11, but some of Apollo 12 rocks were coated with glass and had protruding crystals up to 2% in long. (Rossiter, W Post, 11/29/69, A3; W Star, 11/29/69, Al)
National and international press commented on successful completion of Apollo 11 mission: Washington Post: “It has been eight days of triumph for America, eight days of triumph for mankind. Much more will undoubtedly follow as the secrets of space bow to the advances of science. But it is enough now—more than enough for an entire lifetime when you think about it—to have seen the first men walk on the moon and then, less than four days later, to welcome them back home safely.” (W Post, 7/25/69) New York Times: “For the first time in history, men have gone from this earth to another celestial body, landed there and returned'home, . even bringing back with them extraterrestrial matter. Not since the human race evolved has there been a comparable event, nor one so capable of lifting all mankind’s horizons, dreams and aspirations. What was fantasy to preceding generations is now accomplished fact. The achievement will be remembered so long as civilization survives.” Of President Nixon’s round the world tour, Times said: “The spectacular success of Apollo 11 has vastly increased good feeling toward the United States throughout the world. The President obviously wants to capitalize on it both for foreign and domestic political purposes.” {NYT, 7/25/69, 46) Cleveland, Ohio, Plain Dealer: Apollo 11 mission “closes out one aspect of the exploration program but opens wide the door of what can be an almost endless journey. . . . Although the Apollo program is not complete, the lure of Mars, 5 million miles away, grows in bold anticipation of the future. ... the race has only just begun.” (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 7/25/69) Newport News, Va., Times Herald: “All of the money poured into the space program would appear justified if one of the side products was the kind of cooperation [with the U.S.S.R.] now possible.” (Newport News Times Herald, 7/25/69) El Rai El Amm, Khartoum, Sudan: “America achieved a victory for the human mind by sending the first man from the earth to the moon. . . . But America, the great power that achieved this astonishing big success, must stop doing things that are far below these standards.” (Am Embassy, Khartoum) Somali News, Mogadiscio, Somali: “It is true that the responsibility for the Apollo-Eleven is entirely American, but the message left behind on the moon for posterity by the astronauts . . . acknowledges the universal aspect of such a feat. We think ... of those courageous astronauts not... as Americans but as worthy representatives of the human race on whose total achievement they relied in carrying out their mighty and splendid mission.” (Am Embassy, Mogadiscio)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family flew from New York for nine-day tour of U.S.S.R. Institute for Soviet-American Relations in Moscow had extended invitation through Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. Itinerary included Moscow, Leningrad, Novosibirsk, and Crimea. {W Post, 7/1/69, A15; AP, W Star, 7/1/69, A4)
Univ. of Iowa astronomers Dr. James A. Van Allen and Dr. Richard S. Yeh reported in Science that abstract measurements made by lunar orbiting Explorer XXXV during 1967—68 showed it unlikely that alpha-particle emissivity of moon was greater than 0.064 per square cm per sec per steradian. And it was extremely unlikely it was greater than 0.128. (Values were 0.1 and 0.2 of 1966 provisional estimates by H. W. Kraner and others.) Result implied abundance of uranium-238 in outer crust of moon was much less than typical of earth’s lithosphere, though it was consistent with abundance of uranium-238 in terrestrial basalt cr in chondritic meteorites. (Science, 10/17/69,
Soviet scientist Dr. Valery A. Krasheninnikev and academician Dr. Aleksandr P. Lisitzin had returned to San Diego from 55 days with U.S. Deep Sea Drilling Project aboard drilling ship Glomar Challenger convinced their findings were “more important to man than the samples from the moon,” Associated Press reported. Concentrated drilling between Honolulu and Guam had produced rocks and sedimentary cores showing microorganisms in perfect state of preservation. They might provide history of earth’s creation. Project was cooperative venture of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Lamont Geological Observatory of Columbia Univ., Univ. of Miami Institute of Marine Science, and Univ. of Washington. [NYT, 8/10/69, 45)
Washington Post Apollo 12 editorial: “Although it will be weeks or months before we know what the harvest of knowledge from this trip has been, the first impression is that the harvest has been a rich one. The astronauts accomplished everything they had been asked to do and more. The pinpoint landing indicates that the navigational problems are not nearly as great as once thought, clearing the way for future astronauts to go precisely where the scientists want them to. The ease with which Mr. Conrad and Mr. Bean functioned on the moon’s surface indicates that their successors will be able to range farther afield and undertake more complicated assignments. Even the accidental fall of Pete Conrad is a plus. It cuts down the fear that a fall would be extremely serious and points out . . . that man may be more adaptable to alien conditions than he dreams.” (W Post, 11/25/69, A20)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of nasc, issued statement on Administration’s attitude toward space program: “In response to those who would denigrate our space effort, I think it is clear that this Administration has already demonstrated its belief in the strength and potential of America’s space program.” Administration was taking steps to “evaluate the costs and alternatives available to us in extending the program once man has been placed on the moon and returns.” (AP, W Post, 5/22/69, A5)
Apollo passive seismic experiment, part of extravehicular activity to be performed by Apollo 11 astronauts on moon, was described in Science as “the most exciting experiment in seismology.” Dr. G. Latham and Dr. M. Ewing of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Dr. F. Press of mit, and Dr. G. Sutton of Univ. of Hawaii explained objective was to detect naturally occurring seismic events on lunar surface through early Apollo scientific experiment package (easep) planted on moon. Package weighed 105 lbs and would transmit data to earth one year (or maximum two years), during lunar days because its solar cell panels required illumination to provide power. Complete Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep), containing at least three additional experiments for measurements of solar wind and magnetic field, would be included on Apollo 12 for day and night operation. In Apollo 11 experiment astronaut would remove instrument from lm to smoothest area within 6.6—9.8 ft (20—30 m) of lm, unfold solar panels, adjust package level to within 5°, orient it with azimuth for maximum illumination of solar panels, and aim antenna toward earth. MSC would issue commands to uncage and level seismometers and select proper gain. Expected sources of lunar seismic activity included several hundred monthly moonquakes, thermal stresses produced by rapid temperature variations at surface; tidal stresses exerted by earth and sun; and meteoroid impacts. By end of Apollo program, scientists hoped to have achieved crude curves of travel time for body and surface waves and beginning of seismicity map of moon. During post-Apollo period, seismologists wanted to achieve wider distribution of detectors to map seismically active belts in greater detail; study mechanisms of energy release; lower minimum detectable ground motion of individual seismometer; and improve performance of long-period seismometer systems at ultralong-period end of spectrum for recording surface waves from moonquakes, free oscillations of moon, and lunar tides. (Science, 7/18/69, 241—50)
Norwegian explorer Thor Heyerdahl had rejected NASA request to install communications equipment aboard his papyrus boat for July hookup between Apollo 11 and Heyerdahl’s voyage into the past, his navigator, Norman Baker, said. Also rejected, Baker said, was request to install satellite-controlled navigation system on replica of 4,700-yr-old vessel in which Heyerdahl hoped to reach Mexico from Morocco in four months, to reinforce theory that Egyptian adventurers reached Americas more than 2,500 yrs before Christ. Heyerdahl felt craft could not safely carry 400-lb communications equipment load. He had refused satellite navigation system because Egyptians had managed without navigational aids. (AP, W Post, 5/19/69, A15)
In New York Times Magazine, Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, physicist, wrote: “. . . I would urge that we alter the U.S. space program as follows: First, make a firm decision to terminate the manned space program soon after the initial lunar landing. ... I would reserve the remaining Apollo craft for future unmanned missions to the planets and I would mothball the single-purpose manned space flight facilities. At the same time, I would continue a n.a.S.a. program of long-range space development aimed at advanced modes of propulsion, compact energy sources and improved long-distance communication. High priority would be assigned to the development of nuclear energy both for propulsion and for on-board power. “Second, greatly expand n.a.s.a.’s present program for exploiting applications of space science and technology. The potential of satellites for communications . . . needs to be enhanced by the development of new techniques. It should not be too difficult to develop orbital systems for the control of intercontinental air traffic. Perhaps the greatest benefits from satellites are to be expected in the survey and evaluation of earth resources, such as underground water, mineral deposits and plant-forest cover. . . . “Third, establish a high priority within n.a.S.a. for fundamental research using unmanned space vehicles ... 10 to 20 years in duration and . . . aimed at finding out more about our planet, the sun and the rest of the solar system. The most expensive—and probably the most dramatic—of these projects would be the planetary probes designed to fly by, orbit or land on the nearby planets.” (NYT, 2/2/69, 32—40)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Apollo 12 Mission Director, described Apollo 12 plans to press at NASA Hq. [see Oct. 2]. Mission would be launched toward moon at 11:22 am est Nov. 14, carrying Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Alan L. Bean (lm pilot), and Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (cm pilot). Primary objectives would be to perform selenological inspection, survey and sample mare area, deploy Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), develop techniques for point landing capability, and photograph candidate landing sites. Basic flight plan would be similar to one for Apollo 11 (July 16—24) with modifications to improve landing accuracy and increase data return. Launch azimuth had been narrowed from 72°—108° for Apollo 11 to 72°—96° for Apollo 12 and trajectory had been changed from free-return to hybrid. Lunar orbit stay time for Apollo 12 would be increased from 59.6 hrs for Apollo 11 to 89 hrs; lunar surface stay time, from 21.6 hrs to 31.5 hrs; EVA from one 2-hr 32-min period to two 3-hr 30-min periods; and total mission time, from 195.3 hrs to 244.7 hrs. LM sleeping arrangements would be improved with hammocks, color TV if repaired by launch date would be used on surface, and LM ascent stage would be crashed onto lunar surface near seismometer after ascent from moon and redocking. To increase navigational accuracy crew would avoid waste and water dumps 10 hrs before landing to prevent thrust that might carry them off course, would approach moon upside-down so landing radar would be operational during entire landing phase, and would speed up descent to conserve fuel at landing. (Transcript)
In Washington Evening Star William Hines said: “. . . Space Administrator Thomas 0. Paine was dead right when he acclaimed Project Apollo as ‘a triumph of the squares.’ ” While word “square” was in disrepute, “you will find no umbrage taken by the clean-cut stars of this week’s cosmic drama if you called them squares. They are, and probably proud of it. There was no fight from Neil Armstrong when Congress told him to plant an American flag on the surface of the moon. , . , The Apollo program is not only run by squares, but for squares, as well; its thrills and glories appeal to the vast majority of Americans who, at the bottom, are just as square as any Armstrong on Earth—Jack or Neil or any other.” (W Star, 7/13/69, D2)
Excited U.S. residents called air control towers, police departments, and newspapers to report citing NASA’s Apollo 10 spacecraft circling moon. Weather Bureau explained bright object actually was planet Jupiter, which was approaching its nearest distance to earth. (W Star, 5/26/69, A7)
U.S. Geological Survey Director William T. Pecora said in Washington, D.C., that rocks brought back by Apollo 11 were geologic “hors d’oeuvre” but Apollo 12 rocks “will be a veritable feast.” Geologists were delighted “by the onsite descriptions provided by astronauts Conrad and Bean” who were “eager rock hounds.” (upi, NYT, 11/25/69, 32)
Army Digest published interview on space spinoffs with Harry N. Lowe, Jr., Chief of Extraterrestrial Research Agency of USA Office of Chief of Engineers: Space program should return profit to Nation. Tangible spinoff results were being observed in medicine, communications, engineering, and architecture. Savings in building industry and related engineering fields alone would eventually exceed present cost of entire space program. “We have seen the world’s largest building put up at the Cape, and other scientific and engineering marvels at Huntsville and Houston. We have had to work with scientists and others to an extent never before necessary. We have had to develop and apply new concepts and standards of performance.” Extraterrestrial Research Agency work included design and construction concept for semipermanent lunar base, definition of effort to develop lunar construction capability, and studies with NASA of lunar vehicles and mobility. Analyses of lunar samples indicated no need for change in concepts of lunar construction. With water source and cheaper transportation, “man can colonize the moon.” (Army Digest, 11/69, 30-1)
MSC announced revised quarantine procedures for Apollo 11 after landing. To prevent back contamination from moon, astronauts would dispose on moon under containment conditions equipment exposed there; brush, vacuum-clean, and bag other equipment and clothing for return; prevent dust from being transferred from LM to CM; and continuously filter CM atmosphere during return trip to remove dust particles. Under original plans Apollo 11 crew would have remained in cm after splashdown while it was hoisted onto recovery ship. After reviewing loads to be lifted in transferring CM to deck, reliability of shipboard cranes, and capacity of available load-limiting elastic tackle, NASA decided to retain helicopter lift used on previous Apollo missions. Crew would emerge from cm to raft, where they would put on biological isolation garments that would cover them completely and provide high-efficiency air outlet filter. Interagency Committee on Back Contamination—NASA, Dept, of Agriculture, hew, Dept, of Interior, and NAS—had agreed that helicopter lift, combined with other prelanding procedures, would provide maximum achievable precautions against back contamination, (msc Release 69—47)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew announced President’s Council on Youth Opportunity and NASA would explain mechanics of scheduled July . Apollo 11 lunar landing to high school and junior high school pupils in 50 cities under summer program to be held in city streets, playgrounds, and classrooms. (W Star, 5/12/69, A3)
First notables to arrive at Cape Kennedy on eve of Apollo 11 launch included former President and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Southern Christian Leadership Conference President, the Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy. Johnsons arrived in military aircraft assigned by President Nixon, to attend luncheon honoring James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator. Abernathy led 25 poor southern families to protest Federal funding priorities. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, met group of 150 poor people outside KSC gate where Abernathy requested 40 vip passes to launch, asked Dr. Paine to join fight against poverty, and urged that NASA technology be converted to finding new ways to feed poor. Dr. Paine agreed to admit members of group to launch and pledged to do what he could to adapt space-developed food concentrates to aid undernourished. “It will be a lot harder to solve the problems of hunger and poverty than it is to send men to the moon.” But, “if it were possible for us not to push that button tomorrow and solve the problems you are talking about, we would not push the button.” He said space program and science could be used to help solve poverty problems. “I want you to hitch your wagon to our rocket and tell the people the NASA program is an example of what this country can do.” The poor people said they would pray for Apollo 11 astronauts. By evening 500,000 tourists had arrived in Brevard County, site of ksc, with total one million expected by early morning. Air traffic had quadrupled, with 10 local airfields handling over 1,200 small aircraft, and 200 private jets. Aircraft were to bring Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, over 200 Congressmen, 60 ambassadors, 19 governors, 40 mayors, and other public figures July 16. More than 1,000 police struggled to control road traffic, and hordes settled to sleep on beaches from which they could see illuminated spacecraft on launch pad. (Weinraub, NYT, 7/16/69, 22; Greider, TV Post, 7/16/69)
In farewell speech to JPL as President of Cal Tech, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Science Adviser-designate to President-elect Richard M. Nixon, said: “I am sure that under the new administration a change in the general structure of the space program may occur principally because the Apollo landings for 1969 will be carried out. . . . [And] that ends an era, so to speak, in the space program which President Kennedy started when he proposed attainment of a landing on the moon by the end of this decade.” Question would be raised “in Congress and in the administration and by the 'people of the country, ‘OK we’re all through now, let’s save that four billion or five billion dollars a year and settle back and do something less expensive.’ I don’t believe that this is a very widespread view in the top levels of the new administration. I think the Apollo 8 program came at a very critical moment” to make everyone see that “by lifting the eyes of the people to something beyond this little planet on which we live that the spiritual effect . . . the elevation of morale which has occurred, the pride which the country has taken in this sort of achievement, ■ following on the many other achievements, is going to be a stimulus to redirecting the program, yes, but certainly not abandoning it, and deciding what are the great things that can be done in the future of the space program.” (Transcript)
NASA exhibit at Expo 70 in Osaka, Japan, March 15 through September would feature F—1 rocket engine, models of Explorer VII, VIII, and XI, tools being developed for Saturn V Workshop, and Saturn V launch vehicle digital computer, msfc announced. Exhibit also would display weather and communications satellites, Apollo spacecraft, space-suits, flight cameras, and moon rocks, (msfc Release 69—273)
Apollo 11 astronauts, welcomed by crowds in Amsterdam during world tour, presented Queen Juliana with plaque similar to one they left on lunar surface. In Brussels later in day they were decorated by King Baudouin with insignia of the Order of Leopold, nation’s highest honor. (AP, Huntsville Times, 10/9/69; upi, W Star, 10/10/69, A9)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean held press conference at msc. Code names for Apollo 12 LM and cm had been selected, they said, from entries submitted by North American Rockwell Corp. and Grumman Aerospace Corp. employees. CM would be called “Yankee Clipper” and lm, “Intrepid.” Major differences from Apollo 11 mission would be increase in geology and photography. Detailed documented sample collection would be team effort. Description would tell geologist about rock’s location, including how it was related to other rocks, whether it was partially covered, and why it attracted attention. Astronauts would carry bags and tongs at all times during eva to collect rocks when sighted instead of being limited to collecting during specific period of EVA. Photographic activities, described by Conrad as “the world’s greatest zero-G juggling act,” would include multispectral photography of lunar surface, using four Hasselblad cameras in hatch window. Three cameras would have black-and-white film with filters; fourth would have infrared film. Purpose of camera setup, Gordon explained, was to “photograph the illuminated side of the moon from one minute after sunrise to one minute prior to sunset in a stiff manner.” Every 20 secs “cameras would be activated, to give complete strip photography across the surface of the moon. . . . The big step photography I think is probably one of the most important things we’re doing on this flight. . . .” (Transcript; msc Release 69—68)
Apollo 11 astronauts arrived at Belgrade from Rome during world tour. They were cheered by crowd estimated at 400,000 to 500,000 persons between airport and tomb of Yugoslavia’s Unknown Soldier, where they placed wreath. Later, at luncheon in their honor, President Tito said, “I do not like invaders on earth, but I hold in high esteem the conquering of celestial bodies, and I express my wishes for biggest success.” (NYT, 10/19/69, L69; upi, W Star, 10/19/69, A4)
New York Times commented on Soviet decision to participate in February intelsat conference [see Jan. 22] and on Soviet coverage of Apollo 8 which was “treated more generously in the Soviet press than any earlier American space accomplishment.” Editorial said: “These indications of a positive shift in Kremlin thinking seem to enhance hopes that President Nixon will have an opportunity for creative diplomacy and action of the kind he envisaged in his Inaugural Address. Thought might be given, for example, to inviting Moscow to designate a Soviet astronaut to participate in an Apollo flight late this year or early next year. Or Washington might suggest that the United States and the Soviet Union coordinate their programs of planetary exploration with one nation, say, having primary responsibility for studying Venus and the other Mars. With the landing of men on the moon now probably only months away it is certainly not too early for the two nations that have pioneered most actively in space to discuss concrete means for involving the United Nations directly in the future exploration and exploitation of the moon, as well as of the planets when men reach them.” (NYT, 1/24/69, 46)
In Kinshasa, Republic of Congo, Apollo 11 astronauts were awarded National Order of the Leopard, Congo’s highest decoration, by President Joseph D. Mobutu for “setting an example to all mankind.” (C Trib, 10/24/69)
Hot firing of twin RL-10 Centaur engines marked first use of LeRC’s new Spacecraft Propulsion Research Facility, B—2 stand, at Plum Brook Station, Ohio [see Oct. 7], and first Centaur tests at Plum Brook since structural tests in mid-1960s. Since then, Centaur, configured with 1st-stage Atlas, had launched seven Surveyor spacecraft to moon, two Mariner spacecraft to Mars, one oao, and one ATS. (LeRC Release 69-76)
Motion picture footage of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission would be released for sale to commercial producers after quarantine period, NASA announced. Two 600-ft rolls would be made available initially: one would include prelaunch, launch, and recovery operations; other would include all usable onboard footage, (nasa Release 69-83L)
Galabert International Astronautics Prize for 1969 was awarded in Paris to Apollo 11 astronauts. Award of .$4,000 was presented annually for notable contributions “to human progress for the advancement of all sciences and techniques associated with astronautics.” (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69, A8)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, presented Public Service Group Achievement Award Certificates to 12 representatives of communications organizations which had supported Apollo 8 mission. Award to Apollo 8 Communications Network cited “the dedication and skill of the leaders and all personnel in these organizations in maintaining reliable communications which insured the success of the first manned lunar orbit mission.” British External Telecommunication Executive and Hawaiian Telephone Co. had received same award. (nasa Release 69—20)
Some observers on earth might be able to see moon-bound Apollo 11 on two occasions, NASA announced. At 2:44:18 GET, exhaust plumes from S—IVB firing in parking orbit over Gilbert Islands in South Pacific would be visible to naked eye for several minutes over large part of sky. For several hours after translunar injection burn, csm/lm, S—IVB, and four spacecraft-lunar-module-adapter (sla) panels would be visible through telescope to observers in U.S., Mexico, Central and South America, and western Africa, (nasa Special Release)
Author Norman Mailer’s total publishing rights on book on lunar landing would exceed $1 million when book was published by Little, Brown & Co. in January or February 1970, according to his agent, Scott Meredith. If film rights were sold, total could approach the $1.5 million paid for Lyndon B. Johnson memoirs. Mailer planned to visit KSC during Apollo 11 launch to interview astronauts and describe space center operations. He also planned chapter On philosophical and technological implications of lunar landing. Meredith said he was surprised at “phenomenal competition among foreign publishers for book and magazine rights.” (Raymont, NYT, 5/13/69, 44)
U.K.’s Royal Geographical Society awarded special gold medal—its first for space exploration-—to Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong for leading Apollo 11 mission. Other gold medalists included Capt. Roald Amundsen, first to reach South Pole; Adm. Robert E. Peary, first to reach North Pole; Sir Edmund Hillary, conqueror of Mt. Everest; and Sir John Hunt, leader of Everest expedition. (AP, W Star, 7/28/69, A5)
Apollo 11 and current nationwide water shortage were “two illustrations of man’s efficiency in achieving the thrills of life and man’s inefficiency in not achieving the necessities of life,’’.Drew Pearson said in Washington Post. “At Cape Kennedy, the United States is about to launch the most carefully rehearsed, most expensive, most unnecessary project of this century by which man will reach a piece of drab, radioactive, lava-like real estate hitherto romantic because of distance—the moon. The launching will succeed because a vast amount of money and the best scientific brains in America over a period of seven years have been lavished on this moon shot. Meanwhile, up the Atlantic Coast, the Capital which voted the $20 billion to reach the moon is desperately short of the second essential to man’s life—water—all because of lack of planning, lack of foresight, and lack of money—the same ingredients which have put the moon shot on the verge of success.” (W Post, 7/10/69, Fll)
Apollo 11 astronauts attended celebrations in their hometowns. In Wapakoneta, Ohio, Neil A. Armstrong was cheered by crowd estimated at 10 times normal 7,000 population, addressed teen-age rally, and led parade including Gov. James A. Rhodes, Dr. Albert D. Sabin (developer of oral polio vaccine), and comedian Bob Hope—all Ohioans. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on second visit to hometown as astronaut, presented Montclair, N.J., Library with autographed photo of plaque left on moon; Library named its science collection in his honor. Astronaut Michael Collins, who was born in Rome, Italy, visited New Orleans, La., as his adopted hometown. He attended luncheon in his honor and visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility. (W Post, 9/7/69, A3)
X-ray, one of science’s foremost photographic tools, was being supplemented by revolutionary process of neutron radiography called “neu-trography,” said New York Times. It had been used to check safety of components in Apollo 10 spacecraft and was subject of Government-supported research in U.K., France, West Germany, and Japan. In U.S., commercially oriented studies were being pursued by General Electric Co., Aerojet-General Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. Process—in which object to be radiographed was placed in large, high-density beam of neutrons that passed through object and registered data concerning its internal structure on film—had applications in inspection of pyrotechnic devices and nuclear reactor fuel and detection of excessive moisture or minute cracks. Critical welds, guidance components, and “honeycomb” bonding used in NASA program could also be inspected—as well as home TV sets, telephones, radios, missiles, and sst. (NYT, 6/2/69, 39)
Following publication Nov. 29 by Pravda of article describing U.S. moon rock exhibit in Moscow, crowd of “thousands,” eager to see display, smashed glass door and nearly demolished room in which Apollo films were shown. (Clarity, NYT, 12/1/69, 14)
Lunar Science Institute and Msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory were preparing for “lunar knowledge explosion” expected to follow first manned lunar landing, Washington Evening Star reported. Laboratory would quarantine astronauts and lunar samples brought back from landing, storing samples for study and distribution to scientists. Institute, funded by NASA and administered through nas by Rice Univ., would facilitate lunar research by nonspace scientific community, Administrator Robert C. Wimberley said in interview. Directed by William C. Rubey, Institute was soon to be turned over to consortium of universities. U.S. Public Health Service, nas, Dept, of Interior, Dept, of Agriculture, and NASA had planned 30-day quarantine and study of moon material and 21-day quarantine of astronauts. Samples would be sealed on lunar surface and would be flown from recovery carrier to Laboratory after spacecraft return. Astronauts were to be transferred from spacecraft into sealed van through plastic tunnel aboard carrier [see May 16]. Van would be delivered to nearest port and then flown to Houston to sealed-off laboratory. Objective was to prevent importing viruses, some of which had been known to survive thousands of years under unlikely conditions. During three-week debriefing, crew would live in glassed-in quarters including medical area. Samples would be maintained under vacuum seals until opened in high-vacuum chambers containing remotely controlled equipment. Once photographed, catalogued, and processed, content and structure would be studied to determine composition and origins. (W Star, 3/12/69, A13)
AFSC announced new uhf communications terminal developed by Electronic Systems Div. might solve problems in relaying messages between spacecraft and ground stations. Designed for USAF aircraft as part of joint-service Tactical Satellite Communications Program, terminals would be installed and tested on usaf jet tracking aircraft used for communications support in Apollo program. They would allow aircraft to relay spacecraft information and recovery operations reliably from parts of globe where communications had posed problem. (usaf Release 51.69)
aiaa announced election of Honorary Fellows: Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Dr. Seamans, former NASA Deputy Administrator, was honored for “organizing the research, development and operational base which produced the Apollo program.” Honors would be presented at Oct. 23 banquet in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
At first day ceremonies for commemorative moon landing stamp in Washington, D.C., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount presented Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, with albums containing 32 stamps each. He said: “In the largest sense we pay tribute today to the spirit of man. We cannot separate the accomplishments of Apollo 11 from those of Yostok 1; we cannot separate the contributions of Michael Collins, or Edwin Aldrin or Neil Armstrong from those of Goddard and Einstein, Kepler and Newton, Copernicus and Galileo. We know this. And in the knowing again we find hope. For if men of all nations, together, can achieve dominion over the heavens, men of all nations, together, can achieve peace on earth for men for all time.” Armstrong said astronauts had deferred cancellation of stamps until they were reunited in cm, July 22. They had then grasped canceler simultaneously and pressed it upon die-proof version of commemorative stamp affixed to unaddressed envelope. Cancellation date remained July 20, day of lunar landing. (PO Dept Release 135; Shandler, W Star, 9/10/69, A3)
Washington Sunday Star commented on display of moon rocks at Smithsonian Institution: “The lunar chunk does indeed look like something that, if it turned up in a Bethesda [Md.] backyard, would not draw a second glance. And yet it is something that, until two months ago, no man had seen before. ... It is a promise of unimagined things to come.” Judging by crowds queued up, “Smithsonian has booked its best act since the Mona Lisa came to town six years ago.” (W Star, 9/21/69, Cl)
President Nixon telephoned congratulations to Apollo 10 crew following successful splashdown after lunar mission for its “magnificent achievement” and invited astronauts and their wives to dinner at White House. “This is a proud moment for the country,” President said. (NYT, 5/27/69, 29; PD, 6/2/69, 775)
usn reported eight-ship Soviet Naval fleet was heading south 25 mi eastsoutheast of Miami, Fla., on course that could provide view of Apollo 11 launch. U.S. carrier aircraft and destroyer escort Gary shadowed squadron, officially en route to Havana for July 26 commemoration of Cuhan revolution. (Homan, W Post, 7/12/69, Al; AP, W Post, 7/13/69, A5)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong arrived in Bangkok, Thailand, to meet with Peace Corps officials on Presidential mission. (AP, W Post, 12/21/69, A17; W Star, 12/21/69, D7)
National Geographic Society cartographer and “backyard stargazer” David Moore was one of few amateur astronomers selected by NASA to help nearly 200 professionals who had volunteered to attempt sightings of Apollo 11 spacecraft, Washington Evening Star said. Through telescope in yard of his Wheaton, Md., home he would watch for “small brilliant flashes when rocket engines are turned on or ‘burned’ or . . . when waste water is ejected from the spacecraft.” In ejection, water froze instantly and resultant ice crystals flared in sunlight. NASA had credited Moore with one of few sightings of earthbound Apollo 10. (Radcliffe, W Star, 7/10/69, D2)
NASA unloaded eight-ton airlock at MSFC for ground testing to qualify it as part of orbiting space station. Part of Apollo Applications program cluster to be launched in mid-1970s, 65-in-dia, 17-ft cylindrical unit was flown from McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s St. Louis plant to be joined to multiple-docking adapter. It would provide interconnecting passageway between S—IVB rocket stage and multiple-docking adapter in flight, condition environmental gases, and provide instrumentation, data management, intercommunication, and other services, (msfc Release 69—124)
Apollo 11 recovery physician, Dr. William R. Carpentier, reported from inside Mobile Quarantine Facility onboard U.S.S. Hornet that astronauts had completed preliminary medical examination and were “fine.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s slight ear infection had disappeared and all three astronauts were in excellent condition. (Wooten, NYT, 7/26/69, 1)
msfc shipped 20,000-lb, 20-ft-tall F—1 and 225,000-lb-thrust J—2 Saturn V rocket engines from New Orleans to France as part of NASA exhibit at Paris Air Show, May 29—June 8. Other items in display would include Apollo 8 spacecraft and an Apollo lunar module, (msfc Release 69-106; msfc Pio)
In Washington Sunday Star, David Van Praagh discussed President Nixon’s planned Asian tour, to follow mid-Pacific recovery of Apollo 11 crew: Nixon would find “the problems of this planet’s most populous continent present a striking contrast. They are not subject to quick, rational, scientific or dramatic solutions. Usually they can not even be tackled through modern communications. The vast majority of Indians and Pakistanis for example, can’t read or write and do not own a tiny transistor radio or TV set to monitor the Pacific splashdown. They live in a rather backward age and most of them are hungry.” (W Star, 7/6/69, D14)
Visiting Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin P. Feoktistov and Georgy T. Beregovoy left New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport for Moscow after two-week U.S. visit. During airport interview Feoktistov said he liked U.S. astronauts’ “sincerity and hopeful approach to life.” Beregovoy said, “Friendship is a force which will help the world to conquer space.” Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was at airport to see them off. (NYT, 11/5/69, 52)
Swiss physicist Dr. Johannes Geiss, originator of Apollo 11 experiment to trap atomic particles from solar wind on lunar surface, would use “deliberate speed” in assaying results, New York Times reported. NASA courier had delivered square foot of aluminum foil exposed on moon for an hour to catch particles emitted by sun. Dr. Geiss and associates in Berne Univ.’s Physics Institute had devised plan for dual study of foil in Berne and at Federal Polytechnic at Zurich. Analyses, determining components by spectrometer, would require several weeks. NASA would not release remaining three square feet of foil to him until 1970. {NYT, 8/18/69, 34)
President Nixon and Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan issued joint statement following White House discussions on international situation. On space, statement said: “The Prime Minister congratulated the President on the successful moon landing of Apollo XII, and expressed the hope for a safe journey back to earth for the astronauts. The President and the Prime Minister agreed that the exploration of space offers great opportunities for expanding cooperation in peaceful scientific projects among all nations. In this connection, the Prime Minister noted with pleasure that the United States and Japan last summer had concluded an agreement on space cooperation. The President and the Prime Minister agreed that the implementation of this unique program is of importance to both countries.” {PD, 11/24/69, 1633—7)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President, Prof. Mstislav V. Keldysh, said in Stockholm, “We no longer have any time plan for manned moon trips. Right now we are concentrating on constructing big satellite space stations.” He predicted expanded scientific cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. with possibility of cosmonauts and astronauts aboard same spacecraft in future. In Sweden for Swedish Academy of Engineering’s 50th anniversary, Prof. Keldysh implied U.S.S.R. planned to assemble spacecraft in orbiting stations and launch them from there. He indicated existence of conflicting views in U.S.S.R. as to space research funding. “My personal view is that, when man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (upi, W Post, 10/25/69, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins held first postflight press conference at MSC, narrating 45-min film of mission and answering questions. On meaning of lunar landing, Collins said it was “technical triumph for this country to have said what it was going to do a number of years ago, and then by golly do it. Just like we said we were going to do. Not just . . . purely technical, but also a triumph of the nation’s overall determination, will, economy, attention to detail, and a thousand and one other factors that went into it.” To Aldrin mission meant “that many other problems perhaps can be solved in the same way by taking a commitment to solve them in long time fashion. I think that we were timely in accepting this mission of going to the moon. It might be timely at this point to think in many other areas of other missions that could be accomplished.” Armstrong said moon landing heralded “beginning of a new age.” He said moon was “stark and strangely different place, but it looked friendly . . . and proved to be friendly.” Astronauts had much less trouble than expected on lunar surface. Primary difficulty was that “there was just far too little time to do the variety of things that we would have liked to have done. . . . We had the problem of the 5 year old boy in a candy store. There are just too many interesting things to do.” Armstrong said that during landing they “were concerned about running low on fuel on range extension we did to avoid the boulder field and craters. We used a significant percentage of our fuel margins and we were quite close to our legal limit.” On possibility of abort during period they were receiving alarm signals, Aldrin said procedure in preparation simulations had been always to “keep going as long as we could. . . . The computer was continuing to issue guidance . . . and it was continuing to fly the vehicle down in the same way that it was programmed to do. The only thing that was missing ... is that we did not have some of the displays . . . and we had to make several entries ... to clear up that area.” Armstrong added, “We would have continued the landing so long as the trajectory seemed safe. And landing is possible under these conditions, although with considerably less confidence than you have when you have the information from the ground and the computer in its normal manner available to you.” (Transcript)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale posthumously awarded its highest honor—Gold Medal—to nasa test pilot Joseph A. Walker for “his many enduring contributions to the advancement of aviation made during a 21-year flight research career marked by extraordinary perfection and valor.” . Award was received by his widow at Edwards afb ceremony. As FRC chief research pilot, Walker had flown X—15 to its highest altitude, 354,200 ft (67 mi); was first man to fly llrv astronaut training craft; was author of 20 technical papers and articles; and had taught Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong at frc. (frc Release 17—69)
Bert Greenglass, former head of Apollo Program Control Office at ksc and later Deputy Director of Management Systems Div. in NASA Office of Technology Utilization, joined hud as Director of Management Information and Program Control Systems. (W Star, 9/24/69; hud pio)
faa said preliminary figures showed its 27 air route traffic control centers handled 19.5 million aircraft in 1968, an increase of 17% over 1967. Chicago, New York, and Cleveland each logged 1.5 million operations —first time any center had reached this mark, (faa Release 69-15) During January: jpl Senior Staff Scientist Albert R. Hibbs summarized results of NASA’s Surveyor program in Astronautics and Aeronautics. Experiments on five Surveyor spacecraft which successfully landed on moon between May 30, 1966, and Jan. 7, 1968, indicated surface material was granular and very fine with 10 3 dynes/cm2 cohesion. Slightly deeper material had lower normal albedo than undisturbed surface. Chemical composition of surface material was similar to basaltic rocks on earth; mare material contained more iron elements than highland material; and highland material had higher albedo than mare material. Chemical analyses indicated material did not resemble chondritic meteorites. From observed data scientists concluded that moon had undergone significant chemical differentiation during its history and had been subjected to basaltic lava flows; surface was continually being “churned and pulverized” by meteoroid impacts; some undefined process lightened optical surface and darkened buried material; and mare areas were “surprisingly similar and offer numerous safe-landing zones for future lunar missions.” (A&A, 1/69, 50—63)
Behind “computerized smoothness” of Apollo 12 countdown, there was “smoldering and sometimes explosive struggle” at ksc among scientists, engineers, and Government officials over how to run space program, John Noble Wilford said in New York Times. General uncertainty over future of NASA and of space priorities was fueling “internal feud” which began to be exposed after July Apollo 11 lunar landing. Successful Apollo 12 flight could intensify controversy by raising “stakes” in struggle. Scientists wanted greater emphasis on scientific experiments; scientist-astronauts were disenchanted at slim prospects of space flights; engineers, especially at MSC, resented scientists’ attitude. (NYT, 11/11/69, 1)
Lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey discussed moon findings at San Diego, Calif., press conference after return from study of Apollo 11 lunar samples at lrl. There was “no evidence whatever” of life on moon and, “at present, no age of the rocks on the surface of the moon is known.” Fine dust on lunar surface consisted of 50% glass—10% in form of small beads, 40% as broken-up beads—and “something else” containing minerals similar to those in lunar rocks. Dust and rocks evidenced shock as though produced by “rather large collisions somewhere that dug up material considerably deeper in the moon than the few centimeters they have been investigating.” There was no evidence of water. Chemical analyses had shown high concentration of titanium in lunar samples characteristic of area where Surveyor V and Apollo 11 had landed. “No such . . . titanium concentration occurs anywhere that we know of on the surface of Earth.” No one had “anticipated what we are finding. And I believe that no one has a good explanation of how it got that way.” It would take “much more” than nine more Apollo manned landings to solve lunar mysteries. He saw no economic value in future lunar colonization but “an observatory on the moon would be a wonderful way to investigate the heavens, because the difficulties of the atmosphere would disappear.” (Space World, 12/69, 35—42)
msfc issued rfps for design, development, test, and delivery of four flight models of manned lunar roving vehicle. Four-wheeled, 400-lb vehicle would be carried to moon on board LM in 1971, to transport astronauts, tools, lunar samples, and other equipment and experiments. (nasa Special Release)
NASA announced availability of 16-in-dia globe of moon prepared by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center from NASA photos made by Lunar Orbiter series. Lovell Observatory, Ariz., prepared art work with exaggerated color tones showing lunar landscape bathed in morning sunlight and large Ring Plains, or explosive craters, on far side. One globe had been presented to President Nixon by Apollo 10 astronauts. (NASA Release 69—83G)
Apollo 12 countdown began at KSC at 12:00 pm EST for launch toward moon at 11:22 am est Nov. 14. Countdown, originally scheduled to begin at 7:00 pm est Nov. 8, had been started early to reduce costs by eliminating overtime that would have been paid to launch crews. (upi, NYT, 11/8/69, 20)
Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. moon flight was, again, advocated by Jess Gorkin in Parade. Magazine had proposed cooperative space venture Jan. 9, 1966. “The idea had international appeal. Residents of Moscow spoke warmly of the concept. Letters of approval poured in from all over the United States as well as Europe and Asia. The proposal was supported by newspapers around the world.” NASA had “been sharing the country’s space knowledge with other nations for years.” U.S. scientists had worked closely with scientists from nations whose scientific payloads were launched aboard U.S. rockets. (Parade, 11/9/69)
U.S. delegate to U.N. William B. Buffum, responding to Soviet tribute to Apollo 11 astronauts by U.S.S.R. delegate Aleksey V. Zakharov, said before Security Council he hoped “fraternal spirit” demonstrated by astronauts and cosmonauts would lead to greater cooperation on earth also. {NYT, 7/25/69, 31)
At Apollo 11 splashdown party at Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. —attended by Apollo 11 astronauts and wives—NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced new Apollo Achievement Award of lapel button and certificate. He presented awards to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller; former Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) ; and former Deputy Director of Apollo Program George H. Hage. (Beale, W Star, 9/10/69, FI)
gsfc scientists and Smithsonian Institution ecologist Dr. Helmut K.	Buechner planned to use female elk named Moe for first experiment in tracking animals by satellite, New York Times said. Wearing 23-lb instrumentation around neck, elk was expected to migrate from point in Wyoming to national elk refuge south of Yellowstone Park at Jackson Hole, Wyo.—100-mi distance. (Teltsch, NYT, 10/5/69, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, gave Invited Lecture Oct. 6 on Apollo program, space benefits, Apollo Applications program, and lunar exploration. Apollo Applications program would “study the earth through the use of a six lens multispectral camera installation. On Apollo 9 some of the rudimentary work was done using four lenses. 50% more kinds of information will be brought back by the crews of Apollo Applications. Because almost everything on earth has a different reflective quality, as distinctive as a signature or a fingerprint, results from this photographic exploration can be expected to yield rich rewards. Many of the earth sciences look to this kind of information for answers to previously unanswerable questions. Hydrologists are interested in discovering not only the depth, but also the temperature of the waters of the world, and these conditions can be ascertained from space. Warm water attracts certain species of fish, so fishermen are also interested in these experiments. “Agronomists believe that soil chemistry will reveal itself on a large scale in certain kinds of filtered photography. Agriculturists know that different crops, at different stages of their development and in different states of health, reflect distinctive amounts of light. They hope, using the photographs we will take, to get some measure of the world’s crop, as well as some knowledge of its condition. Geologists, who have found clues to mineral deposits in the Gemini and Apollo pictures, look to this more sophisticated photography for additional information, and for distinctions which will eventually permit certain kinds of prospecting from space. Cartographers and Geodesists are interested in everything from urban sprawl to continental drift.” Sun would be prime target for exploration in Apollo Applications program, with experiments conducted by astronaut-astronomers using Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) in orbit. “For the first time we will have a massive set of instruments with high resolution for looking in some depth and detail at the activities of the sun from beyond the veil of the earth’s atmosphere.” Program would consist of three missions into near-earth space, one of 28 days and two of 56 days each. First step would be establishment of Saturn V workshop in orbit, planned for March 1972 launch, followed by launches of solar panels, ATM, and crew of three for 28-day stay. Second manned mission was scheduled for launch about three months after first, with third to follow one month after return of second crew. (Text)
NASA’s Apollo 8 mission and usn navigation satellite system developed by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory had been named two of top four engineering achievements of 1968 by National Society of Professional Engineers. (W Star, 2/2/69, B2)
New York Times editorial: “This is the week of the moon. The countdown is on at Cape Kennedy and, if all goes well, a week from today a manned vehicle will for the first time alight on another celestial body. ... all mankind will share in the exhilaration of discovery. Ever since man evolved he has been exploring, extending his domain over all parts of his planet. Now that insatiable curiosity is bursting its terrestrial bounds to provide our first personal knowledge of the nearest neighbor in the cosmos. It is an inspiring adventure, a testimony not only to man’s imagination in amassing knowledge of nature, but to his courage, his perseverance and his indomitable spirit.” {NYT, 7/13/69)
NASA had assured Post Office Dept, that master die for 10-cent moon landing commemorative stamp [see July 9] had gone all the way to lunar surface as planned. It had returned to earth in cm and been rushed to Washington, D.C., July 31 after decontamination at msc. However, moon letter envelope with die proof of moon landing stamp had not been postmarked on lunar surface. Because of tight schedule for lunar eva, letter had heen left with Astronaut Michael Collins in cm Columbia while Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Al-drin, Jr., worked on moon. “Moon Landing” postmark had been applied during return voyage. Letter had been decontaminated at msc and returned to Postmaster General Winton M. Blount Aug. 5. (Fairies, W Star, 8/10/69, Hll)
Dr. Harry H. Hess, Chairman of NAS—NRc Space Science Board and member of NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight since 1963, died of heart attack suffered while attending Board meeting at Woods Hole, Mass. Dr. Hess, Blair professor of geology at Princeton Univ., was one of scientists who had analyzed Apollo 11 lunar samples. In 1960 he had advanced theory that volcanic activity on ocean floor caused continental drift. He had been past president of Mineralogical Society of America and of Geological Society of America, chairman of site-selection committee for NSF’s Project Mohole, and adviser to numerous other Federal agencies. (upi, W Post, 8/27/69, A10; Science, 8/29/69, 882)
Technologically and managerially, Apollo was difficult,” Englebert Kirchner said in Space/Aeronautics editorial. “Politically and socially, it was simple. Just the reverse is true about the great problems of our society. What is making these so hard to solve is not technology but serious disagreement about goals and priorities, about what is good for whom, who is to get what and who should pay for it. The space program does not hold the answer to these questions. Trying to find them in Apollo will only distort and therefore belittle an incomparable achievement. Apollo took us to the moon, to that shining disk in the sky that looks so unbelievably distant. Isn’t that enough?” (S/A, 8/69, 27)
Apollo 10 spacecraft, atop Saturn V launch vehicle, rolled out of Vehicle Assembly Building at ksc to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, for May liftoff to lunar orbit. (AP, NYT, 3/12/69, 14; UPl, Huntsville News, 3/12/69)
l/g Samuel C. Phillips, NASA Apollo Program Director, became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) . Gen. Phillips had been Director of Minuteman program before assignment to NASA in January 1964 as Deputy Director of Apollo program. He was succeeded by Rocco A. Petrone [see Aug. 22]. (nasa Ann, 7/31/69)
Lunar Rock Conference was held at Smithsonian Institution, with participation of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Henry J. Smith, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator (Science); and Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists. During conference NASA released PET Summary of Apollo 11 Lunar Samples, report of 60-day preliminary examination of 48 lbs of Apollo 11 lunar samples in lrl by university and Government scientists on NASA Preliminary Examination Team (pet). Report confirmed existence of unexplained erosion process on lunar surface indicated in Ranger, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor photos, “unlike any process so far observed on earth”; said unique chemical composition (that of silicate liquid) of Tranquility Base fines and igneous rocks “implies either the composition of the rock from which the liquid was derived differs significantly from that of the mantle of the earth, or that the mechanism by which the liquid was formed differs from analogous terrestrial processes”; and concluded there was “very good chance that the time of crystallization of some of the Apollo 11 rocks may date back to times earlier than the oldest rocks on earth.” Samples could be divided into fine- and medium-grained crystalline of igneous origin, breccias of complex origin, and fines. Crystalline rocks differed from any terrestrial rock and from meteorites in modal mineralogy and bulk chemistry. Erosion had occurred on lunar surface but there was no evidence it was caused by surface water. Probable presence of assemblage iron-troilite-ilmenite and absence of any hydrated phase indicated crystalline rocks were formed under extremely low partial pressures of oxygen, water, and sulfur. Absence of hydrated minerals suggested absence of any surface water at Tranquility Base since rocks were exposed. Rocks and fines showed evidence of shock or impact metamorphism; all rocks displayed glass-lined surface pits possibly caused by impact of small particles; and fine material and breccia contained gases that indicated they were derived from solar wind. Measurements on igneous rock indicated crystallization 3 billion to 4 billion yrs ago. Rocks had been within one meter of surface for 20 million to 160 million yrs. Level of indigenous volatiliz-able and/or pyrolyzable organic material was extremely low. All rocks and fines were generally similar chemically. Major and minor constituents were same as in terrestrial igneous rocks and meteorites, but differences in composition were significant. Elements that were enriched in iron meteorites were not observed or were very low in occurrence. No evidence of biological material had been found. Tranquility Base soil was fine grained, granular, cohesive, and incompressible, with hardness increasing at six-inch depth. It was similar in appearance and behavior to soil at Surveyor landing sites. (Program; Text; Science, 9/19/69)
Senate unanimously adopted S.R. 224, introduced by Sen. Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) for himself and Sen. Everett M. Dirksen (R-Ill.), expressing gratitude on behalf of Senate and of all American people for “dedication, devotion, courage and effort of all associated with the Apollo program and with the Apollo 11 mission.” (CR, 7/25/69, S8575)	...	.
Soviet space scientist Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko said at news conference during meeting of International Academy of Astronautics at Cloudcroft, N.Mex., it would be desirable and technically feasible for cosmonaut to be member of future Apollo moon-landing crew. (AP, B Sun, 10/2/69, A15)
Time named Apollo 8 astronauts its Men of the Year for 1968. “For all its upheavals and frustrations, the year would be remembered to the end of time for the dazzling skills and Promethean daring that sent mortals around the moon. It would be celebrated as the year in which men saw at first hand their little earth entire, a remote, blue-brown sphere hovering like a migrant bird in the hostile night of space.” {Time, 1/3/69, 9)
Time magazine said Astronaut Frank Borman had amused audiences during February 1969 European tour by claiming Apollo 8 astronauts deserved overtime pay because they had aged about 300 microseconds more than people on earth during moon mission. At NASA’s request, Univ. of Maryland physicist Carroll Alley had calculated effects on astronauts of phenomena described in Einstein’s relativity equations— time ran slower for object as its speed increased, and time accelerated for object as it moved away from body exerting gravitational force. Alley found Apollo 8 spacecraft speed was predominant factor when it was within 4,000 mi of earth; time slowed and astronauts actually aged more slowly. Beyond 4,000 mi, effects of earth’s gravity lessened as Apollo’s time passed 300 microseconds faster than earth’s. Despite Alley’s calculations, said Time, Borman’s claim was valid only for Astronaut William A. Anders, who made his first space flight on Apollo 8. Astronauts Borman and James A. Lovell had been crew-mates on Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini VII, when time dilation effect was dominant for entire two weeks. They had aged less than those on earth by 400 microseconds. Lovell’s time also had been slowed during four-day Gemini XII mission Nov. 11—15, 1966, by about 100 microseconds. “Thus,” said Time, “during all their missions in space, Lovell and Borman respectively spent 200 and 100 microseconds less time than was recorded on earth—which means they were paid for more time than they actually worked.” [Time, 3/7/69, 42)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Michael Collins, their families, and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, flew in presidential jet from Houston to New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles during day of cross-country celebrations. Three-hour New York visit included greeting at City Hall by Mayor John V. Lindsay, motorcade to U.N. for greeting by TJ.N. Secretary General U Thant, and ticker-tape procession to John F. Kennedy International Airport for departure to Chicago. New York Public Events Commissioner John S. Palmer estimated crowds at 4 million; other observers said there were fewer and blamed ahead-of-schedule appearance and TV coverage. In Chicago, welcoming crowd was estimated at 3.5 million. Mayor Richard J. Daley greeted party at Civic Center and presented medals symbolic of honorary citizenship to astronauts and Dr. Paine. Illinois Gov. Richard B. Ogilvie said, “To these first citizens of the new epoch, the people of Chicago and Illinois offer their profound admiration and respect.” Astronauts spoke to 15,000 young people in Grant Park before returning by helicopter to O’Hare International Airport for flight to Los Angeles. Mayor Samuel W. Yorty met party at Los Angeles International Airport. After brief ceremony, party sped to Century Plaza Hotel for reception preceding state dinner. (Lelyveld, NYT, 8/14/69, 1; Ober-dorfer, W Post, 8/14/69, Al; NASA pao)
Press commented on Apollo 10 mission: Washington Post editorial: “The mission of Messrs. Cernan, Stafford and Young, as dramatic and daring as it is, is only an interim step between the first trip to the moon and the first landing on the moon. It is, however, a crucial step since any major problems in this mission or any major unanticipated discoveries about the moon’s gravity might well delay the ultimate landing. Because it is both so crucial and so risky, the Nation will wait with special concern when they disappear behind the moon for the first time this afternoon and when the lunar landing craft breaks away from the mother ship tomorrow afternoon for its descent toward the moon’s surface. The hope hardly needs to be expressed that these maneuvers, like those in the other Apollo flights,
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Apollo 10 color TV pictures: “Of all the visions man sees from his new and precarious vantages in space, the most compelling is still the planet from which he comes. In the eye of Apollo 10’s color TV camera, Earth is indeed the fairest object, the ‘oasis’ the Apollo 8 astronauts saw last Christmas on Earth’s first manned mission to the moon. “For a stranger entering the solar system from the outer reaches of the Universe, surely Earth’s mist-shrouded blues, browns and reds would be a goal to satisfy the utmost yearning. Set against the cold blackness of space, it would be a prize to draw bold and venturesome inhabitants of other planets across incredible distances. It would be a goal courageous strangers would endure incredible hardships to win. . . . “The awe expressed by the intrepid Apollo 10 astronauts ... is further reminder that the greatest space prize presently within man’s comprehension is already in his keeping. And it is one to leave man wondering whether beings on other planets strive and dream as he does. For the moment certainly, it would not seem so. For what people on another planet could resist the vision in the eye of Apollo 10’s TV camera?” (P Bull, 5/20/69)
Christian Science Monitor congratulated “Gumdrop, Spider, and their gallant crew” for successful Apollo 9 mission to date: “In a series of smoothly executed maneuvers, they have opened the way for landing on the moon. They have removed any doubt that the machinery and tactics designed to set men down and recover them safely can indeed do the job.” Spectacular view from space symbolized “men’s ability to surmount human and natural obstacles to reach the most difficult goals when they want to. It bespeaks a spirit running counter to the rivalries, hatreds, and selfishness that often seem to prevent a similar attack on tough human problems on earth. The spirit now has brought the moon within mankind’s grasp. It could bring a better life on earth within their grasp, too.” (csm, 3/8-10/69)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family returned from European goodwill tour made on behalf of President Nixon. At Andrews afb, Md., Borman told press on arrival that Europeans found, it hard to believe U.S. “could spend all that money on its space program and still make public everything we learned.” He said reception had been uniformly friendly, “but they would hesitate to ask us questions, because they assumed . . . information about the Apollo 8 flight must be classified.” Borman and family reported at Capitol to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of nasc. Borman told press conference he had found “extreme identification of people in all walks of life in Europe with our flight. They were very well informed about it and looked on us as representatives of Earth. I hope that feeling of comradeship can continue.” (AP, W Post, 2/22/69, A2)
Washington■ Post columnist Franklin R. Bruns, Jr., said 10 days after issuance of moon landing airmail stamp in Washington, D.C., “an already tired city post office crew had just passed the two-million first day cover mark.” Post Office had gone “all out” to cooperate with those of other countries in returning covers and with Voice of America, NASA, and regular servicers. There was little doubt that “new first day cover record is in the making.” {W Post, 9/28/69, F9)
House passed by vote of 328 to 52 H.R. 11271, FY 1970 nasa authorization of $3,966 billion, allocating $3.26 billion for R&D, $58.2 million for construction of facilities, and $643.8 million for research and program management. House had adopted amendment canceling $327 million authorized for FYs 1967, 1968, and 1969 for which appropriations had not been made. It also adopted amendment requiring emplacement of U.S. flag, exclusively, on moon or any other planet by U.S. astronauts during visits financed entirely by Government funds. Act would be symbolic gesture of national pride in achievement, not declaration of national appropriation by claim of sovereignty. (Text; CR, 6/10/69, H4615-56)
At Cape Kennedy press conference, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman termed “totally ridiculous” cancellation of President Nixon’s dinner with Apollo 11 crew on eve of launch to avoid contaminating crew with presidential germs. He had delivered invitation to dinner to White House and President Nixon had accepted when msc Medical Director, Dr. Charles A. Berry, criticized dinner [see July 7]. Borman said his talks with U.S.S.R. officials during recent tour had left him convinced they planned lunar landing soon but, “from the people on the subways to their president, all I heard was that they are wishing success for Apollo 11.” (Greider, W Post, 7/13/69, A4)
Stacked spacecraft and Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo 11, first lunar landing mission, rolled out to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at KSC. (ksc Hist Off; McGehan, B Sun, 5/21/69)
Special six-cent postal stamp honoring Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission had been approved by Post Office Dept., Postmaster General W. Marvin Watson announced. Stamp would be issued May 5, seventh anniversary of Freedom 7, first U.S. manned suborbital space flight, by Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (PO Dept Release 14)
In nationwide reaction to safe return of Apollo 11 astronauts, New York Stock Exchange went wild though stocks continued to fall. Numbers on annunciator boards flapped in unison as message “New York Stock Exchange shares the world’s joy at the safe return of Apollo from the moon—Astronauts Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins—So proudly we hail you” appeared on tape and illuminated on screen. Along Fifth Avenue church bells rang. Hayden Planetarium suspended usual program to throw “splashdown party” with champagne and live color telecast of Apollo 11 recovery operations flashed on blackened dome. San Franciscans exploded firecrackers and threw ticker tape from windows, and 10-story-high figure “11” was fashioned in lighted windows at mit in Boston. Des Moines, Iowa, rang Liberty Bell reproduction for first time since its 1950 installation on State House grounds. In Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s home town, Wapakoneta, Ohio, high school band marched playing moon songs. Montclair, N.J., theater marquee read, “Congratulations Buzz Aldrin—Mqntclair’s Man on the Moon.” In Huntsville, Ala., Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was hoisted on shoulders of four local councilmen while thousands at msfc site cheered and waved banners saying “Huntsville is Rocket City.” City of Houston planned “Texas size” celebration for Apollo 11 astronauts Aug. 16, including ticker-tape parade and huge program in city’s Astrodome coliseum. (Sloan, Weinraub, Hicks, Borders, upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 67, 29, 69, 31, 30; B Sun, 7/25/69, 45)
Aerospace industry sales of $28.3 billion in 1969 were second highest in industry’s history despite anticipated decline of 4.1% from 1968 record of $29.5 billion. All areas of aerospace endeavor leveled off except nonaerospace sales by aerospace companies, which increased. Commercial aerospace sales, principally jet transports, were $5,800 million, down from $6,429 million in 1968. Trend resulted from phasing out of current transport models while jumbo jet production was beginning. Sales by aerospace industry to dod were $16.2 million in 1969 and $16.6 billion in 1968. Military aircraft sales totaled $10 billion in 1969 and $10.7 billion in 1968. Space sales dropped to $4,499 million from $5,108 million in 1968, because of approaching completion of Apollo program hardware phase and cancellation of mol. (Aerospace, Winter, 1970)
In letter to Astronaut Frank Borman, Board of Education of Glendale Union High School District No. 205, Glendale, Ariz., said it had named planned high school “Apollo” in “honor and appreciation of the accomplishments of the participating astronauts.” It invited Apollo 8 crew to participate in 1970 dedication ceremony. (CR, 2/21/69, E1216)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean underwent last major preflight medical examination at KSC and were cleared for Nov. 14 launch. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, said astronauts were rested and in good spirits and showed no evidence of any infectious disease that might interfere with launch, (upi, NYT, 11/10/69, 10)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong joined comedian Bob Hope in entertaining 15,000 U.S. troops at field headquarters of 25th Infantry Div. near Saigon, South Vietnam, (upi, W Star, 12/24/69, A5)
Commentary in West Berlin’s independent Tagesspiegel: “Some people take off for the moon while others try to learn to operate a farm tractor. Our culture will depend on mastering this schizophrenic situation.” (Atlas, 7/69, 16)
U.S. newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 12 landing on moon: Washington Post: “The sheer joy of these two astronauts . . . shines out over everything else. They are obviously moon-struck. Conrad sounded like the most eager and happiest young geology student in the universe as he hummed and laughed his way from rock to rock, grabbing one after the other and complaining that he couldn’t get enough. And who would have thought that one of these highly skilled men would resort, as Bean did, to bonking the television camera with a hammer in an effort to make it work? Unfortunately, the failure of the camera did deprive us of seeing this frolic. . . . There was much to be learned from it about the moon and about the men who combine such cool technical competence with such zest for a serious and dangerous job.” (W Post, 11/20/69) Detroit News: “To travel 230,000 miles and hit the target on the button is almost unbelievable except that NASA, its crews and its machines are making believers of us all. But there’s a lesson to be taken to heart in the camera’s freak failure. Conrad and Bean tried to remedy the defect. . . . But they had to drop that to get on with more essential scientific exploratory experiments. Conrad’s oxygen limit was four hours. He hadn’t time to spare. . . . that should be warning to those euphoric advocates of setting a target date for a trip to Mars. An astronaut limited to four hours work on the moon is a reminder of the vast project ahead in confounding the elements in this untapped lunar mystery. Prophecies of colonizing the moon should be set against that four-hour limit, even though we no doubt will improve on it.” (D News, 11/20/69) Atlanta Constitution: “This second landing, more than 900 miles from where the pioneers of Apollo 11 put down last July, notably extends our knowledge. New landing techniques, a longer lunar stay, nuclear-powered experiments—they all serve to push back a fantastic frontier which only a few short years ago was regarded as a most implausible province of man.” (Atlanta Constitution, 11/20/69) Houstin Chronicle: “Our admiration for the coolness and the skill of astronauts Conrad, Bean and Richard F. Gordon, Jr.—the latter still in lonely orbit around the Moon—is boundless. The astronauts continue to perform, one mission after the other, in story-book perfection. We marvel, too, at the ability of the technicians on the ground to quickly respond to unexpected eventualities, like the electrical difficulty just after the launch, and to enable the mission to proceed unimpaired. These achievements inspire all men. They lift our sights for the future.” (.H Chron, 11/20/69, 2 Sec, 5) Birmingham, News: “The flight has been so predictably on schedule that its very success is certain to help push moon travel back into the ho-hum recesses of blase mankind’s mind, as each success in the Mercury and Gemini and early Apollo series made earth orbital spaceflight seem routine.” (B News, 11/20/69)
msfc announced that it had issued $10,751,000 contract to General Electric Co.’s Apollo Systems Div. for electrical support equipment for Apollo Telescope Mount and launch systems for Saturn V Workshop multiple docking adapter and airlock. Work was to be completed June 30, 1975. msfc had also issued six-month $56,727 contract to Bionic Instruments, Inc., to develop lunar roving vehicle hazard locator. Locator, which would be installed on lunar rover or dual-model vehicle, would use laser beam to spot rocks, holes, and other, obstacles on lunar surface and display on screen warning of obstacles hidden from astronauts’ view, (msfc Releases 69—223, 69—224)
nasa was using July 26 edict against unauthorized use of Apollo flight insignia to make “unauthorized” possession of souvenir Apollo flight patches Federal offense, 'Washington Post said. While astronauts felt they should be only ones entitled to distribute patches, businessmen contended they ought to be in public domain. NASA contractors like Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. had been granted exceptions to blanket rule. (Lardner, W Post, 11/25/69, A8)
Associated Press quoted Col. Edwin E. Aldrin (usaf, Ret.) as saying nasa had rejected his proposal to postpone Apollo 12 and run it in tandem with Apollo 13 so crews could protect or rescue each other in emergency. Aldrin was father of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and a NASA safety consultant. NASA Manned Space Flight Safety Director Jerome F. Lederer had called proposal impractical, “tremendously expensive, and I don’t know if it could be done.” Lederer had said there was no question that astronaut rescue capability from lunar surface or orbital emergency must be provided, but it was “out of the picture for Apollo.” (Haughland, AP, W Star, 9/22/69, A4)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
Soviet Embassy praised Apollo 10 mission as event that “inspires into us pride for man.” Message, written by academician Boniface Kedrov, called astronauts “20th Century Columbuses” and said mission was an “immeasurably more complex, dangerous and almost unrealizable aim compared with that Columbus set before himself at the dawn of the new era.” Moscow TV showed splashdown. (W Post, 5/27/69, A9)
Analysis of lunar soil samples supported theory that moon once was part of earth and became separated in cataclysmic tidal wave, Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief of GSFc’s Laboratory for Theoretical Studies, said in lecture at Northern Illinois Univ. Theory would explain why both earth’s crust and moon were deficient in precious metals, nickel, and cobalt and would account for indications of intense heat in moon’s formation. Heavy metals would have sunk to earth’s core when it was molten; moon had no heavy core, so it must be part of earth’s crust. (UPl, LA Her-Exam, 11/4/69; W News, 11/4/69)
American Academy of Achievement presented 1969 Gold Plate “Man of Achievement” Awards to Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and to Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders and Frank Borman. (LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69; AFJ, 6/21/69, 30)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman ended four-day visit to Czechoslovakia —first visit by U.S. astronaut to any Communist country, (upi, W Post, 5/24/69, A3)
In message transmitting to Congress nasa’s Twentieth Semiannual Report, President Nixon said: “During this decade, we have successfully met many challenges and have achieved significant progress in our ability to utilize space for practical applications, scientific exploration, and expansion of man’s frontiers. We have subsequently landed astronauts upon the Moon, explored its surface, and returned these men to Earth. This historic event was made possible because of the solid foundation of a broad range of earlier activities, and through the skill and dedication of the many contributors to our space program.” (PD, 11/17/69, 1603; CR, 11/13/69, S14274)
NASA announced it had signed $2,919,000 supplemental agreement with Div. of Sponsored Research of mit for fabrication and delivery of 40 inertial reference integrating gyros (irigs) for Apollo guidance and navigation system, bringing total contract to $81,000,000. (nasa Release 69—11)
In interview published by This Week, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman said many things could be learned from moon: “One ... I hope will be international cooperation, such as now exists in Antarctica. Even though the moon struck me as a very desolate, forbidding expanse, it will be very beneficial for men to work together to unlock its many mysteries and secrets. I hope that both the moon and the large permanent space stations from earth will be citadels for international cooperation and that the people who visit them will really be internationalists in the truest sense.” (This Week, 4/6/69)
During visit to West Berlin, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman drove past U.S.S.R.’s war memorial near Berlin wall and looked across wall into East Berlin. At Tempelhof airport Borman told press, “I was here before [during 1949 Berlin airlift] amid many bags of coal. There have been many space advances in the last two decades, yet we have so many troubles here on earth.” (C Trib, 2/13/69)
NASA’s Apollo 10 lunar orbital mission was proceeding well toward launch readiness for 11:49 am EST May 18, Deputy Apollo Program Director George H. Hage told NASA Hq. briefing. Flight readiness test had been successfully completed April 9. Countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin April 27, completing cryogenic propellant flow May 2; crew participation in cddt would begin May 3. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot) would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad B—being used for first time—on eight-day mission in which crew would enter lunar orbit, separate lm from CSM, and pilot lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface. Mission would include 11 different crew operations on TV and Westinghouse Electric Corp.-developed “experiment involving color TV if we can develop it and get it prepared to fly in time to support this mission. If we are able to ... we would do most of the pictures with color TV rather than black and white. . . .” (Transcript)
New York Times Magazine profile quoted NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine: Late President John F. Kennedy’s decision to try to put man on moon by end of 1960s was “bold act that is standing the test of time damned well,” Dr. Paine had said. “Our ability to function now in a new environment a decade after Jack Kennedy is going to be a very challenging test for us. Do we understand that environment? Can we achieve a new consensus without the ‘Pearl Harbor’ of a Russian lead in space? We’re not really talking about the space program anymore. The space program is finished. You wouldn’t speak about Columbus’s voyage as the sail-powered water craft program. What Columbus’s journey was all about had nothing to do with water. It was the extension of man’s dominion, new life styles, new forms of government, new societies.” Dr. Paine believed U.S. had no choice but to push ahead. “A nation that turns down a challenge like this is a nation that’s on its way out.” (Buckley, NYT Magazine, 6/8/69, 34-63)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins visited Canadian Parliament in Ottawa. Canadian Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau said astronauts’ contributions to science and humanity “will live as long as mankind lives.” Astronauts would conclude two-day Canadian visit with Dec. 2 visit to Montreal and tour of nearby factory where lm landing pads were made, (upi, W Post, 12/4/69, B3)
Aerospace industry was having its greatest week in history with Apollo 11 launch, said New York Times, but aerospace stocks remained in doldrums. Wall Street was “bearish about the industry and, from an investment standpoint, unenthusiastic about space.” Security analysts interviewed agreed Apollo 11 would have little effect on long-depressed stocks, which commenced decline in 1968; many were selling near lows for year. Aerospace industry was chief beneficiary of space program funds, but largest portion of $34 billion spent since 1960 had been allocated before “really spectacular shots” occurred. While Apollo program had been “treniendous boon to the aerospace industry and to the advancement of technology,” it represented small part of total industry revenues and outlook was for further decline. (Hammer, NYT, 7/17/69, 63)
International comment on NASA’s Apollo 10 mission: U.N. Secretary General U Thant said flight was “a thrilling compound of great skill, boundless courage and fabulous technology, as impressive for its perfection as for its informality and its great humor. ... It is refreshing to have been able to turn for a moment from all our troubles on earth to this magnificent spectacle of man’s extraordinary capacity for achievement and peaceful quest.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said mission represented almost miraculous achievement attainable only by finest technology and engineering in world: “Every part of the Apollo 10 concept now appears to have been performed perfectly. . . . We are nearly about to enter an epoch when men and materials can be transferred to other planets in the solar system.” U.K. Prime Minister Harold Wilson termed flight “a great triumph in both human and technical terms.” Soviet space scientist, Dr. Vassily V. Parin, called mission “big event in the history of cosmonautics,” impressive because of “the accuracy of all its maneuvers.” Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India, said of Apollo 10 crew, “These men who could have come back with moon dust on their feet are leaving that for others in the true spirit of detachment of great pioneers.” Heinrich Luebke, President of West Germany, said mission “brings the United States to the brink of an historical high point—the landing of the first man on the moon.” (NYT, 5/27/69, 29; AP, B Sun, 5/27/69, Al)	__	'
NASA announced appointment of Astronaut James A. McDivitt as Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. McDivitt, who would remain in USAF, would be responsible for planning lunar landing missions subsequent to first landing and would no longer be candidate for space flight crew assignments, (nasa Release 69—96)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family departed on usaf jet for 18-day Presidential goodwill mission to Europe. Itinerary: London, Feb. 2—5; Paris, Feb. 5—7; Brussels, Feb. 7—10; The Hague, Feb. 10—11; Bonn, Feb. 11—12; West Berlin, Feb. 12—13; Rome, Feb. 13—17; Madrid, Feb. 17—19; and Lisbon, Feb. 19—21. (nasa Int Aff; W Star, 2/2/69, A3)
First public display of 21.1-gm Apollo 11 moon rock at American Museum of Natural History in New York attracted largest crowd in museum’s history—42,195 persons. Display would run for 2% mos as highlight of museum’s centennial celebration. (NYT, 11/16/69, 66; AP, W Star, 11/17/69, Al)
During telephone call from White House to U.S.S. Hornet, shortly after Apollo 12 splashdown and recovery, President Nixon told Apollo 12 astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan F. Bean of their promotions to captain, usn. (PD, 12/1/69, 1659)
Inaugural parade following President Nixon’s address included NASA float carrying mockup of lunar module to be used for moon landing and Apollo 7 capsule. Apollo 7 Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham rode in convertible automobile in front of NASA float. (NASA Pio)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on Apollo program, space flight operations, and advanced manned missions before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. He explained importance of lunar exploration and outlined plans for new space station.	■ President’s Science Advisory Committee had said answers to questions about moon “may profoundly affect our views of the evolution of the solar system and its place, as well as man’s in the larger scheme of things.” Fact that earth’s moon was largest in relation to its planet, Dr. Mueller said, “implies that the two bodies may have been formed in the same manner at the same time. If true, the moon may be a book containing the secret of the earth’s first billion years of life. This record is lost on the earth which is subjected to . . . erosion by atmosphere and water. ... By comparing similarities and contrasting differences, man may be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth; for example, the mechanisms that cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and the processes responsible for concentrating ore deposits. The orbits of Apollo 8 and the Lunar Orbiters were disturbed by mass concentrations beneath the circular lunar seas. These may be huge meteors that struck the moon with such force that they melted and sank into the interior, or they may be iron deposits. “Another objective of lunar exploration is to learn about man as a space explorer—his capabilities and limitations. Some day man will move on to other planets; the moon is a training ground. . . . We don’t have the basic information which early lunar landings will furnish and we can only speculate today about the feasibility of the moon as a base for an observatory or a permanent science station—about exploiting its environment of low gravity and high vacuum—about its potential for natural resources. ... A long-range goal like the lunar base would direct technological advances, stimulate public interest, and attain subsidiary objectives with earth application such as food synthesis, environmental control, and recovery of useful elements from rock.” Within new program category, Space Flight Operations, nasa was bypassing intermediate space station, launch vehicles, and logistic craft and proposing to move directly to new, semipermanent space station and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system. Space station “should be in being by the mid-1970s.” With FY 1969 funds, contractor definition efforts were being initiated. FY 1970 funds would continue definition, preliminary design, and supporting work. Dr. Mueller described space complex 200 to 300 mi above earth planned for 10 yrs’ continuous operation and adaptable for crew size, additional laboratory facilities, or other special-purpose equipment through selection, design, and arrangement of component modules. Crew would rotate at three- to six-month intervals, ferried between station and earth by reusable shuttles. Station’s electric power would come from solar panels or small nuclear generator. (Testimony; NASA Release 69-49)
With Apollo 11 launch “minus-23 days” MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, visited 3,000-yr-old temple of Apollo at Delphi, Greece. After consultation with oracle, Dr. von Braun said, “I am convinced that we will succeed because no other space operation was ever so well prepared in advance.” Oracle, he said, “was ambiguous, as usual.” {Time, 7/4/69, 35; AP, W Post, 6/25/69)
Gravity at Apollo 11 lunar landing site had been determined to be 162,821,680 milligals from data telemetered to earth by lm on lunar surface, msc scientist Richard L. Nance reported in Science. Gravity was measured with pulsed integrating pendulous accelerometer. Measurement could suggest order of magnitude of other anomalies, provide guide for future surveys, and indicate degree of homogeneity of moon. Radius of moon at an observation point could be determined independently of other methods of measurement. (Science, 10/17/69, 384-5)
Pittsfield, Mass., Berkshire Eagle editorial said: “It subtracts nothing from the extraordinary human and technical achievement represented by Apollo 11 to say that the projected lunar landing is an occasion not only for awe and pride but also for a thoughtful reappraisal of our whole approach to the new frontier of space.” (B Eagle, 7/19/69)
President Nixon addressed U.S. Embassy staff in Paris before departure for visit with Pope Paul VI at Vatican and return to U.S. after goodwill tour:	. . the success of a policy depends upon thousands of people around, in an embassy like this and an establishment like this, and millions around this world,” in same way that success of Apollo 8
Terminal countdown for Apollo 9 mission, scheduled for launch March 3, began at 10:00 pm EST. (NASA Proj Off)
Bill added $258 million to R&D funds for new total of $3,264 billion, including increase of $75.7 million for Apollo program, to total $1,767 billion. Of this increase, $32.1 million was for Saturn V improvements and $4.6 million for lunar exploration. Within new total of $354.8-million noa for manned space flight operations, bill restored $57 million cut from Apollo Applications by budget amendment and added $66 million for space station and shuttle and $6.2 million for Saturn V production. In space science and applications, bill reduced funds for supporting research and technology by $12 million and deferred funding for four proposed Explorer satellites and for Mariner-Mercury 1973 mission, but restored biosatellite program to originally requested $18 million plus $1.6 million restored for Delta launch vehicle for Biosatellite-F. Earth Resources Technology Satellite funds were increased by $10 million, with transfer of funds to other projects prohibited. Advanced research and technology funds were increased by $31.5 million, including $13.5-million increase for nuclear rocket program, $5.25 million for chemical propulsion, and restoration of $1.20 million for aeronautics. Research and program management total was cut by $7.15 million, to $643.75 million. Construction of facilities total remained unchanged. (Text; CR, 5/15/69; House Rpt 91—255)
At state dinner in New Delhi, India, Acting President Mohammed Hidayatullah exchanged toasts with President Nixon and congratulated him: “The epic flight to the moon and back by three of your countrymen has amazed the world and marks a new stage in science and technology. On behalf of the Government and people of India, and myself, I congratulate you, and through you, the people of your country on this historic occasion. . . . We are glad to know that you are sharing the knowledge you have gained with the rest of the world.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1056-9)	.
Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu met President and Mrs. Nixon on arrival at Otopeni Airport, Bucharest. President Nixon replied to welcome: “. . . this significant moment in the history of relations between our two countries coincides with a great moment in the history of the human race. Mankind has landed on the moon. We have established a foothold in outer space. But there are goals we have not reached here on earth. We are still building a just peace in the world. This is a work that requires the same cooperation and patience and perseverance from men of good will that it took to launch that vehicle to the moon.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1065)
In Washington Daily News column Sen. Everett M. Dirksen (R-lll.) said: “Unknowing voices clamor to us to give up the search into the unknown. They ask us to spend the money on things here on earth. They ask for something that already has been done. Where do you think the money is spent that sent Apollo 11 to the moon? It wasn’t spent on the moon. There are no creatures there to benefit from the billions spent to finally land Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin in the Sea of Tranquility. The money was spent here on earth, where it enriched the laborers, the craftsmen, the technicians, the engineers, the scientists— and their neighborhoods. It enriched the millions and millions of people who always benefit from industry. . . . (W News, 8/8/69, 23)
In U.S.’s Annual Review of National and Co-Operative International Space Activities, Soviet Government report said Soviet scientists had paid “great attention” to developing methods of detecting signs of life on other planets. “With the development of space research, the problem of detecting life on the celestial bodies closest to the earth by means of space craft is becoming a priority matter. The considerable difference between conditions on the surface of the moon, Venus and Mars and those in which terrestrial life exists makes it necessary for us to extend our knowledge of the limits within which terrestrial life and life in general can exist. In this connexion Soviet scientists are investigating the possible limits of the existence of life. The absence of systematic processes for the movement of matter on the moon obviously makes active life on its surface impossible. On Mars, where free liquid water is probably absent, life is possible using matter transfer by frost, ice in the soil, water vapour and the wind. Examination of the temperature limits for the existence of life gives rise to a number of considerations which allow us not to exclude the possibility of the existence of life, in for example, the polar regions of Venus.” (Text)
During CBS TV interview at Cape Kennedy following Apollo 11 launch, former President Lyndon B. Johnson said, “If our industrial people, these great managers of industry, the laboring people of the country, the government, the scientists, all with the help of Congress, can get together and do a job like this there’s just nothing we can’t do.” To world’s ills, “we must apply some of the great talent that we’ve applied to space.” There wasn’t “a single thing that our country does, that our government does, that our people do, that has greater potential for peace than the space effort.” (upi, NYT, 7/17/69, 20)
In Washington Evening Star, Judith Randal said world’s first successful heart transplant and Apollo 8 mission made 1968 year “of spectacular scientific achievement” but that critics of both events had charged that technology “was being exploited at the expense of basic research and social worth.” It did no harm, she said, to celebrate heart transplants and voyages to moon, “but, with the advent of a new administration, it also is worth reflecting what the price may be— when so much else needs doing—of deciding to climb Mount Everest just because Mount Everest is there and we have learned how to climb it.” (W'Star, 1/2/69, A14)
Apollo 10 commander Thomas P. Stafford received Flying Tiger Pilot Trophy, presented every two years by Flying Tigers, group of World War II veterans. Trophy was presented during 27th reunion in Ojai, Calif. (AP, W Star, 7/7/69, A2)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, with wives, were welcomed by President Nixon at White House ceremony on their return from 44,650-mi around-the-world goodwill journey. President called 38-day, 29-stop tour of 22 countries “most successful goodwill trip in the history of the United States.” First men on the moon had demonstrated they were “the best possible ambassadors America could have on this earth.” Armstrong said astronauts had been receive'd everywhere, “not just as individuals, but as representatives of the United States” and of “scientific and technological accomplishment . . . that serves as a symbol ... of a willing and talented nation assembling its resources and firm in its will ... to share for the benefits of all mankind.” During journey, astronauts had given 22 news conferences, been received by 20 heads of state, and received decorations on nine occasions. (PD, 11/10/69, 1563; Robertson, NYT, 11/6/69, 22)
George Gallup released results of first poll of President Nixon’s popularity since Apollo 11 success. Poll showed 65% of U.S. public approved his performance in office. Poll July 11—14, before Apollo 11 mission, had shown 58% approval. (W Post, 8/11/69, A2)
At opening session of Governors’ Conference in Washington, D.C., President Nixon presented to governors mementos from Apollo 11 mission for people of 50 states, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, District of Columbia, and Trust Territories of Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa. Each presentation, consisting ‘ of state flag and chip from moon’s surface, bore inscription: “This flag of your state was carried to the Moon and back by Apollo 11, and this fragment of the Moon’s surface was brought to Earth by the crew of that first manned lunar landing.” (PD, 12/8/69, 1696)
msfc announced selection of Bendix Corp. and Boeing Co. for further competitive negotiations on cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for design, development, test, and delivery of four manned lunar roving vehicles for flight to lunar surface aboard descent stage of Apollo lm [see July 11]. First operational vehicle would be delivered in early 1971 for launch late that year. msfc also had awarded $238,400 contract to Bryson Construction and $224,888 contract to Miller and Berry for construction of two clean rooms for Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) assembly and test and had called for bids for checkout station construction. Bids were due Oct. 21. (msfc Releases 69-220; 69-221)
South Korea dedicated its first superhighway, linking Seoul with Inchon. It was named Apollo in honor of U.S. moon landing. (AP, W Post, 7/23/69, C5)
Commemorative stamp to be issued May 5 in honor of Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission would include phrase “In the beginning God . . .” on photo of earth as seen from moon, taken by Apollo 8 crew. Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said phrase, read from Genesis by Astronaut William A. Anders during lunar orbit Christmas Eve 1968, would be included in response to many requests. Stamp would be first U.S. stamp with religious wording since 1961. (upi, W Post, 2/28/69)
At state banquet in Bangkok, Thai King Bhumibol Adulyadej toasted President Nixon: “Last week’s breathtaking achievement of Apollo 11 and its brave American crew cannot be measured solely in scientific terms, for it also indicates man’s ability to look beyond his earthbound problems and to set his sights on new horizons in quest of wider knowledge and deeper understanding of himself and his environment.” {PD, 8/4/69, 1049-50)
Richmond, Va., News-Leader editorial approved Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s calling for flight to Mars by end of century [see July 16]: “One day, man will go beyond the planets, to other solar systems; right now . . . that is not within our technological reach. But Mars is, and so are the other planets. The moon is in earth’s, and man’s, own crib. Plans and commitments should be made—now—for man to take grown-up strides in the real world of space.” (R News-Leader, 7/18/69)
Dr. Gene Simmons, msc Chief Scientist, told press at msc reported conflict between scientists and engineers in U.S. space program was “more apparent than it is real.” msc officials were making great efforts to increase scientific return from nine remaining Apollo missions. Dr. Simmons was “not sure there is this rift.” (W Post, 10/25/69, A9)
Norrlandska Social-Demokraten, Boden, Sweden, editorial commented that Russian press was surprisingly generous with praise of men behind Apollo 11 and American space research in general during mission, but now press seemed to fear landing might have increased respect for U.S. around the world. “It is surely disturbing for Pravda and the Russian Party leaders that the American conquest of the moon . . . witnessed by the greater part of the Communist world, crushed the myth of the Communist system’s superiority.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Washington Post editorial: “It is not often that the public has a chance to share in the day to day unraveling of scientific mysteries. The men and women who engage in basic research prefer to work quietly in laboratories and eventually announce their findings in the atmosphere of scholarly meetings or academic publications. But at Houston and Pasadena [msc and JPl] these days, the public has become a silent observer of the plodding work that goes into basic research. Regardless of the drama that is involved, the study of the rocks brought back by Apollo 11 from the moon and of the pictures being transmitted back by Mariners 6 and 7 as they fly past Mars is simply basic research. Although results are trickling out each day, the dimensions of each discovery are hard to measure and an understanding of their cumulative impact is likely to be long in coming.” (W Post, 8/2/69, A12)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director of Flight Operations, told press at msc he wanted full report on piloting difficulties in landing on moon before committing Apollo 13 to landing attempt on moon’s rugged central highlands. Full discussion of lunar landing—described by Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., as “no easy task”—was important aspect of what must be learned during crew debriefing, Kraft said. (Wilford, NYT, 11/25/69, 33)
Estimated 250,000 persons watched Apollo 11 astronauts parade in Houston, Tex. Crowd threw confetti, ticker tape, and “moon certificates”— fake $100 and $1,000 paper money—until streets were two to three feet deep in litter. Later, 55,000 persons attended gala in Houston’s Astrodome coliseum, which was filled to capacity. Total of 31 astronauts and families rode through cheering throngs, (upi, W Post, 8/17/69, A12)
President Nixon arrived at Lahore, Pakistan, during round-the-world journey. Pakistan President Yahya Khan said at airport, “The City of Lahore is happy to receive you on its historic soil and to share your joy at the most recent and the most memorable triumph of human courage, determination, and scientific skill which was achieved by your astronauts when they were first to land on the moon.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1060)
msfc announced it had extended contract with Mason-Rust for continued support services at Michoud Assembly Facility for six months. Contract modification amounted to $3,786,203. (msfc Release 69—46) February 27: NASA postponed Apollo 9 earth-orbital mission, scheduled for launch Feb. 28, after intensive medical examinations of prime crew revealed viral infections. (W Star, 2/27/69, Al)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, told preflight press conference Apollo 9 astronauts were “in a real fine state of health” for March 3 launch. Although two astronauts still had some minor throat infection, it would not interfere with planned launch time. Three-day postponement of launch from original Feb. 28 date had made possibility of inflight illness “exceedingly slim.” Only addition to spacecraft’s standard medical kit—which already included nasal emolient—might be throat lozenges. (Transcript)
Press commented on personal qualities of Apollo 10 astronauts during crises and technological marvels. New York Times: “Their courage and high technical skill were evident. There was total absence of posturing or pomposity. Notable, too, was the absence of false patriotism or of any attempt to use the space feat as the basis for claims of national or ideological superiority. The astronauts’ personal behavior added a warm human luster to the superb scientific and technological feats they were and are performing.” (NYT, 5/23/69) Washington Evening Star:	. . the flight of Apollo 10 has shown something . . . about the durability of human nature. . . . However rigorous the training, however unworldly and unreal the surroundings, man is still capable of awe, error, fright, outrage and—when the occasion calls for it—profanity. It’s good to know.” (W Star, 5/23/69, A16)
Tass announced that Luna XV was still functioning normally in lunar orbit with 109.4-km (68-mi) apolune, 16.1-km (10-mi) perilune, 1-hr 54-min period, and 127° inclination. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Luna XV had conducted two midcourse corrections and speculated that spacecraft was preparing either to land or to observe Apollo 11 landing. (AP, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al) Harlem, many of 50,000 attending soul music festival booed lunar landing announcement. At massive “Moon In” at Central Park, enthusiastic crowd of young people watched landing on huge outdoor TV screen in steady downpour and bought “lunar dogs,” “Apollo rock candy,” and “moon picnic” boxes. Composer and band leader Duke Ellington made singing debut with “Moon Maiden,” song he wrote to celebrate Apollo 11 success, taped for ABC. New York Times sold out 950,000 copies of July 21 issue announcing lunar landing and announced it would reprint entire edition July 24 as souvenir. Special Florida Times-Union edition datelined “Moonday, July 21” sold out in Jacksonville within two hours. Estimated 8,000 Western Electric Co. employees left work or failed to show up in protest against being denied access to TV or radios on job during lunar landing. Des Moines, Iowa, TV stations received some complaints from viewers over absence of regular programs.	, Crime rate fell in Los Angeles, while in Savannah, Ga., 17 prisoners sawed their way out of Chatham County prison branch while guards watched Apollo 11 on TV. At msc, Houston Welfare Rights Organization members demonstrated around display of lm, calling on U.S. to set new goal—elimination of poverty. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21/69; 7/22/69; Apollo 11 Mission Commentary, 7/21/69; NYT, 7/17/69, 7/27/69) • Millions around world hailed Apollo 11 landing: Soviet Premier Alexsey Kosygin complimented U.S. on lunar landing and expressed interest in widening U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation during July 21 Moscow discussion with former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who was ending Soviet visit. Soviet TV did not carry live coverage of Apollo 11 lunar landing July 20; Tass announcement was read by newscaster and carried in two-paragraph item on Pravdals front page. Evening paper, Izvestia, accorded story more space and featured photo of astronauts on moon. On TV, Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov described landing as “major landmark” and said crew had coped “brilliantly” with mission. Georgy Petrov, Director of Soviet Institute for Cosmic Research, called Apollo 11 “outstanding achievement” but said more data per ruble could have been gathered by unmanned probes. Statue dedicated to Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled July 21 in sports stadium at Cracow, Poland. In U.K., Queen Elizabeth watched lunar landing on TV, then cabled President Nixon “warmest congratulations.” Prime Minister Harold Wilson expressed “heartfelt relief.” At Jodrell Bank Experimental Station astronomers applauded and director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said that “the future has been revolutionized.” David Threlfall collected $24,000 on five-year-old bet that man would land on celestial body before 1971. Betting shop had given him thousand-to-one odds [see May 29]. In Wollongong, Australia, local judge heard cases while watching Apollo 11 lunar landing on portable TV set. Czechoslovakia issued two postage stamps July 21 commemorating lunar landing, while record crowds at U.S. Embassy exhibition tapered off after exhausting supply of Apollo giveaway materials. Five thousand Hungarians walked through American Embassy in Budapest July 21, picking up USIA pamphlet Man on the Moon. In Romania, bouquets were tossed through U.S. Embassy fence to foot of flagpole and several Romanians reported large numbers of Bulgarians were crossing border to watch live TV coverage of Apollo 11. Cuban government decided not to jam Voice of America broadcast of Apollo 11 lunar landing. In Algiers news was ignored except for announcement in government-controlled newspaper that “the man is on the moon.” In Ghana, village chief listening to voa broadcast feared astronauts might fall off moon if not careful. In Bangkok, freedom for 622 pardoned prisoners was delayed because guards refused to leave TV sets showing Apollo 11. Lunar landing stole top play in Israel and Egypt, from accounts of their fierce fighting at Suez Canal. In Singapore, girl born half hour after lunar landing was named Luna. In Pakistan, boy baby was named Apollo. Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and Indian Parliament gave standing ovation to Apollo 11 astronauts at opening of day’s business in New Delhi July 21. In Japan, Emperor Hirohito called off customary daily stroll and interrupted lunch to watch Apollo 11 on TV. Iroquois Indians in Brantford, Ontario, Canada, feared lunar landing might plunge earth into darkness and release monsters from earth’s core. Their medicine man and chief, Joseph Logan, Jr., had said moon was sacred to his people and “we are not supposed to disturb her.” In Taipei, Formosa, Nationalist China Parliament member Hsieh Jen-chao invited Apollo 11 astronauts to attend Moon Festival honoring rabbit which Chinese legend said lived on moon and could provide eternal life. Some devout Moslems in Somalia refused to believe Apollo 11 lunar landing was reality. Following radio, press, and word-of-mouth announcement, fist fights broke out July 21 in Mogadiscio streets between believers and disbelievers. Parents of baby boy born on lunar landing day broke with Muslim tradition and named child Armstrong Abdurahman Osman. In Brussels workers in radio and TV studios suspended strike during transmission of Apollo 11 mission film. In Brazil several thousand persons cheered as they witnessed televised lunar landing at Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro while church bells rang outside. In Santiago de Chile people rushed out of restaurants to look at moon, forgetting it was midafternoon when they learned of lunar landing. While rest of world focused on lunar landing, one quarter of world’s population labored through sixth moon of Chinese lunar year unaware of event. Approximately 800 million people in Communist China had heard no news of lunar landing. Only deviation from “total blackout on space exploration” was July 17 story of Astronaut Frank Borman’s visit to Moscow, reported by New China News Agency. (C Trib, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21-22/69; W Star, 7/22/69; NYT, 7/22/69; B Sun, 7/21—22/69; Am Embassy, Prague, Bucharest, Brussels, Budapest, Mogadiscio)
At annual meeting of Aerospace Medical Assn, and interview which followed in San Francisco, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, said it was almost certain that at least one Apollo 11 astronaut would develop illness during 21-day quarantine period following return from moon. “We have to face the fact that we’ve had post-flight illness on every Apollo mission so far. Our problem will be to determine whether any illnesses that show up . . . are due to the stresses of space flight or to some micro-organism picked up on the moon.” Among difficulties noted during Apollo program were loss of exercise capacity for period after return to earth, motion sickness in flight, and damage to red blood cells from atmosphere of 100% oxygen. Blood cell damage had been alleviated by addition of nitrogen to spacecraft atmosphere. (Huntsville Times, 5/7/69)
There was no question that manned Mars mission could be “organized, equipped and flown, possibly by 1985 or 1986,” William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. “But the cost of such a flight would be tremendous.” Apollo had cost $25 billion over eight years. Project Mars “would cost four times as much over a period twice as long.” Taxpayers and legislators “should listen to the professional pitchmen of space with a dubious ear, demanding facts instead of the sort of rhetoric Dr. George E. Mueller delivered on Apollo 11 splashdown day.” (W Star, 8/3/69, C4) across in Martian summer and increased to 3,500 mi across in winter. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/5/69, Al)
Visiting Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin P. Feoktistov and Georgy T. Beregovoy viewed Apollo 11 lunar rock sample at Smithsonian Institution during tour of Washington, D.C. (W Star, 11/2/69)
nasa adoption of field sequential color TV system to relay pictures from moon on future Apollo flights was “solace” to inventor Dr. Peter C. Goldmark, president of CBS Laboratories, New York Times said. System, employing small revolving filter disc to inject primary colors in front of camera, had been rejected by industry and FCC some 15 yrs earlier in favor of all-electronic compatible system now in worldwide use. Advantage of Goldmark system on moon flights was ability to pick up usable color images under exceptionally low levels of light intensity—important where stars might be major illumination source. Images received from space would then be converted through compatible system for home reception. Dr. Goldmark said system might be “first technological breakthrough that is 28 years old.” (NYT, 4/5/69, 30)
Apollo 11 astronauts would leave three items on lunar surface to commemorate landing, NASA announced. Silicon disc, 1%-in-dia, would carry statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon; messages of goodwill from leaders of 73 countries; list of leaders of Congress and members of four congressional committees responsible for NASA legislation; and names of NASA’s top management, past and present. Statements, messages, and names had been etched on disc by process used to make microminiature electronic circuits. Each message had been reduced 200 times, to barely visible dot. Three- by five-foot nylon American flag with tubing along top edge would be erected on eight-foot aluminum staff on airless moon. Two other U.S. flags and flags from 136 nations and 50 U.S. states would be carried to moon and returned to earth. Plaque left on lm descent stage would bear images of two hemispheres of earth and inscription “Here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.” It would bear names of Apollo 11 crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins—and President Nixon, (nasa Releases 69—83E, 69-83F, 69-83H)
Following successful completion of Apollo 12 President Nixon issued statement: “This mission has shown conclusively that the system we have developed has enormous scientific potential and we can now look forward to utilizing that capability. . . . The triumph of Apollo 12 is not only an American triumph. This second voyage to the surface of the moon represents another great victory of the human mind and spirit, one which will lift the sights and raise the spirits of men everywhere.” {PD, 12/1/69, 1659)
ComSatCorp announced broadcasters had booked 40 hrs of satellite time for TV coverage of President Nixon’s European trip Feb. 23—March 3. More than 17 hrs had been requested from abroad to date for coverage of Apollo 9 Feb. 28—March 3. (ComSatCorp Release 69-8; W Star, 2/16/69, C6)
In his last State of the Union message, President Johnson told Joint Session of Congress:	. . if the Nation’s problems are continuing, so are this Nation’s assets. Our economy, the democratic system, our sense of exploration, symbolized most recently by the wonderful flight of the Apollo 8, in which all Americans took great pride, the good common sense and sound judgment of the American people, and their essential love of justice.” Quest for durable peace “has absorbed every Administration since the end of World War II. It has required us to seek a limitation of arms races not only among the superpowers, but among the smaller nations as well. We have joined in the test ban treaty of 1963, the outer space treaty of 1967, and the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons in 1968.” {PD, 1/20/69, 60—8)
NASA was combining Apollo 11 spectacular with “bit of spectacular lobbying,” Washington Evening Star said. It had invited all 533 members of House and Senate to fly at NASA’s expense to witness Apollo 11 launch from Cape Kennedy. Total bill could come to nearly $28,000. (W Star, 6/21/69, A3)
Economist commented on perils of prolonged space voyages: “When astronauts begin to do tours of duty that could run from three months to a year at a time on the moon, or on orbiting earth platforms— still more when they embark on 2% year trips to Mars—the problems will be much greater. Their bodies may adapt themselves to conditions of weightlessness or low gravity, and to living in atmospheres of rather less density than on earth, and then find it hard to re-adapt back to earth conditions again. If, over time, the changes become irreversible, we could witness the evolution of a new race of space hominoids with whom we could communicate but not cohabit.” (Economist, 11/22/69)
msfc announced contract awards: McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. was awarded $97,340,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract to provide for two Saturn V Workshops—one for launch in 1972 and second for backup. McDonnell Douglas also received $87,450,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract modification for continued work on two airlock modules for Apollo Applications (aa) program cluster, including tests, checkout, documentation, and logistics support. Boeing Co. received $25,130,376 contract modification extending period for completion of Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC—15) from June 30, 1970, to June 30,1971. (msfc Releases 69—199, 69—200, 69—201)
NASA had raised limit on amount of samples Apollo 11 crew could bring back from moon, Washington Post writer Thomas O’Toole reported in Los Angeles Times. Instead of 50 lbs of samples originally set as maximum, astronauts would be permitted to collect as much as they could carry—probably up to about 100 lbs. (LA Times, 6/22/69)
Dr. Persa R. Bell, Chief of msc Lunar and Earth Sciences Div. and Manager of Lunar Receiving Laboratory, announced his resignation, effective in January 1970. He said he would return to scientific research at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Until his departure Dr. Bell would act as special assistant to Anthony J. Calio, msc Director of Science and Applications, evaluating and making recommendations on LRL operations and performing scientific research within LRL. Bryan R. Erb, Deputy Chief of Lunar and Earth Sciences Div., would be acting lrl manager for Apollo 12 mission, (msc Release 69—74)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists issued first comprehensive report on preliminary study of lunar samples collected by Apollo 11 astronauts. Experiments indicated there was no life in sample and traces of organic material reported earlier were probably from astronauts’ space-suits and containers, rubber gloves, and tools used to handle material. (Traces of hydrocarbons in two samples of lunar dust had been reported Aug. 6.) Autopsies performed on 48 mice injected with lunar dust and then killed had shown no signs of germs or illness. Detailed analyses of samples would begin in late September when material would be released from quarantine and distributed to 146 principal investigators in 9 countries. (AP, W Star, 8/8/69, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 8/7/69, 1)
iaf announced official endorsement of absolute world’s records for Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission’s 10 lunar orbits: altitude, 234,672.5 mi; greatest mass lifted into earth orbit, 282,197 lbs; total time in space for an astronaut, James A. Lovell, Jr., 572 hrs 10 min 16 secs. Apollo 8 world class records: duration of lunar mission, 146 hrs 59 min 49 secs; duration in lunar orbit, 20 hrs 14 min 13.2 secs. To obtain iaf certification of Apollo 11, crew would be given torn halves of four $1 bills for comparison with other halves on return as proof same men returned as took off. naa would submit claim for absolute world record for extravehicular activity (eva) for successful Apollo 11 mission. (AP, NYT, 7/15/69, 20)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists told press at msc rocks retrieved from moon by Apollo 12 crew were younger, lower in titanium, and higher in nickel than those retrieved by Apollo 11 and showed no signs of bacteria or toxicity. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of New York State Univ. at Stony Brook said Apollo 12 samples seemed to be 2.2 billion to 2.5 billion yrs old, compared to 3.8 billion to 4.6 billion yrs old for Apollo 11 samples. “The younger age means the . . . activity, whether volcanic or meteorite impact, took place over an extended period of time, not on a short time scale.” Dr. S. Ross Taylor of Australian National Univ. said chemistry of Apollo 12 and Apollo 11 samples was basically similar but had many interesting differences. “The surface is not completely homogeneous across the moon. There are differences in chemistry probably reflecting in the underlying rock. ... it looks as though we could have two extremes of differences.” Apollo 12 samples from Ocean of Storms had about half titanium content found in Apollo 11 samples from Sea of Tranquility. They had few refractory elements and fewer volatile elements. (Wilford, NYT, 12/13/69, 20; Cohn, W Post, 12/13/69, A10)
Countdown for NASA’s Apollo 10 mission, scheduled for launch May 18, began at ksc. Astronauts completed three-hour physical examinations and were reported to be in good health and good spirits. {W Post, 5/13/69, A7; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/14/69, A3)
First stage of Saturn V (SA—508) launch vehicle, to be used on Apollo 13, reached ksc. Second stage, scheduled to leave mtf June 25, would reach ksc June 30. Third stage had arrived at ksc June 13. Instrument unit would be flown from mtf to ksc July 7. (msfc Release 69—148)
Apollo 9 press briefing was held at NASA Hq. Countdown would begin Feb. 22, for launch from ETR at 11 am EST Feb. 28. Ten-day earth-orbital mission would demonstrate lm manned crew performance for first time and carry out intervehicular activities between spacecraft, through-docking-tunnel activities, and eva. Number of small aluminum-alloy brackets and fittings had been replaced or reinforced in LM—3 and LM—4 because they were sensitive to stress or corrosion. Both vehicles were ready for flight. Apollo Program Director George H. Hage said number of activities would be performed on Apollo 9 that had not been done before “in the sense of wringing out the spacecraft.” NASA was “working the hardware launch readiness of Apollo 10 to a late April date” so that “if we have difficulty on Apollo 9 and need to repeat some element or all of the D mission, we can get that mission off as early as possible.” If Apollo 9 was successful Apollo 10 could be launched as early as May 17 on lunar landing mission. (Transcript)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean and 25 other persons quarantined in Lunar Receiving Laboratory were released one day ahead of schedule. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, said astronauts were in good physical condition. (B Sun, 12/11/69, Al)
Reaction to Apollo 12 lunar landing was “almost a ho-hum,” Associated Press reported. “It seemed to indicate they are now taking moon voyages for granted.” At White House, President and Mrs. Nixon arose before dawn to watch moon walk on TV. President had commented it was “first time anybody has sung from the moon,” as Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., hummed while conducting lunar tasks. In Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, where thousands had gathered in July to watch Apollo 11 lunar landing, only 45 persons showed up to watch Apollo 12, Of 12 New Yorkers interviewed by New York Times, only Bernard Granite of the Bronx had watched lunar landing. He said, “The first one was more exciting. This one was anticlimaetic, but I still think they are justified in spending the money.” Portland, Ore., secretary Jeanne Paulson said, “I’m at the point where I think the money should go to the poverty program. There are too many starving people in the slum ghettos.” Des Moines, Iowa, secretary Eileen Brown said, “The biggest concern seemed to be that they couldn’t make the TV work rather than whether they could perform their assignments. What do we think they are up there for, anyway, to put a show on for us?” Police in Los Angeles, Calif., attributed sharp drop in reported crime to Apollo 12 moon landing and walk. In Washington, D.C., McKinley High School teacher said, “This doesn’t concern us at all. There are far more important things going on here.” Question for his pupils was “whether we will survive to the year 2000.” (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 31; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
This Week published interview with science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke: Most important recent outer space discovery was pulsars—“It’s possible that they might be signals from some higher civilization.” Scientific surprise in Apollo program was “its immaculate perfection. You don’t expect that, no matter how carefully you prepare.” Clarke was writing space exploration documentary which would show “whole span of human interest in space, back to the Babylonian astronomers and on up through the colonization of the solar system.” It would include Stonehenge which was “as big a burden for the primitive economy that built it—in fact, probably a much bigger burden than the Apollo program is for us.” (Bradford, This Week, 8/24/69, 7)
NASA announced it would negotiate with North American Rockwell Corp. for modifications to four Apollo spacecraft for Apollo Applications program. Combined value of spacecraft and modifications was estimated at $340 million, (nasa Release 69—34)
Moon landing would change human lives, British novelist and scientist C. P. Snow said in Look. “I am afraid that in the long run, perhaps a generation, perhaps longer, it will have a bad effect. It will give us the feeling, and the perfectly justified feeling, that our world has finally closed in. This is forever the end of the mortal frontier.” Space enthusiasts thought lunar landing would liberate human imagination but “I believe . . . that human imagination is going to be restricted—as to an extent it was when the last spots on the globe had been visited, the South Pole and the summit of Everest. Nowhere on earth for adventurous man to go. Very soon, there will be no place in the universe for adventurous man to go.” {Look, 8/26/69, 68—72)
At small White House dinner, Apollo 10 Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan presented President Nixon and Vice President Agnew with four wrinkled flags which had been carried aboard spacecraft during mission. Stafford told President, “. . . these flags have been to the moon and 31 times around it, so we thought you’d like to have them just the way we brought them back. That’s why we didn’t press out the wrinkles when we had them framed.” (Dean, W Star, 7/1/69, Dl)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
Discovery of approximately 621.4-mi-dia (1,000-km-dia) mascon—mass concentration of gravitational pull—on moon’s far side and of fact that Mare Marginis at eastern edge was flooded fraction of mascon basin Was reported in Science by Cornell Univ. radiophysicists Dr. Malcolm J. Campbell, Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, and Dr. Carl Sagan. Discoveries were made from study of Lunar Orbiter and Apollo 8 photos and gravitational data. New mascon was 2.8 times heavier than mas-cons associated with Mares Imbrium and Serenitatis on moon’s near side. If mare material was confirmed in basin, discoverers proposed calling it Mare Occulum (Hidden Sea). Dr. Campbell said they believed mascons explained moon’s entire “out-of-balance” appearance as seen from spacecraft. While some Apollo mission planners believed moon to be pear-shaped because of its effects on spacecraft, Cornell team believed moon was nearly perfect sphere. Mascons explained unexpected variations in lunar gravity which, according to msc officials, had dragged Apollo 10 off course. With mascons, scientists were close to answering question of origin of lunar seas, Dr. Campbell said, “But we haven’t quite gotten the whole story.” (Science, 6/13/69, 1273—5; Cohn, W Post, 6/14/69, Al)
U.K. radioastronomer Sir Bernard Lovell told press at U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station that Apollo 11 and Luna XV increased hopes for U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation because “this is the first time the United States has been demonstratively superior in a vital part of the space program. American approaches for collaboration may be received with sympathy in the Soviet Union as they can no longer regard themselves as masters.” (AP, B Sun, 7/23/69, A4)
Izvestia gave first U.S.S.R. report of President Nixon’s July 17 announcement that medals of two dead Soviet cosmonauts would be placed on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. Factual account of mission carried no comment. {W Post, 7/19/69, A10)
Briefing on Apollo 9’s earth resources survey experiment [see March 3— 13]	was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Leonard Jaffe, Director of Space Applications Programs, stressed importance of satellite photos for earth resources program: “. . . we have taken advantage of the Apollo and Gemini, as we did with Mercury, opportunities to get pictures of the earth and its environment with cameras, largely held by hand, by the astronauts. These pictures have been a very large source of experimental data for our Earth Resources Survey Program.” Advantage of using space for earth resources survey was twofold. One was “large view that it gives you of the earth.” Second was “ability to see the same phenomenon, or the same area of the earth time and time again, to be able to arrive over this particular spot on the earth periodically and observe temporal changes.” Apollo 9 experiment had obtained some 120 or 130 useful frames of multispectral data, all of which had been distributed to principal investigators for analysis. (Transcript)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., orbiting moon in csm, set new world record for solo space flight. Gordon piloted csm alone for 37 hrs 41 min, breaking 30-hr 20-min record set by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., in Faith 7 May 15—16, 1963. (upi, W Star, 11/21/69, A7)
Moon “loomed large in Chinese tradition,” but 700 million people of Communist China had not been told of Apollo 12 lunar landing, Christian Science Monitor said. Though “elite hierarchy in Peking . . . learned of Intrepid’s touchdown as fast as the Soviets,” story of Apollo 12 had not passed beyond select group of leaders. “Indeed the Chinese people have yet to be told by their government-controlled press and radio of the flight of Apollo 11. . . .” Some might hear of flight from foreign radio broadcast, but many were jammed by Peking. VOA report to Hong Kong on Intrepid’s lunar landing had been “curiously overlaid with martial music from a Chinese Communist radio station on the mainland.” (Hughes, CSM, 11/20/69)
If NASA’s Apollo 11 successfully landed on moon July 20, “it will be a proud moment for Americans and a costly one for British bookmakers, who will pay out at least $172,000 in bets they wish they had never made,” Karl E. Meyer reported in Washington Post. Big winner would be David Threlfall of Preston, Lancashire, who in April 1964 bet £10 ($24) that man would land on moon before January 1971. Since odds were 1,000 to 1, Threlfall would collect $24,000 from William Hill Organization betting firm. As one broker explained: “When you think about it, it’s a bit ridiculous. This is one of the few times we’ve made a mistake—the man in the street knew more about space than we did.” (W Post, 5/29/69, A4)
At televised news conference in Moscow on Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII mission [see Oct. 12—18], Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. hoped to have permanent space station in earth orbit “certainly” within 10 yrs “and I think less than five years.” Station plans did not rule out manned lunar exploration but, he said, “I can only say such operations are not planned for the coming months. Shall we study the universe with the help of automatic (unmanned) spacecraft? We shall. Shall we fly to the moon and the other planets of the solar system in the future? I think we shall because such travel is one of the further aims of mankind in conquering outer space.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 11/5/69, 16)
Atlas published translation of article in L’Espresso, Rome, by Italian novelist Alberto Moravia on implications of Apollo 11. “In Columbus’s days, men were offered finite goals, like the discovery of America; or they were offered spiritual aims, like the search for goodness, truth and beauty. At that time, no one could have guessed that Columbus’s discovery was only a beginning. That other discoveries would follow, a second America, a third, a fourth, and so on through millions of years and billions of kilometers. But today that is happening. Compared to our new set of goals, the aims of Marx and communism are pure imagination. For the first time the real and the rational are about to become one. We are now at the end of history—and post-history is just beginning.” (Atlas, 9/69, 40—3)
Senate confirmed nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council. (CR, 6/19/69, S6736)
NASA announced msfc award of $98,200,000 definitive contract for payload integration in support of Apollo Applications program to Martin Marietta Corp. Work—which started under Jan. 16, 1968, letter contract—would extend through Nov. 30, 1972, and cover flights 1, 2, 3, 3A, and 4. msfc also awarded North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. $1,142,294, 26-mo contract for additional work on aerospike (plug-nozzle) engine evaluated by Rocketdyne under previous msfc contract. Ring-like engine had tiny throats along circumference that discharged engine exhaust down sides of plug, making aerodynamic extension for plug, providing nozzle during launch ascent, and simulating performance characteristics of full-length nozzle without increased weight and length, (msfc Releases 69—43, 69—87)
At 12th annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C., sponsored by National Space Club, Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, said: “. . . we are witnessing another spectacular example of the utilization of scientific knowledge, accumulated by many generations of scientists, some famous and some obscure, who worked away in their laboratories trying to probe the secrets of nature. We have seen how once these secrets . . . have been revealed, engineering skills could be put to work. We see in our space program also an example of the reverse process. ... New technological developments lead to new techniques and new instruments which . . . speed up our basic work in science and lead to new ways of uncovering new secrets of nature. Thus, during these past ten years the advance of science has been enormously aided by the advance of space technology.” (CR, 3/12/69, S2755) Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to NASA’s l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) in absentia since Apollo 9 mission was still under way. Citation read: “For his personal direction of the Apollo program throughout development and into the final phases of flight to the Moon dramatically illustrated by the two successful all-up flights of the Saturn V and the error-free flights of Apollo 7 and the extraordinary flight of Apollo 8 to the Moon and back. His engineering skill and leadership throughout the development and execution of this complex program have made possible an outstanding American success.” Richard J. Allen of nasa Apollo Program Office Test Div. was awarded Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship presented to NASA employee adjudged “a deserving individual in disciplines applicable to science, astronautics and space administration.” Mitchell R. Sharpe of Systems Safety and Manned Flight Awareness Office, MSFC, received certificate, trophy, and $500 award for winning entry in 1969 Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay competition. (His Development of the Lifesaving Rocket: A Study in 19th Century Technological Fallout was released by NASA June 10 as msfc Historical Note 4.) National Space Club Press Award “for penetrating, consistently informed and lucid writing on all phases of the national space program” was awarded Evert Clark, Washington science correspondent, Newsweek. North American Rockwell Corp. received Nelson P. Jackson Award “for its major contribution to the success of Apollo during 1968.” (Program; msfc Historical Note 4)
Czechoslovakian Communist Party Central Committee’s weekly Tribuna said of Apollo 11 landing: “It would be premature today to try to attempt a detailed evaluation of the historical significance of this act. Surely its influence will be no smaller than that of Columbus’ travels many centuries ago.” (Am Embassy, Prague)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said: “. . . man’s flight to the moon and beyond could be the only means he has left of renewing his dwindling spirits. . . . The voyage of Apollo 8 around the moon last Christmas did more than any other single event last year to restore man’s faith in himself-—and that flight will pale beside an actual moon landing when it comes. ... It could just be that when man walks the moon for the first time it will be felt round the world as such a triumph of the human heart that its beat shall go on for a million years.” (W Post, 3/26/69, A27) March 27—April 8: NASA’s Mariner VII (Mariner G) spacecraft was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-19) booster on four-month, 193-million-mi, direct-ascent trajectory toward Mars—NASA’s second mission to fly past Mars during 1969 launch window. Launch vehicle performance was nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its four solar panels, and locked its sensors on sun and star Vega. Because of several minor spacecraft anomalies during launch, spacecraft was kept in sun-Vega cruise while performance was evaluated. Star-lock override command was transmitted to spacecraft April 1; Canopus was acquired as planned initially and Mariner VII entered stable cruise mode. Midcourse maneuver was conducted April 8 to ensure that spacecraft would fly within 1,900 mi (3,057.7 km) of Mars Aug- 5. Primary mission objective was to fly by southern hemisphere and polar regions of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary mission spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 900-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mariner March 27-April 8: has* latmcked Mariner VII on an Atlas-Centaur booster as the second of two spacecraft in the Mariner Mars 1969 mission to take photograpks and collect data about [he surface and atmosphere of Mars. Mariner IV (oris launched Feb. 24. An April 8 maneuver ensured that Mariner VII would pass Mars Aug. 5. VII mission, except for flyby area, was almost identical to mission of Mariner VI launched Feb. 24 for investigation of equatorial region and scheduled to arrive at Mars July 31. (NASA Proi Off; NASA Releases 69-26, 69-12)
On nbc TV program “Meet the Press" NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, said there was possibility U.S.S.R. would land men and instruments on all planets before U.S. “The Russians have publicly taken the position that they are extremely interested in landing on the planets, and . . . one of the popular songs in the Soviet Union right now is a song about little apple trees growing on Mars.” NASA felt with Apollo lunar landing “we are really taking a lead in the ability to operate on all other bodies. . . . the technology we are developing . . . is a kind . . . that would be required.” If July lunar landing succeeded, “we will have enough hardware for nine additional flights to begin the exploration of the lunar surface. In parallel with that, we see activities in earth orbit which will be the precursors to the eventual emplacement of a large permanent space station, a laboratory in the sky.” NASA expected to find “surprising amount” to study on moon. “In fact, we have already radically changed our views of the moon just with the activities we have carried out in preparation for the Apollo landing. For example . . . men are beginning to seriously question whether there may have been water at one time on the surface of the moon. Indeed, whether the large mare areas, the smooth areas . . . may even have been the beds of ancient seas. As we get more and more familiar with the moon we realize how little we know about it. It will take those ten flights and many other trips to the moon before man really begins to understand his twin planet.” Dr. Paine said ijsaf’s mol and NASA orbiting workshop were “two very different projects.” NASA’s was “longer range program aimed at a very substantial facility which would be really a university campus type of research station in orbit.” mol was “program that is well advanced, and is designed to find out the military applications of space.” (Transcript)
White House announced President Nixon had canceled plans to dine with Apollo 11 astronauts July 15, eve of launch, msc Director of Research and Medical Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, had expressed concern that crew might catch earthly illness from President, which could complicate lunar landing mission. (AP, B Sun, 7/8/69)
Die proof of 1.05- by 1.80-in 10-cent airmail stamp commemorating “First Man on the Moon,” attached to envelope, would be carried by Apollo 11 and canceled on Moon by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount announced. On return to earth, die would be used to produce commemorative stamps for August issue. Hand-canceled “Moon Letter” would undergo 21-day decontamination period at lrl and be returned to Post Office Dept, for display in Washington, D.C., and later throughout U.S. and abroad. Stamp was designed by Paul Calle, modeled by Robert J. Jones, and engraved by Edward R. Felver and Albert Saavedra. It depicted astronaut stepping from spacecraft onto lunar surface. (PO Dept Releases 107, P—37; W Post, 7/10/69, A13)
Rep. John V. Tunney (D-Calif.) introduced H.J.R. 810, “designating the day which man lands on the moon, and the anniversary of that day each year thereafter as a national holiday to be known as ‘Space Exploration Day.’ ” Resolution was referred to House Judiciary Committee. (CR, 7/8/69, H5725)
msfc announced award of two contracts. Eight-month, $400,000 contract had been given to General Dynamics Corp. to study experiment modules for proposed manned space station. Study, which would complement space station investigations being conducted by McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp., would examine variety of experiments suitable for manned space station, analyze scientific and engineering community’s need for experiment modules, and develop concepts for least number of modules needed to meet these requirements. Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded $1,170,000 contract to fabricate, test, and deliver 15 Saturn V workshop rate gyro processors and 1 module test set and to retrofit 22 Apollo Telescope Mount rategyro processors for Apollo Applications program. Work, expected to take 18 mos, would be done in Orlando, Fla. (msfc Releases 69—172, 69-173)
Countdown for Apollo 12 lunar landing mission continued at ksc despite discovery of leak in fuel tank. Officials said launch crews would have ample time to replace tank and check out replacement without delaying liftoff Nov. 14. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/13/69, Al)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean held press conference at msc and showed movies and slides of mission. Explaining failure of color TV camera, Conrad said: “What apparently happened ... is that I took the thing off mesa and set it down. The MESA was in the sun at the time and ... I apparently either pointed it at the sun or pointed it at the mesa, which was in the sun and a pretty bright reflector . . . and just that few seconds . . . was enough to sunburn the camera. ... I didn’t realize it was as sensitive to light as it is.” Dust on surface was a major problem, Conrad said. Ground was soft and astronauts sank in significantly. It was difficult to keep experiment package clean. “It was almost impossible for us to walk around those packages without our little dust cloud and at any time the dust hit the surface of the package it stuck and the worst thing you could do was try to rub it off because you just smeared it over them even worse. . . .” To question about difficulty in landing LM on moon, Conrad replied he had misinterpreted correct gage reading and underestimated accuracy of LM’s descent. “. . . I felt that that gage was not . . . giving me the proper information. I found it quite hard to believe that I could have gotten the velocity killed quite as well as I did . . . and so I was continually going out the window to get roll information and a general idea of my lateral and horizontal velocities.” Although Conrad felt landing on moon was not “an amateur’s game,” he felt satisfactory landings under completely instrumented flight rule conditions could be made. Crew had suggested adding instrument that would provide automatic nulling of horizontal and lateral velocities but would leave pilot with rate of descent command. Conrad said he did not think dust during descent would be problem on future missions “as long as you get a look at your landing site before you get into the dust, and ascertain that it’s all right—it’s perfectly all right to go in and land, IFR. ... I don’t recommend any change from the procedures that we’re using right now.” Bean said photos of moon were realistic, but photos of earth were not. “As we view the Moon from the Earth, it’s white and flat; it’s quite pretty. When you get up at the Moon . . . it’s much the same; it’s either white or concrete colored or grey. . . . But when you look at the Earth ... it kind of sparkles, and . . . you can’t capture it on the film. It’s sort of like taking a picture of an emerald . . . and hoping to get it.” Gordon said he had mixture of emotions, “a mixture of thoughts, as to why is it all here? And . . . what the function that each person, each part, each molecule, each body performs, in the overall scheme of why is it, what is it, and from where did it come.” (Transcript)
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory’s Dr. Gary Latham said in Houston his team had detected 14 “unusual seismic events” from seismometers left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts. They believed walls of lunar craters had been falling in as different parts became hotter than others during highest lunar temperatures and felt they might be observing “initial stages of the process by which fresh new craters are transformed to old.” (W Post, 7/28/69, A6)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial: “The public ceremonies honoring the astronauts underscore identity in a larger and much more responsible sense—a feeling of community, rooted in a family and expanding to embrace the nation, perhaps ultimately the world. There are other words for it—awareness of a common purpose, a sense of decency both public and private, a common standard of behavior and a common sense of service and loyalty to country. This is what made Apollo succeed, and this is what the nation is recognizing as the celebration begins today.” (P Bull, 8/12/69)
Poor People’s Campaign” Director, the Rev. Hosea Williams of Southern Christian Leadership Conference, said “hungry” people from five southern states would demonstrate at Cape Kennedy July 15 on eve of Apollo 11 launch and would try to get “as close as possible” to launch site with mules and wagons. “We’re not against things like the space shot, but there’s been a miscalculation in priorities.” (Reuters, W Post, 7/13/69, A5)
Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev told Soviet gathering in honor of four Soyuz IV and Soyuz V cosmonauts U.S.S.R. was “fully justified in saying that the successful flight . . . [see Jan. 14-18] is a great achievement of Soviet science and engineering, and a new triumph of the courage, boldness, intellect and labour of the Soviet people. The recent outstanding flight made by the American astronauts round the Moon, the confident start made by the Soviet automatic interplanetary stations ‘Venus-5’ and ‘Venus-6’ towards their distant target, and the successful flight made by the . . . [Soyuz] spaceships—all this constitutes man’s new, major steps along the road to conquering the mysterious world of outer space. . . .” (Moscow News, 2/8—15/69, Supplement, 3—5)
At U.S. Embassy Independence Day Party in Moscow Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman signed autographs with Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Georgy T. Beregovoy, and Konstantin P. Feoktistov. Among 1,000 persons attending reception given by U.S. Ambassador Jacob D. Beam were Vasily V. Kuznetsov, U.S.S.R. First Deputy Foreign Minister, and Mikhail P. Georgadze, Secretary of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. They were highest ranking Soviet officials to attend annual July 4 reception since 1964 attendance of Nikita S. Khrushchev as head of government and Communist Party. (Clarity, NYT, 7/5/69, 28; AP, B Sun, 7/5/69, A2)
CBS presented interview with former President Lyndon B. Johnson which had been taped July 5. President Johnson credited space program with sparking “revolution of the 60s” and said, “We can’t discard space. We’re just beginning.” U.S. had enough money “to do all the things we need to do” in space, education, and health. “What we must have is the determination to do it.” He said his last act as president had been to send Apollo 8 photos of earth to 186 leaders of foreign governments. (W Post, 7/21/69, A7)
Spain awarded its Grand Cross of Aeronautic Merit to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. (upi, NYT, 10/4/69, 23)
National and international press continued comment on Apollo 11 lunar Philadelphia Inquirer; “Will this magnificent accomplishment serve as inspiration, urging Americans and all mankind on to a genuine ‘giant leap’ forward, not merely into the infinite reaches of space but into the infinite possibilities of achievement on earth where the space age has recorded many more failures than successes? Or will the inspiration be abandoned before the veiled censure of those who seem to suggest the solution of all human dilemmas lies in turning away from space to other priorities?” Cutbacks at hour of triumph would be only waste of investment in technology which could be helped in solving earth problems. “This is no time to falter, our astronauts should come home to a world and nation determined to fulfill the prophecy in Commander Armstrong’s words.” (P Inq, 7/22/69) W.ashington Post: It was foolish “to leap from this historic moment to eager expectations of the day when men will live and work in space, when colonies will be established, food raised and industrial products built on heavenly bodies other than the earth. These things will doubtless come in their own good time. But this is not the occasion on which to make a new national commitment in space that would keep NASA’s program going at the frantic pace which fulfilled President Kennedy’s great promise for the moon. Now is the occasion, rather, to establish a steady program of space development, one removed from the political debate <Jver national priorities, which will ensure that we establish a firm base for future generations to build upon while creating at home ... a kind of society which will allow them to use fully the new opportunities opened up by the three new American heroes and the tens of thousands of other people who made their flight possible.” (W Post, 7/22/69, A24) Handels Och Sjofartstidning, Goteborg, Sweden: “This is a small step for a man, but a great one for humanity. Neil Armstrong’s commentary when he stepped down onto the surface of the moon has every prospect of becoming one of those winged expressions which generations of school children will commit to memory. ... Now should be the time to replace the extraordinarily costly space race with cooperation between the Soviet and the U.S.A.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm) Stockholm Expressen: “The ‘moonshot’ . . . was imposing. But it also gives a horrible feeling to think that the U.S.A. can handle tremendous technical problems with such ease while it is considerably more difficult to cope with those of a complicated social, political and human nature.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm) Canadian Montreal Star: “The scientific information which results from Apollo 11 is an extra dividend from an enterprise which has produced its own benefits for the human spirit and, perhaps, for human solidarity.” (Am Consul, Montreal)	,
NASA announced revised plans for first orbital workshop, with 1972 launch using first two stages of Saturn V to launch workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount together. Workshop would be outfitted on ground and would arrive in 253-mi circular orbit equipped for immediate occupancy by astronauts and with atm attached. Program objectives remained same as when NASA intended to use Saturn IB 2nd stage as 1971 workshop: to provide environment in which man could live and work for extended periods in space and to study man’s physiological and psychological responses and capabilities in space, atm would permit man to operate high-resolution astronomical telescopes in space, free from earth’s atmosphere. Saturn V hardware from Apollo program was available for revised plan, (nasa Release 69—105; Simons, W Post, 7/22/69, Al)
Wendell F. Moore, assistant chief engineer at Bell Aerosystems Co. and developer of rocket belt which could lift man and carry him length of football field, died in Niagara Falls, N.Y., at age 51. He had won John Price Wetherill Medal of Franklin Institute of Philadelphia in 1964 for his invention, first flight-tested in 1961. (upi, NYT, 5/30/69) May 29—June 8: 28th Salon Internationale de l’Aeronautique et de l’Espace —Paris Air Show—featured nearly 550 exhibitors representing 14 nations. U.S., with largest pavilion, emphasized space achievements, taking “Countdown Apollo” as theme. On opening day biggest display attraction, said United Press International, was Apollo 8 spacecraft, which Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart unveiled in ceremony attended by U.S. Ambassador to France, R. Sargent Shriver. U.S. exhibit also included F—1 and J—2 engines of 1st and 2nd stages of Saturn V rocket and full-scale model of Apollo 11 lm. French prototype of Concorde 001 supersonic transport was flown over Paris for first time and later took its place on apron at Le Bourget Airport among 150 aircraft, helicopters, and gliders. Opening day also marked signing of agreement for joint development of short-haul airbus by French Transport Minister Jean Chamant and West German Economics Minister Karl Schiller. Spokesman for U.K. manufacturer Hawker Siddeley said firm was still negotiating on building wings for 250-seat airbus. U.S. exhibited 490-passenger Boeing 747 but did not show Lockheed C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. U.K. exhibits at Air Show included Concorde 002, British prototype; Hawker Siddeley Harrier vtol jet fighter; and Hawker Siddeley Nimrod, maritime reconnaissance version of Comet. French exhibits included Dassault Mirage fighters and Dassault Hirondelle turboprop. U.S.S.R.’s chief entry was 500-passenger An-22 turboprop airliner. (Amer Av, 5/26/69, 33-6; upi, W Star, 5/29/69, A10; Reuters, NYT, 5/30/69, 40)
Soviet youth newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda praised NASA’s Apollo 9 mission: “A thorough check of the entire equipment necessary for a lunar landing has been attained, thanks to the courage and gallantry of the three American astronauts. At the same time the Apollo 9 flight showed that it is impossible in terrestrial conditions to envisage all difficulties astronauts are encountering in real flight.” Soviet Academician Prof. Anatoly Blagonravov complimented NASA’s planning for lunar landing: “The fact that the Americans earlier made a flight around the moon and now conducted the Apollo 9 experiment, in my opinion, is evidence of a rather complete solution of the problem of dependability,” though some risk always remained, (upi, W Star, 3/14/69, A6)
Joseph P. Loftus, Jr., Manager of MSC Program Engineering Office, described plans for future Apollo lunar exploration at MSC press conference. Technological objectives were to increase scientific payload to lunar orbit and to lunar surface, permit high flexibility in landing site selection, increase lunar orbit and lunar surface stay time, increase lunar surface mobility with self-propelled lunar roving vehicle, develop and demonstrate advanced techniques and hardware for expanded manned space mission capabilities, develop techniques for achieving point landings, and demonstrate closed-loop onboard navigation capability as applicable to advanced missions. Scientific objectives were to investigate major classes of lunar surface features, surface processes, and regional problems; collect samples at each site for analyses on earth; establish network of surface instrumentation to measure seismic activity, heat flow, and disturbance in moon’s axis of rotation; survey and measure lunar surface from lunar orbit with high-resolution photography and remote sensing; investigate near-moon environment and interaction of moon with solar wind; map lunar gravitational field and internally produced magnetic field; and detect atmospheric components resulting from neutralized solar wind and micrometeoroid impacts. Achievement of scientific objectives would be facilitated by addition of scientific instrument module (sim) under service module sector door, sim would consist of scientific instruments mounted on shelves behind door, which would be deployed pyrotechnically after crew left lunar surface. Spacecraft would also use new modular equipment storage assembly (mesa) . “Unlike the existing mesa it is modular and people, instead of having to take many things out of compartments and stick them into a bag .' . . here you simply take hold of a handle . . . and lift out an entire shelf. On that shelf are all the things required for the next eva period. So, it is one movement instead of a dozen.” One tank of hydrogen and one tank of oxygen would be added to extend mission capability to I6V2 days. Since each eva period would increase up to 5 hrs and total lunar stay time would increase up to 200 hrs, lithium hydroxide would be increased for portable life-support system and for spacecraft, and insulation would £e increased on top of spacecraft around docking tunnel. Minor changes would be made to interior garments so crew would have more suitable environment and crew would remove spacesuits and sleep in hammocks during rest periods on lunar surface. (Transcript)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
Apollo 11 CSM and LM were mated with Saturn V (SA—506) launch vehicle at ksc in preparation for July 16 lunar landing mission. (SBD, 4/15/69, 209)
International team of scientists might man first U.S. permanent space laboratory, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at London news conference. Work on project would begin about 1975 and additional sections would be added each year for decade, eventually producing laboratory for about 50 scientists. Dr. Paine, on his way to Paris Air Show, said it was too early to say if there would be permanent U.S. lunar space station or to predict if man would land on Mars. He had no information to support rumors of imminent Soviet moon landing. (Reuters, W Post, 6/5/69, E5)
Best seller of books published by New York Times during year was We Reach the Moon by John Noble Wilford. Book sold 1 million copies in U.S. and abroad. (NYT, 2/22/70)
In Science, Walter Orr Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, wrote: “Manned exploration of the moon will provide answers to age-long speculation about its nature. Perhaps even more important than what we find will be the fact that we have done it. The event will mark the successful attainment of a goal that demanded technological attainments of unprecedented complexity and difficulty. Our sights were set upon this goal nearly a decade ago by President Kennedy. I was, I confess, one who feared he had asked the impossible.” Weather forecasting—one example of earth-oriented use of space science—would require space satellites of new and sophisticated character. “We will not solve this problem unless we can somehow inspire atmospheric scientists of all the world to commit themselves to the goal. . . . Space technology is perhaps the most important single component of the technology development needed for success. What better use could be found for our incredible talents in space? After the moon, the earth!” (Science, 2/7/69)
NASA published Lunar Orbiter I Preliminary Results (SP—197), including assessment of lunar terrain and results of secondary experiments in selenodesy, micrometeoroids, and radiation. Launched Aug. 10, 1966, spacecraft had been first U.S. vehicle to orbit moon, first to obtain detailed photographic coverage of near and far sides of moon, and first to photograph earth from moon’s vicinity. Photos showed fractured and faulted lunar crust with mass-wasting where large boulders had tumbled into craters. Moon appeared to have been highly dynamic and affected by volcanic activity, but despite overall roughness, some photos showed regions of relative smoothness. Surface of far side appeared much rougher than near side with higher terra-to-mare ratio. Meteoroid sensors registered no impacts during mission, indicating meteor activity near moon was no greater than that near earth. Radiation dose rate during transit to moon corresponded to that produced by galactic cosmic rays, but dose rates as high as 70 mrad per hr and 7 rad per hr were experienced during solar flares Aug. 26 and Sept. 2, 1966. (Text)
At lunar landing celebration dinner in Huntsville, Ala., Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said: “We worked together and together we accomplished our part of the mission. The moon is now accessible. And someday, because of the beginning that we have made here, the planets and the stars may belong to mankind. This reach toward the heavens, toward the stars, can eventually loose the human race from the confines of this earth and maybe even this solar system and give it immortality in the immense and never-ending reaches of space.” For first time, “life has left its planetary cradle and the ultimate destiny of mankind is no longer confined. When the Mayflower landed on American shores the pilgrims did not envision the nation that would eventually evolve. Neither can we truly say what will eventually spring from the footprints around Tranquility Base.” (Text)
The supersonic Soviet airliner Tu-144 following its landing at Sheremetyevo Airport, Moscow, after a public-demonstration test flight. {AP wirephoto) will be executed with the same precision that marked the early stages of this trip.” ( W Post, 5/22/69, A24) John Lannan in Washington Evening Star; “Where manned space flight once was fraught with fright and peril, it seems to have moved into an era of fun and games. . . . The astronauts have learned to fly their spacecraft, the ground crews to launch them and the Defense Department to recover them. What remains is to use this accumulated knowledge, and that’s what NASA is attempting to do.” It all pointed to fact that “space flight has come of age.” (W Star, 5/21/69, A4) Marquis Childs in Washington Post: “When the moon landing . . . is completed the cost to the government will be just under $24 billion. The achievement represents an unprecedented orchestration of the resources of science and technology. The contrast with the failures here on earth to begin to try to cure rudimentary ills could hardly at this moment of grave uncertainty be sharper.” (W Post, 5/21/69, A25) Christian Science Monitor editorial: Apollo 10 mission “has again posed the old, old question: If mankind can achieve so spectacularly in space, why cannot we improve matters faster here on earth? The answer, surely, is that it is simpler to mobilize the complex electronics and space-science gadgetry to rocket a spacecraft to the moon than it is to coordinate the manifold and conflicting human emotions, ambitions, and processes necessary for cleaning up the cities, thrusting the black revolution forward with a minimum of friction, and banishing earth’s pollutants. The earth problem is moTe complex than the moon problem. Yet success in the moon venture will offer assurance that the earth challenge can be met. “So let no one call the moon venture a waste of ambition, treasure, achievement. The whole brilliant enterprise is immensely horizon-widening, thought-expanding.” (csm, 5/21/69)
Apollo 11 astronauts were received at Buckingham Palace by Queen Elizabeth during their visit to U.K. on 22-nation tour. (Reuters, B Sun, 10/15/69)
Apollo 12 astronauts, enclosed in mobile quarantine facility, arrived at Ellington afb, Tex., where they were greeted by 500 cheering persons, including their families and NASA officials, mqf was moved in motorcade to Lunar Receiving Laboratory, where astronauts would remain until Dec. 10. (DeLone, W Post, 11/30/69, A3)
Paul G. Dembling, NASA General Counsel since January 1967, became NASA Deputy Associate Administrator. Dembling, who had joined naca in 1945, had been principal drafter of bill which became National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and had received NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1968 for contributions to development of legal framework of U.S. aeronautical and space activities. (NASA Release 69-131) Study of lunar samples was “bringing to light as many mysteries as it unravels,” New York Times editorial said. Theorists were cautious, with evidence from one small area, Tranquility Base. “It is likely that the picture will become still more complex when a representative collection of samples becomes available from ten, twenty or thirty areas spread over the entire lunar surface. But even the limitations of the present data suggest strongly that the moon is very different from earth, and therefore has much to teach human science about the origin and evolution of the solar system. The case for intensive scientific study of the moon—conducted in part by geologists and other scientists sent there for on-the-spot investigation-—is strong.” (NYT, 9/10/69, 40) September 11: Press conference on results of Mariner VI (launched Feb. 24) and Mariner VII (launched March 27) was held at NASA Hq. Some 200 TV pictures of Mars were taken by two Mariners, including 57 high- and medium-resolution views of selected Martian surface areas from altitude of only few hundred miles. Spacecraft measured Martian atmospheric temperature, pressure, and chemical constituency and measured surface temperatures in effort to correlate thermal characteristics with features observed in TV pictures. Data indicated Mars was heavily cratered, bleak, cold, dry, nearly airless, and generally hostile to any earth-style life forms. Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech said: “We got nine times the number of far encounter pictures that were originally proposed [few years ago], 20 per cent more near encounter pictures than were proposed, and 1,100 digital pictures which were entirely impossible according to schemes at the time of the proposal. . . . After Mariner 4 Mars seemed to be like the moon. At last Mariners 6 and 7 have shown Mars to be like Mars and have brought out Mars’ own characteristic features, some of them unknown and unrecognized elsewhere in the solar system.” Dr. Robert P. Sharp of Cal Tech said Martian terrain could be divided into three types—crater, featureless, and. chaotic. Cratered terrain was widespread and common on Mars and resembled moon. Featureless terrain was represented by Hellas area, which appeared to be upland area, 150-mi-wide zone that gently sloped into flat featureless floor. Chaotic terrain had series of “short ridges, little valleys, and irregular, jumbled topography.” Chaotic and featureless terrain appeared to be distinctly Martian, suggesting “that on Mars we have either a difference in processes that are operating on the surface or within the crust or we have a difference of material from one place to another on Mars and different than on the moon, or, more likely, a combination of both. ... We also have good reason for believing that the evolutionary history has been somewhat different. Again, there are scars on the face of Mars that we do not see on the face of the moon. And there have perhaps been episodic events in Martian history that are unique to the planet Mars. We end up with the conclusion that Mars is its own planet.” Dr. George C. Pimentel of Univ. of California at Berkeley said reevaluation of initial data from infrared spectrometer had shown infrared spectral features earlier ascribed to methane and ammonia were actually due to previously undiscovered absorptions of solid carbon dioxide. Reflection peak recorded three times in atmosphere off Mars’ bright limb showed presence of solid carbon dioxide at high altitudes and at latitudes north of polar cap. Broad absorption near 9 p. recorded on bright limb was ascribed to solid silica or silicate material and broad absorptions near 12 p. recorded near dark limb were tentatively ascribed in part to solid carbon dioxide above ground. Further experimental work was in progress to refine thermal map. Initial results of uv spectrometer experiment were detection of ionized carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, atomic hydrogen, and oxygen. Nitrogen and nitric oxide were not detected and no evidence was found of clouds, blue haze, or any appreciable atmospheric absorption of uv radiation. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado said important point “is that the atmosphere of Mars is different than the atmosphere of the earth. If I showed you a spectrum taken the same way from the upper atmosphere of the earth, we would see a plentiful number of nitrogen bands. We could see emissions from nitric oxide. We could see emissions from atomic nitrogen. None of those features is present in the atmosphere of Mars. . . .” Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of jpl presented biological implications of Mariner 1969 results. “There is nothing in the new data that encourages the belief that Mars is a body of life. But the results don’t exclude this possibility. . . . The Mariner 6 and 7 data strengthen the previous conclusion that the scarcity of water on Mars is the most serious limiting factor for life. . . . Mars is a cold desert by terrestrial standards. If there is life on Mars, it must be a form of life that can utilize water in the form of water vapor or ice.” (Transcript; NASA News Release)
U.K.’s first lunar samples—3 oz of moon dust in 16 contamination-proof boxes—arrived in London and were shown to scientists and press at Science Research Council. Dr. S. O. Agrell of Cambridge Univ. and Dr. P. E. Clegg of London Univ. had flown to MSC to collect them. They would be examined by 14 British research teams. (AP, Kansas City Times, 9/20/69)
At meeting of American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo program’s seismic research, proposed detonation of nuclear device on moon to assist analysis of lunar interior. He announced tentative plans for placement of one- to five-kiloton bomb on lunar far side by unmanned Atlas-Agena rocket between Apollo 15 and 16 missions in November 1970 and envisioned possible cooperative effort with U.S.S.R. “I expect to run into a large number of political snags. But these problems are not insurmountable if we include the Russians . . . and agree to share the data with them. ... I would like to ask them to put the bomb on the moon.” Proposal was to be submitted to nas for approval. Nuclear blast would send seismic waves through moon’s core. These would be measured to yield information on nature and origin of lunar interior. (Reuters, W Post, 12/16/69, A2)
Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post observed similarities among astronauts. Of 23 who already had flown in space, 21 were either only sons or eldest sons. Pattern tied in, he said, with psychologists’ beliefs that only and eldest children tended to achieve more in life because they were disciplined more and trained and treated better by parents. Astronauts also were athletic, showed academic excellence, and had intense love of flying, O’Toole said. (W Post, 3/2/69) Primary objectives were to demonstrate crew, space vehicle, and mission support facilities performance during manned Saturn V mission with CSM and LM; demonstrate LM and crew performance, demonstrate performance of nominal and selected backup lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mission activities; and assess CSm/lm consumables. Multispectral photography experiment was carried for first time to provide photos of earth resources using several different film-filter combinations. Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft, carrying Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), entered initial orbit with 119.5-mi (192.3-km) apogee and 117.6-rai (189,3-km) perigee. After post-insertion checkout csm, code-named “Gumdrop,” separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, code-named “Spider.” Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm, and docked spacecraft was separated from 3rd stage with rcs burn. Two S—IVB burns placed stage on earth-escape trajectory. Crew conducted first docked SPS burn. On second day crew tracked landmarks, conducted pitch and yaw roll maneuvers, and increased apogee by firing sps engine three times. On third day, McDivitt and Schweickart entered lm through docking tunnel, evaluated lm systems, transmitted first telecast, and conducted first manned firing of lm descent propulsion system (dps). They then returned to csm and conducted fifth sps burn to circularize orbit. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fourth day and transmitted second telecast. Schweickart, recovered from earlier nausea, spent 37 min outside spacecraft, walking between lm and csm hatches, maneuvering on handrails, and standing in “golden slipper” foot restraints. He commented on sun’s brightness, photographed spacecraft and earth, and described rain squalls over ksc before he and McDivitt returned to csm. Scott opened cm hatch and retrieved thermal samples from csm exterior. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fifth day to perform csm—lm rendezvous. Scott separated csm from lm and fired csm reaction control system thrusters to place spacecraft about 3.4 mi (5.5 km) apart, lm dps was ignited twice to set up rendezvous, lm descent stage was jettisoned and LM ascent propulsion system (aps) was fired to set up conditions for circularization. Although problems were encountered with crewman optical alignment sight (coas) because of extremely bright reflections, radar and optical sightings backed up by earth tracking enabled spacecraft to dock successfully after being up to 114 mi (183.5 km) apart during 6%-hr separation. After McDivitt and Schweickart returned to csm, crew jettisoned lm ascent stage and maneuvered to safe distance while stage burned to propellant depletion and entered orbit with 4,309-mi (6,934.5-km) apogee and 142.2-mi (228.8-km) perigee. By end of fifth day 97% of Apollo 9 objectives had been successfully accomplished. On sixth through ninth days crew conducted sixth and seventh SPS burns to alter apogee, tracked NASA’s Pegasus III meteoroid detection satellite (launched July 30, 1965), took multispectral photos of earth, tracked landmarks, exercised spacecraft systems, and prepared for reentry. Final sps burn for deorbit on 10th day was delayed one revolution because of unfavorable weather in planned landing area, cm—sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal; spacecraft reentered during 152nd revolution and splashed down in Atlantic 180 mi east of Bahamas at 12:53 pm est March 13, 241 hrs 53 secs after launch, within sight of recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. Astronauts were welcomed by Guadalcanal crew and received congratulatory telegram message from President Nixon which said: “The epic flight of Apollo Nine will be recorded in history as ten days that thrilled the world. You have by your courage and your skill helped to shape the future of man in space. The three of you and the great team which enabled you to complete your successful mission have shown the world that the spirit of man and his technological genius are eager to begin an age of adventure, an age which will benefit all the people on this good earth.” All primary Apollo 9 objectives were achieved and anomalies were not serious enough to alter mission operations or flight plan significantly. First manned flight of lm qualified last major component for lunar landing mission. Apollo 9 was sixth Apollo mission to date and third manned Apollo mission. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4, 1968), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Second manned mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), proved capability of Apollo hardware and systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 69-29, 69-33; PD, 3/17/69, 400)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President’s Science Adviser, told aiaa board luncheon in Washington, D.C., that President’s Space Task Group had forged ahead with plans for new space program by Apollo program’s end but he did not see specific mechanism in Nixon Administration for handling “tremendous” aviation problems. He had raised question at first Task Group meeting, but budget squeeze had cut dot request for civil aviation research by two-thirds. Noise would be dealt with by Cabinet-level committee on environmental quality. President Nixon was “anxious to extend our technical and scientific collaboration with other nations.” Recent visit to U.S.S.R. by U.S. scientists had led to plans for more extensive collaboration in high-energy physics. (A&A, 4/69, 5; aiaa pio)
Apollo 11 had opened vast market for medals, tokens, and pins to collectors who specialized in commemorative pieces, New York Times said. Medals issued by several countries after Apollo 8 were “few compared to the meteoric shower of commemoratives for the moon landing.” Medal by Ralph J. Menconi portrayed Apollo 11 astronauts on face side; reverse showed Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with lm on lunar surface and earth in background. Medal designed in U.K. by Paul Vincze depicted astronaut on lunar surface with names of Apollo 11 astronauts. Reverse showed figure of Hermes holding winged staff of flight and olive branch with Saturn V in background. (Haney, NYT, 8/10/69)
House adopted H.R. 765, authorizing Smithsonian Institution to display U.S. flag presented to House by Apollo 11 astronauts. (CR, 12/23/69, H13090)
Safe landing of Apollo 11 in Pacific made “splash applauded around the world,” New York Times said. In U.S.S.R. TV viewers had live coverage for first time during mission as Moscow TV station hooked into Eastern Europe’s Intervision network for live transmission of astronauts being deposited on carrier Hornet. Later, station devoted first two-thirds of final newscast to Apollo 11 and announced that Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent telegram to President Nixon offering “our congratulations and best wishes to the space pilots.” Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh called voyage “a big contribution to space exploration and further progress of world science.” Cosmonauts sent message to Apollo 11 crew: “We . . . closely followed your flight. We wholeheartedly congratulate you on the completion of your wonderful journey to the moon and safe return to earth.” In London Lloyd’s of London’s Lutine Bell tolled twice for good news of splashdown of Apollo 11. Sir Bernard Lovell, Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, said, “The successful conclusion of this immense project marks the beginning of a new phase when man must concern himself with the greatest issues of peaceful coexistence in extraterrestrial space.” Thunderstorm in Paris drove many people off streets at time of splashdown. On Riviera, bells tolled for five minutes and ancient cannon boomed. Mayor Pascal Rossini of Ajaccio, Corsica, sent invitation to astronauts to visit Corsica during 1969 bicentennial of Napoleon’s birth. In Warsaw crowd of 300 Poles broke into applause at U.S. Embassy. Over Pacific on Qantas airliner flying under Apollo reentry point, crew and 80 passengers saw space capsule reenter. In Canberra Prime Minister John Gorton invited astronauts to visit Australia. Pope Paul VI sent telegram to President Nixon with prayer “that this immense achievement may foster peace and prosperity and scientific and moral progress for all mankind.” Congratulatory messages were sent by President Giuseppe Saragat of Italy, President Yahya Khan of Pakistan, Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan, President Chung Hee Park of South Korea, U.N. Secretary General U Thant, President Gustav Heinemann of West Germany, and Prime Minister John Gorton of Australia. (Collier, NYT, 7/25/69, 31; Mills, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6; AP, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6)
New York Times—while urging precautions against contamination on Apollo 11 lunar landing mission—praised Apollo 10 mission as “triumphant scientific climax” of Apollo effort: “The breathtaking virtuosity of Apollo 10’s equipment and crew leaves little doubt that similar apparatus can deposit properly trained men on the moon and bring them back safely to earth—always barring the possibility of unexpected mechanical or other malfunction. At the cost of more than $20 billion the United States has acquired the capability of manned travel to the moon. Whatever the wisdom of concentrating such vast resources on the space race, the accomplishment is brilliant and merits awed congratulations for all those whose work and talent made it possible.” (NYT, 5/25/69, E16)
Ten NASA employees and four support contractors received special awards at White Sands Test Facility for participation in extensive Apollo propulsion system test programs, (msc Release 69—76)
White House confirmed President Nixon would talk with Apollo 11 astronauts over two-way TV hookup as they first set foot on moon. Nixon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., would be visible on split screen to earth TV viewers. President could watch on White House TV, but astronauts would have no view of him. President Nixon planned to spend evening of July 20 watching Apollo 11 progress on TV with former Astronaut Frank Borman, White House liaison with NASA. (Lyons, W Post, 7/19/69, A9)
NASA announced decision to install color TV camera on Apollo 12 lm for operation on lunar surface. Decision had been made after three-hour test using unified S-band transmitter. Engineers had simulated varying return signal strengths to Manned Space Flight Network tracking antennas. Camera had been refurbished after flying in Apollo 10 cm. (msc Release 69—75)
Total $21.35-billion investment “in the development and demonstration of a national manned lunar landing capability” was detailed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “At the time of its establishment, the national goal of a manned lunar landing and return in this decade represented the most difficult technological endeavor ever to challenge the American nation. During this period, senior NASA officials in testimony before the Congress estimated the cost ... at between $20 and $40 billion.” Estimate was refined to approximately $19.5 billion in March 1964, with assumption “there would be a timely initiation of a follow-on program which would bear a portion of the relatively fixed cost required to develop and sustain this national capability.” Estimates then and annual reassessments had reflected total program cost, including cost of initial lunar landing. Lunar objective “was not simply an end in itself but, rather, provided the focus for the effort to attain space supremacy for whatever the national interest required.” In March 1966 NASA had furnished estimate of $22,718 billion based on assumption that there would not be timely initiation of follow-on program. In April 1969 NASA furnished estimate of $23,877 billion, which would still be valid if negative assumption had materialized. “But with the success of Apollo 11, we have the opportunity to utilize this demonstrated capability in a more meaningful way. By improving payloads and modifying spacecraft to increase lunar surface systems, we can enhance significantly the return of scientific data from both lunar orbit and the lunar surface.” NASA had met national commitment “at a cost nearer the lower end of the range of estimates” despite “unpredictable substantial inflationary conditions.” Actual cost accrued through July 31, 1969, was $21.35 billion, of which $2 billion was value of flight hardware available for future flights. Capital assets included were approximately $2.8 billion and were “of continuing national value.” Apollo was “triumph in management as well as in technology and engineering which united government, industry and universities in a common peaceful undertaking. At least one-half million people worked on the manned lunar landing program . . . during the eight years from its announcement to its initial success.” (Text)
