Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were debriefed on Apollo 13 mission at msc, tape-recording details for almost eight hours. NASA released 6Vi-min 15-mm movie of mission, including scenes of astronauts after SM explosion. Film showed Lovell rubbing his hands vigorously as if trying to warm them, Haise sleeping with his hands folded inside his spacesuit to keep them from floating free in weightlessness, and Swigert studying flight plan. (AP, WPost, 4/21/ 70, A4)
Vial containing 2.3 g (0.07 oz) of Apollo 11 lunar material disappeared from display at charity dinner in Los Angeles, Calif. Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, later said sample, one of 100 issued to scientists in U.S., had been lent to Cal Tech scientist for research. Use of sample at fund-raising affair was violation of NASA regulations. (Rosenbaum, NYT, 3/2/70,26)
With Apollo 13 proceeding “in almost textbook fashion,” newsmen at MSC were discussing “minor ‘glitches’ ” because “there had been nothing of major nature to talk about,” Los Angeles Herald-Examiner, said. Houston TV had failed to carry launch live and only 295 U.S. and 55 foreign journalists were covering MSC. Apollo 13 astronauts had prompted complaints from newsmen for being “too quiet.” Reason might be “that few newsmen have listened to find out whether the crewmen are talking or not.” (Bane, LA Her-Exam, 4/13/70)
Medical experience in Apollo 7 through 11 was summarized by Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, in Aerospace Medicine: “The 3105 hours of exposing man to spaceflight during the Apollo program have added greatly to knowledge of man’s response to space travel.” Spacecraft cabin environment had been “suitably maintained”; radiation environment had been “benign,” with no solar flares occurring; crews had adapted well to weightlessness; and improvements had been made in inflight food. Body-weight losses which continued to occur were not entirely due to body fluid loss. Supplying potable water had been effective and “great strides have been made in removing gas bubbles in the water. Work-sleep cycles had been improved and bioinstrumentation had continued to function well. “Although a preflight preventative medicine program has been difficult to conduct, it has been effective in the later Apollo missions in reducing pre-, in-, and postflight illnesses, which had occurred in all flight phases and were usually viral upper respiratory and gastrointestinal infections.” Although crews had adapted to motion environment, “this area will require continuing attention.” Cardiovascular deconditioning had been identified after flight, along with “significant decrement in work capacity in immediate postflight period.” Postflight neutrophilia had been observed after crew recovery. Loss of red cell mass observed in Gemini program had reoccurred only during Apollo 9, indicating that hyperoxia was responsible. Even small amount of nitrogen in atmosphere might protect red cells from lytic action of oxygen. Microbiological studies had shown that organisms transferred between crewmembers and that organism’s growth was favored by shifts, eva on lunar surface during Apollo 11 was conducted within expected energy costs, at average of 1200 btu per hour. It appeared lunar surface time could be extended safely. (Aero Med, 5/70, 500-18)
NASA had applied for patent on magnetic hammer that synthesized small quantities of clear and yellow diamonds from graphite, msfc announced. Devised by msfc engineers John R. Rasqum and Marvin F. Estes, process produced diamond grit of kind used by industry for cutting operations. Hammer, which might be used for making other crystals, had been developed for use in Saturn rocket production. (msfc Release 70-265)	' Apollo 11 July 19-20, 1969. (Program; NASA Hist Off; CR, 12/17/70, HI 1884-5)
Chicago Daily News editorial commented on President Nixon’s space recommendations: “Compared to the feverish reach for the moon in the Sixties, the plans. . .seem almost pedestrian. Not until men take off for Mars—at the earliest in 1983—will there be anything like the excitement of the first trip to the moon. Yet it is a practical timetable NASA has developed, one that promises the maximum in scientific research within a budget reflecting a lowered priority for space. Exploration of space is by no means being abandoned, but urgent needs on Earth clearly come first.” (CDaily News, 3/13/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research, described Soviet Tu-144 as “striking” supersonic aircraft “every bit as attractive” as Anglo-French Concorde, during luncheon meeting of Aero Club of Washington and Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C. Armstrong said visit to Tu-144 hangar had been highlight of Moscow visit. He said Tu-144’s four engines were similar to those on U.S. B-70 bomber and interior resembled McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Tu-144 pilots had told him aircraft had flown at twice speed of sound and handled well at all speeds. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/11/70, A3)
New York Times editorial appeared before Apollo 13 splashdown: “Here on earth the drama in space has done more than shatter any complacency that may have begun to surround lunar flight. It has drawn men and nations together in common concern over astronauts who are envoys of mankind even before they are nationals of a particular state .... Lovell, Swigert and Haise have already written an epic of heroism and skill that assures them immortality in the annals of space exploration.” (NYT, 4/17/70)
Buddy secondary life support system (bslss) to be carried by Apollo 14 astronauts during surface EVA was described by MSC Roundup. If water cooling system in one of backpacks failed, astronauts could retrieve bslss from met cart and attach the 21/£-m (814-ft) hoses to their portable life support systems (plss). Tether snapped to waist restraint straps of astronauts’ spacesuits would prevent damage to hoses or spacesuits during return to lm. By sharing water supply between two crewmen, BLSS stretched time that emergency oxygen would last from 30 min to 60 min. (msc Roundup, 12/4/70,1; NASA Release, 12/13/70)
Map of portion of Venus larger than Asiatic continent made by using 64.0-m (210-ft) dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station was described in Science by jpl astronomers Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and H. Rumsey, Jr.: Map covered planet from 90° west longitude to 30° east longitude and from 45° south latitude to 35° north latitude. Area extended 13 700 km (8500 mi) at Venus equator and was up to 7400 km (4600 mi) wide. Resolution was “about two times as good as the moon can be seen with the naked eye” and was “best definition of Venus yet obtained.” (Science, 9/4/70, 975-7; jpl Release 561)
City council of Roermond, the Netherlands, had announced it would name street after Apollo 13 and include names of Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., in street signs, AP reported. (WPost, 4/20/70, A8)
NASA announced tracking station at Antigua, no longer required for manned space flight support, would be closed by June 30. Station, which included unified S-band radar complex and 9-m (30-ft) dish antenna, had been established in 1967 and had played major role in tracking Apollo flights through Apollo 11. (nasa Release 70-58)
U.S.S.R. celebrated National Cosmonauts Day—ninth anniversary of Vostok I, first manned orbital space flight by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin April 12, 1961. Soviet press reviewed U.S.S.R. space triumphs and praised 18 cosmonauts. Except for brief announcement in Pravda that Apollo 13 had “departed for the moon,” press ignored third U.S. manned lunar landing attempt. AP reported mood of Soviet people was not festive and quoted one Muscovite as saying, “It seems a bit silly celebrating Gagarin’s first space flight while the Americans are paying their third visit to the moon.” (B Sun, 4/13/70, A5)
Bruce Biossat discussed Apollo 13 in Washington Daily News: “Our greatest hangup is the dreams we cling to on earth. And no one is more guilty of fostering and perpetuating these than the men who today are assailing our space undertaking as costly distraction.... What we have long needed, as historian Dr. Daniel Boorstin suggests, is to forget about fixing and fulfilling some great national purpose. We will do better in small human clusters, working with dedication and fuller knowledge, in assaults on an ever-changing roster of important but quite specialized goals. Far from adding to crippling illusion, our men in space have shown us—in a very cruel laboratory—that such hard goals can be attained.” (W News, 4/22/70, 19)
msc announced award of $4.5-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee NASA contract to Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp. for three-inch-focal-length mapping camera, stellar reference camera, and timing device for precision mapping of moon on future Apollo missions. Mapping camera would provide 114-mm-sq (4.5-in-sq) photos with precise geometric controls. Stellar reference camera, used with timing device and laser altimeter—being produced under separate NASA contract with rca—would provide spacecraft attitude, time, and altitude at which each photo was taken, (msc Release 70-40)
NASA launched two Aerobee sounding rockets. Aerobee 350 launched from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan experiment to conduct radiation belt studies. Rocket and instrument functioned satisfactorily. Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried nrl experiment to 185.6-km (115.3-mi) altitude to study extreme uv spectra. Experiment, model of solar experiment scheduled to fly on NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount, successfully photographed sun for 300 secs and recorded excellent scientific data. (SR list; MSFC Release 70-213)
NASA announced publication of Apollo 12: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP-235), 227-page book containing extensive black-and-white photos, charts, and initial scientific findings of Apollo 12 mission. (nasa Special Release)
NASA announced issuance of Analysis of Apollo 8 Photography and Visual Observations (NASA SP-201). Book contained black-and-white photos taken on 1968 mission to furnish data on approach topography and landmarks for early Apollo landings, on scientific merit and roughness of areas for possible follow-on Apollo landings and on broad structure and characteristics of lunar surface. (NASA Special Release)
Time magazine named “the Middle Americans” its Men and Women of the Year: “They sent Richard Nixon to the White House and two teams of astronauts to the moon. They were both exalted and afraid. The mysteries of space were nothing. . .compared with the menacing confusions of their own society.” Middle Americans admired “men like Neil Armstrong and, to some extent, Spiro Agnew.” Apollo 11 and 12 were “a quintessential adventure of American technology and daring.” Astronauts were “paragons of Middle American aspiration. Redolent of charcoal cookouts, their vocabularies an engaging mix of space jargon and ‘gee whiz,’ the space explorers gave back to Middle America a victory of its own values. It was little noted, except in Middle America where such things still matter, that among Neil Armstrong’s extraterrestrial baggage was a special badge of his college fraternity, Phi Delta Theta. He used it symbolically to establish Moon Alpha Chapter.” Some liberals had “grumbled that the Apollo program’s $26 billion would have been better spent on curing hunger or the urban malaise.” Yet Middle Americans “reveled in the lunar landings precisely because they were victories purely accomplished; in Vietnam, in the carious slums, in the polluted environment, no clear victories seemed possible any longer.” (Time, 1/5/70, 10-2)
Two alternative plans for future Apollo lunar exploration were being developed by omsf for nasa Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and NAS-NRC Space Science Board evaluation, NASA announced. First plan was to fly remaining six Apollo missions as planned; second was to delete two missions, thus freeing two Saturn Vs and spacecraft for possible future use such as in space station mission. (NASA Release 70-1 35)~
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted Silver Quill Award of American Business Press on NASA’s behalf at dinner in Wahington, D.C. Award was given for “greatest exploration expedition in the history of mankind,” abp Board Chairman Donald V. Buttenheim said. It also recognized “tremendous feat of organization of human and material resources” and translation of discoveries and development of manned space flight into “down to earth benefits of the new technology for the good of industry, America, and all mankind.” (abp Release, 1/1/70; abp Off)
Distribution of 13 kg (28.6 lbs) of Apollo 12 lunar material to 139 U.S. scientists and 54 scientists from 16 foreign countries had begun at msc, NASA announced. Domestic analysis would be performed in 139 university, industrial, and government laboratories in 25 states and District of Columbia. Foreign investigators represented Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Finland, West Germany, Japan, Korea, Spain, Switzerland, U.K., South Africa, Italy, France, Norway, and India. Preliminary investigation at lrl had revealed Apollo 12 samples were similar in characteristics to Apollo 11 samples. Principal investigators would report findings at MSC Lunar Science Conference in January 1971. (NASA Release 70-19)
NASA released two black-and-white photos taken by Apollo 13 crew, showing damage to SM from oxygen tank explosion. Former Astronaut James A. McDivitt, Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, said primary information revealed by pictures was that entire 4- by PA-m (13- by 5Vi-ft) panel held by 250 bolts had been blown off and that fuel cells above tanks had remained intact. (Auerbach, WPost, 4/20/70, A1)
If Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde emerged from test series with reputation intact, it would “in its builders’ eyes confirm its image as the spearhead of European technology, and the last defense against American domination of the aviation industry,” Stephen V. Armstrong said in Washington Post. Public attention was focused on aircraft’s sonic boom. West Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway, and Holland had said they were likely to ban supersonic flight over their territories because of boom. Instruments in Oban Cathedral in Scotland during recent Concorde 002 tests had shown boom produced between 10 300 and 20 700 newtons of pressure per sq m (1.5 and 3 psf)—equivalent of thunder, bac officials had predicted Concorde would produce no more noise than this in commercial service. Concorde opponents were concerned about U.S. reports that supersonic airliners could change weather patterns by condensing water vapor in atmosphere. Airlines had options on only 74 Concordes but bac was saying it could sell minimum of 200 by mid-1970s for $24 million each and was considering construction of larger model, which would hold 200 rather than 150 passengers. Concorde had already cost more than $1 billion and was expected to cost $650 million more by 1973. No one expected it to make enough to cover this expenditure. (WPost, 9/7/70, A13)
Univ. of California physicist and lunar expert Dr. Harold C. Urey pleaded for reinstatement of Apollo missions canceled by NASA because of lack of funds in letter to Washington Post: “We scientific people in great numbers are working on many aspects of this problem. We wish that we could talk more about our conclusions. A bag of rocks requires much, study and much other evidence must be carefully considered. The remaining Apollo missions are needed to secure an understanding of the moon which may be the only planetary object with the very ancient history recorded in its surface rocks.” (WPost, 9/17/70, A23)
Sen. William B. Spong, Jr. (D-Va.), introduced S.J.R. 221, providing for construction of monument in Washington, D.C., commemorating Apollo 11 lunar landing. Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. (CR, 7/16/70, SI 1535)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
Apollo 13 Review Board accident report was released by NASA at Hq. news conference. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Chairman of Review Board, said accident “was not the result of a chance malfunction in a statistical sense but, rather, it was the result of an unusual combination of mistakes coupled with a somewhat deficient and unforgiving design.” After assembly and acceptance testing, oxygen tank No, 2 that flew on Apollo 13 had been shipped from Beech Aircraft Corp. to NR in apparently satisfactory condition. “It is now known, however, that the tank contained two protective thermostatic switches on the heater assembly which were inadequate and would subsequently fail during ground test operations. ... In addition, it is probable that the tank contained a loosely fitting fill tube assembly. . .which was loose when it left the plant. . .[and] was subsequently displaced during handling. . .[and] led to the use of improvised detanking procedures. . .which almost certainly set the stage for the accident.” Special detanking procedures at KSC subjected tank to extended heater operation. “These procedures had not been used before and the tank had not been qualified by test for the conditions experienced. However the procedures did not violate the specifications which governed the operation of the heaters. ... In reviewing these procedures before the flight, officials. . .did not recognize the possibility of damage due to overheating. “The thermostatic switch discrepancy was not detected. . . . Nor did tests identify the incompatibility of the switches with the ground support equipment at KSC. ... As shown by subsequent tests, failure of the thermostatic switches probably permitted the temperature of the heater tube assembly to reach as much as 1000 degrees Fahrenheit [810 K] in spots during the continuous eight-hour period of heater operation. From that time on the oxygen tank. . .was in a hazardous condition when filled with oxygen and electrically powered. “However it was not until nearly 56 hours into the mission that the fan motor wiring possibly moved by the fan stirring of the fluid contents of the tank short circuited and ignited the wiring insulation by means of an electric arc. The resulting combustion in the oxygen tank probably overheated and failed the wiring conduit where it enters the tank and possibly a portion of the tank itself. The rapid expulsion of high pressure oxygen which followed possibly augmented by combustion of insulation in the space surrounding the tank blew off the outer panel. . .of the service module, caused a leak in the high pressure system of Oxygen Tank Number 1, damaged the high gain antenna, caused other miscellaneous damage and aborted the mission.” Board recommended that cryogenic oxygen storage system be modified to minimize use of combustible materials and remove materials that might short-circuit from contact with potential ignition sources and that system be rigorously requalified; onboard warning systems be reviewed and modified; consumables and emergency equipment be reviewed to determine whether potential for use in “lifeboat” mode should be enhanced; msc continue special tests and analyses under way to understand better the accident details; standard procedures require “presentation of all prior anomalies” whenever significant anomalies occurred in critical subsystems during final preparations for launch; NASA thoroughly reexamine all spacecraft, launch vehicles, and ground systems to identify and evaluate potential combustion hazards and conduct additional research on materials compatibility, ignition, and combustion in strong oxidizers at various g levels; and msc reassess all Apollo spacecraft subsystems and engineering organizations responsible for them to ensure adequate understanding of subsystems at subcontractor and vendor level. Cortright said thermostatic switch discrepancy and incompatibility of switches with ksc ground support equipment was “a serious oversight in which all parties [NASA, NR, and Beech] shared. . .. The accident is judged to have been nearly catastrophic. Only outstanding performance on the part of the crew, Mission Control and other members of the team which supported the operations successfully returned the crew to earth.” (Transcript; text)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., told news conference at Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.: “In the past it has taken a war to force technology to advance at an abnormal rate. The space program did it in peacetime, and to me this makes much more sense.” Swigert defended proposals for Mars exploration: “If we can learn more about our solar system and have those benefits accrue to the economy, I would say it is worthwhile.” (AP, W Post, 9/10/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun (feff), former msfc Director, was sworn in as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning by Dr, Thomas O. Paine, Administrator. lifting-body vehicle and to Apo//o 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, William A, Anders, and James A. Lovell, Jr., for first manned Right to moon. (Program; afsc Newsreview, 4/70)
On first anniversary of Apollo IVs first manned lunar landing, Apollo 11	Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, visited Apollo 11 spacecraft exhibit at state capitol in Jefferson City, Mo., and received plaque from Missouri Gov. Warren E. Hearnes. Later they flew to New York, where they presented 113 g (4 oz) lunar sample to U.N. Secretary General U Thant. Sample would remain on exhibit at U.N. Presenting sample, Dr. Paine said: “What the full significance of Apollo will be to the world of the future, no one can yet predict. We must await the verdict of history. But as we continue to learn and to explore, I am inclined to think that our first moon landing may some day be thought of as the turning point when man first demonstrated that he can open new worlds, where eventually exciting new extraterrestrial societies will be founded. Mankind will move onward to settle and colonize other worlds, and the United Nations will encompass new territories, if not new dimensions.” NASA centers and tracking stations around world celebrated anniversary throughout week. (NASA Release 70-125; upi, NYT, 7/21/70; Text)
Federation of American Scientists held Washington, D.C., news conference to protest extensive advertising campaign by American Security Council asserting U.S.S.R. had taken lead in strategic nuclear weaponry. Dr. Herbert Scoville, Jr., head of fas Strategic Weapons Committee presented chart showing U.S. had 1710 long-range missiles and 550 strategic bombers, for total of 2260 delivery vehicles. Soviet force had 1518 missiles and 150 bombers, or 1668 delivery vehicle total, and was building 390 additional vehicles. (Beecher, NYT, 10/27/70, 13) In exchange of basic information on docking systems NASA officials described Gemini and Apollo techniques, procedures, and docking adapters and Skylab project. Soviet team described plans for future system similar to Apollo’s, with tunnel between spacecraft to accommodate docking apparatus. Agreement was reached that 12 specific technical elements required further joint study, including guidance systems for rendezvous, docking hardware, coordinate systems, and reference markings. Teams agreed on November exchange by mail of supplementary technical information and subsequent meeting in March or April to organize three joint working groups, to meet alternately in U.S. and U.S.S.R. to develop compatible hardware and procedures. (Transcript, NASA background press briefing, 10/29/70)
Discovery that glassy portion of 4.6-billion-yr-old lunar sample 12013 [see May 26] was chemically more like some tektites from Java than like any terrestrial igneous rock was reported in Science by GSFC scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe. Glassy portion of Apollo 12 moon rock satisfied all chemical criteria for tektite. “Tektites are relatively recent and acid rocks, whereas the moon is chiefly ancient and basaltic; hence, tektites are probably ejected volcanically, rather than by impact, from the moon.” (Science, 6/5/70, 1209-10)
MSC announced award of contract supplements: North American Rockwell Corp. received $92 449 970 for changes in Apollo CSM contract. Agreement formally incorporated changes to increase mission duration, add scientific instrument module (SIM), and provide experiment integration and brought total value of cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract since August 1963 to $3,724 billion. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $7 974 400 for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated changes previously authorized by NASA for modification to contractor’s maintenance and repair program. Modifications brought total value of cost-plus-incentive-fee contract since January 1963 to $1,681 billion, (msc Releases 70-83,70-84)
Apollo 12 lunar samples were presented in Bonn to Science and Education Ministry’s Parliamentary State Secretary Klaus von Dohnan-yi by U.S. Ambassador to West Germany Kenneth Rush. Samples would be investigated at Max-Planck Institute in Heidelberg. (Ley-endecker, Bonner Rundschau, 3/12/70)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, accepted Franklin Institute’s William M. Vermiyle Medal on behalf of NASA at Philadelphia ceremony. Award cited NASA for “a decade of unprecedented managerial, scientific and technological achievement culminating in the incredible triumph of landing men on the Moon and returning them safely to earth.” NASA was first organization to receive medal; previous awards for outstanding contributions in industrial management had been made only to individuals. (Franklin Institute Release)
Boom ‘‘was busted” at Cape Kennedy, New York Times article said. Engineers and technicians ‘‘who helped put American astronauts on the moon” had moved away by thousands, leaving “a sagging economy and perhaps the best house buys in the United States.” Employment in Cape Kennedy area had dropped from 26 000 to 18 900, and was still falling. Business in Brevard County had dropped 15%; total bank deposits were down by $1.7 million from $241 million on Dec. 31, 1968; and unemployment rate had risen to almost 4%. Motel business was off estimated $400 000 per month, with half of county’s 1500 units vacant most of time. In December 1969 county had become eligible for Federal food commodities and 1327 families had qualified. Real estate was only business booming, with local residents buying homes sold by engineers at low prices and interest rates. (Waldron, NYT, 2/8/70,80)
Astronaut Donn F. Eisele would leave msc in mid-June to become Technical Assistant (Manned Flight) in LaRC’s Space Systems Research Div., NASA announced. Eisele had been astronaut since October 1963 and was CM pilot on Apollo 7 mission Oct. 16-22, 1968. i(NASA Release 70-81)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star praised NASA handling of Apollo 13 investigation: Handling “contrasted sharply” with that following Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire. “Administrator Thomas 0. Paine is undoubtedly directly and personally responsible for the change. Paine seems to be one of the few high officials in Washington with a decent respect for the opinions—and the intelligence—of the taxpaying public/^ WStar, 7/12/70, B4)
Former President Lyndon B. Johnson was briefed on Apollo 12 mission by Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr.; at lbj ranch near Stonewall,Tex. (P Bull, 1/15/70)
In Space/Aeronautics Frank Leary commented on NASA plans for manned Mars mission: “A commitment to placing human footprints on the red planet will spark an arduous and enormously expensive effort. And it will rankle those critics who want the money spent on earthly ills. Technologically and politically, the manned Mars mission is no piece of cake. But, like Apollo, it is virtually inevitable.” (S/A, 2/70, 28-38)
Univ. of Southern California conferred degree of M.S. in aerospace engineering on Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Astronaut had pursued graduate studies under usc-Edwards afb program from 1955 to 1960 and had nearly completed degree requirements when he was transferred. Lecture delivered Jan. 22 by Armstrong on “Lunar Landing: Techniques and Procedures” completed requirements. (AP, W Star, 1/23/70)
Senate received President Nixon’s nomination of Col. James A. McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at msc, to be brigadier general. (CR, 12/14/70, S20137)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski testified before House Committee: Tracking networks had supported 101 manned and unmanned missions in addition to Apollo 11 in 1969. Meeting basic requirements of flight projects when budget was at “minimum level” had required significant reductions in overall network capability. Planned improvements had been deferred in FY 1969 for second year and, for first time, sustaining equipment items had been deferred. FY 1971 request of $299.3 million—$298.0 million for R&D and $1.3 million for construction—included MSFN equipment to support Apollo Applications program while continuing alsep support. Satellite Network reductions in FY 1969 had terminated or greatly reduced support of several in-orbit spacecraft still capable of transmitting valuable scientific data. Remaining workload of some 45 satellites! continued to require around-the-clock bperationsjatimostlnet-work stations. Many satellites already aloft would require support in FY 1971, as would 10 new spacecraft scheduled for launch. FY 1971 equipment replacement program was critical. Network could support only portion of spacecraft passes and reliability was essential. Continued support from dsn overseas facilities would be needed to support four on-going Pioneer missions and Mariner VI and VII. Major increase in workload in late FY 1971 with launch of dual Mariner ’71 mission would require substantial preparatory engineering effort, as would multimission capability for future programs of Pioneer F and G, Mariner/Mercury ’73, and Helios. (Testimony)
Officials of Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., said 22 000 persons had filed past hotel’s exhibit of Apollo 12 lunar sample in six days. About 10 000 viewed most successful Strip “show” in one week. (AP, NYT, 4/16/70)	_
U.S. reaction to Apollo 13's successful splashdown: Sign at msc was changed from “Our hearts are with the Apollo 13 crew,” to “Sigh of relief party here tonight.” Mission Control broke into applause before whipping out traditional cigars to fill huge room with blue smoke. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, observed that mission had not been complete failure. Spacecraft had gone around moon—feat that would have caused sensation two years before. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said later in day, “I’m a little tired and bedraggled but I’m feeling 10 or 20 years younger than I did yesterday.” In New York, thousands watched recovery on giant TV screen at Grand Central Terminal. Loud applause sounded when capsule appeared in sky, at splashdown, and when astronauts appeared. Hot dog stand operator at Vanderbilt Ave. and 47th Street assured pas-sersby, “It’s all right.” Long strands of multicolored ticker tape and bushels of confetti poured from skyscraper windows. At City Hall, Mayor John V. Lindsay said, “Now they are safely back and New Yorkers join with men everywhere in saying’welcome home.’” Church bells pealed throughout Nation. Traffic came to standstill in Indianapolis, Los Angeles reported no crime for brief period, and dice stopped rolling in Las Vegas briefly. Richmond, Va., department store manager, watching crowd before store TV set, said everybody “had a quiet smile, but it was curious the way they stood iooking at all that good news—silently and almost as if they were still praying.” (WPost, 4/18/70, Al, All; NYT, 4/18/70, 1, 13)
Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as CM pilot on Apollo 13 mission April 11, Dr, Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced. Mattingly, exposed to German measles, had not developed immunity and was expected to show symptoms of disease next week. “The recommendation of ApriMO: nasa announced that Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as cm pilot on Apollo 13 mission. Cancellation of the mission had been considered following Mattingly's exposure to German measles. Below, Dr. George M, Low (left). Deputy Administrator, conferred with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at April 10 launch status meeting at Kennedy Space Center. everyone. . .was unanimous that Apollo 13 be launched tomorrow,” Dr. Paine told press at ksc. Decision was made after Swigert demonstrated in intensive training that he could replace Mattingly on short notice. “When it comes to the problems you can get into in the command module. . Jack [Swigert] literally wrote the book on the malfunctions and how to overcome them,” Dr. Paine said. Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said Swigert had performed critical maneuvers flawlessly in training. “Our simulator people said it couldn’t be done. . .but we anticipated more problems than we had. We were all surprised. It went very smoothly.” (Wilford, NYT, 4/11/70, 1; O’Toole, WPost, 4/11/70, Al)
ESSA scientist Elmer Schuman was using computer to determine exact limits of safe flight through electrically charged clouds, in study to help avert lightning strikes such as occurred during Nov. 14, 1969, launch of Apollo 12, ESSA reported. (ESSa Release)
President Nixon sent message to Ambassador Gerard C. Smith, chief of U.S. delegation to U.S.-U.S.S.R. strategic arms limitations talks (salt) in Vienna: “I express. . .the hope that an agreement can be reached on the limitation and eventual reduction of strategic arsenals with proper recognition of the legitimate security interests of the United States and the Soviet Union and of third countries.” (PD, 4/20/70, 531) April 17:	President Nixon issued statement following safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts: “From the beginning, man’s ventures into space have been accompanied by danger. Apollo 13 reminds us how real those dangers are. . .of the special qualities of the men who dare to brave the perils of space. It testifies, also, to the extraordinary concert of skills, in space and on the ground, that goes into a moon mission. To the astronauts, a relieved Nation says ‘Welcome home.’ To them and to those on the ground who did so magnificent a job of guiding Apollo 13 safely back from the edge of eternity, a grateful Nation says ‘Well done.’ ” In proclamation designating April 19 as national day of prayer and thanksgiving for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts, President said: “The imperiled flight and safe return of the crew of Apollo 13 were events that humbled and inspired people all over the world. We were humbled by the knowledge that in this stage of man’s exploration of space, a safe splashdown of an imperiled mission is in its way as successful as a landing on and safe return from the Moon. We were inspired by the courage of the crew, the devotion and skill of the members of the NASA team on the ground and by the offers of assistance from nations around the world.” President spoke with Apollo 13 astronauts by telephone from White House to U.S.S. Iwo Jima in Pacific. He told them he would like to present them the Presidential Medal of Freedom in Hawaii on following day. President then announced intentions at White House press briefing. He would go “first to Houston, where we will pick up the two wives, and then go on to Hawaii. .. .what these men have done has been a great inspiration to all of us. I think also what the men on the ground have done is an inspiration to us. How men react in adversity determines their true greatness, and these men have demonstrated that the American character is sound and strong and capable of taking a very difficult situation and turning it into a very successful venture. .. in recognition, also, of the men on the ground, I am going to present the Medal of Freedom tomorrow in Houston. . . to the Apollo 13 crew on the ground who have made these very difficult decisions on the spot, decisions that had to be right.” (PD, 4/20/70, 538-40; Text)
More than 50 engineers at msc and at NR’s Downey, Calif., plant were working through weekend to complete “life history” of ruptured Apollo 13 oxygen tank, John N. Wilford reported in New York Times. “The only time in the tank’s history even the slightest doubt was raised about its preflight condition was during precountdown preparations .... Technicians reported having trouble draining the liquid oxygen from the tank after a test. The tank seemed to empty slower than usual. But the next time it was checked out, the drainage problem did not occur.” Report on tank’s manufacture, installation, testing, and flight would be submitted to Apollo 13Review Board. (NYT, 4/19/70,54)
Abolition of 21-day quarantine for astronauts returning from moon was recommended to NAS panel by NASA officials and representatives of Interagency Committee on Back Contamination. Panel Chairman, Dr. Allan H. Brown of Univ. of Pennsylvania, said his. group would relay decision to NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. (UPI, NYT, 2/18/70, C17)
Dr. Max Born, nuclear physicist and corecipient of 1954 Nobel Prize in physics, died at age 87. (NYT, 1/6/70, 1) Most common minerals found were pyroxene, plagioclase, ilmen-ite, olivine, and cristobalite. Three new minerals occurring in igneous rocks were pyroxmanganite, ferropseudobrookite, and chromium-titanium spinel. Free metallic iron and troilite, rare on earth, were common accessory minerals in igneous rocks. Silicate minerals were unusually transparent because of complete absence of hydrothermal alteration. Tests had shown that, at time of crystallization, observed phases could have coexisted only in very dry, highly reducing system in which oxygen pressure was estimated to be 10-13 atmospheres—more than five orders of magnitude lower than for typical terrestrial basaltic magmas. Melting experiments indicated 98% of primary igneous liquid crystallized in 1483-1333 K (1210-1060°C) temperature range with minor interstitial liquids continuing to crystallize down to 1223 K (950°C). Microscopic and microprobe examinations had produced evidence for existence of interstitial liquid rich in potassium and aluminum, which probably was immiscible with main liquid. Viscosity of lunar magmas was calculated an order of magnitude below that of terrestrial basaltic magmas. This characteristic might be significant in explaining textural features, differentiation mechanisms that produced chemical composition, and morphological features of lunar seas. Chemical compositions of all igneous rocks were similar except for concentration of potassium, rubidium, cesium, uranium, thorium, and barium. These elements distinguished two groups of igneous rocks, with fine-grained rocks containing more than coarsegrained rocks. All rocks had high concentrations of titanium, scandium, zirconium, hafnium, yttrium, and trivalent rare earth elements, and low concentrations of sodium. Low abundance of europium was striking feature of igneous rocks. Composition of soils and breccias was similar to but distinguishable from igneous rocks. Igneous rocks contained at least one other “rock” component distinctfrom lunar basalts sampled. Soil was rich in nickel and volatile elements—cadmium, zinc, silver, gold, copper, and thallium—that occurred in carbonaceous chondrites. Enrichment was consistent with observed occurrence of meteorite material in soil. Many elements that occurred in low abundance in lunar igneous rocks were strongly enriched in terrestrial crustal rocks that were product of igneous differentiation. It had been suggested that low abundance of these elements derived from residual lunar liquids was indication that whole moon was depleted in number of volatile elements. If inference was correct, it could be inferred that lunar material separated from high-temperature, dispersed nebula at 1273 K (1000°C) or higher. Coincidence of high abundance of titanium, separation of europium from other rare earth elements, and separation of barium and strontium suggested igneous liquids were end product of fractional crystallization process or, less likely, that they were produced by partial melting and subsequent segregation of liquid in lunar interior. High-pressure and temperature experiments had shown that materials with chemical composition of Tranquility Base basalts would, at conditions inferred for lunar interior, have densities exceeding moon’s average density. Therefore, basalts could not represent moon’s bulk composition. Age of basaltic crystalline rock was determined at 3.7 billion yrs. Igneous rocks were melted and crystallized about 10 billion yrs after moon’s formation. Single exotic rock fragment had yielded age of 4.4 billion yrs and indicated variability in age between different areas on lunar surface. Relatively young basalts showed moon had not been completely dead planet from its formation, but that it had undergone significant differentiation, at least locally, in thin lunar crust. Period before 3.7-billion-yr event recorded in older Highland areas was interval in which earth’s record had been obliterated. Therefore much of lunar surface was important in understanding early evolution and differentiation of planets. Observations showed lunar materials were product of considerable geochemical and petrological evolution. Optical properties of soil measured in laboratories agreed with those inferred from telescopic studies and indicated thin layer of soil must have covered most of moon. Correlation of spectral features determined in laboratory with telescopic studies suggested that iron content of lunar surface might vary. Measured dielectric constant of soil agreed with known radar reflectivity of moon. Penetration depth suggested upper layers were electrically transparent. Measured thermal conductivity suggested that diurnal variations in temperature should extend to less than one meter in soil regions. Thermoluminescence studies on core samples showed substantial diurnal variation in temperature 12 cm (4.7 in) below surface. Seismic study showed that attenuation of lunar sound waves decreased with pressure. High-pressure velocities were consistent with those observed in Apollo 12 seismic experiments, suggesting possibility of seismic wave guide at shallow depths on moon. Natural remanent magnetization found in crystalline rocks and breccias suggested ancient moon might have had magnetic field with strength of few percent of earth’s field. Field existing 3.7 billion yrs ago might have been result of fluid motions in lunar interior—effect of earth’s field when moon and earth were closer together or result of processes not yet understood. Lunar samples were valuable for study of low-energy, weakly penetrating radiations and had provided sample of gases blown off sun in solar wind, making it possible to determine isotopic composition and abundance of elements in sun by direct measurement. Results would lead to better understanding of sun’s evolution. Studies of stored nuclear tracks and induced radioactivities had shown effect of bombardment by solar flare particles and suggested activity had persisted for long periods. Abundance of cosmic-ray-produced nuclides in samples showed some rocks had been on or within several centimeters of lunar surface for at least 10 million yrs and within one or two meters (three to six and a half feet) for at least 500 million yrs. In search for life origins on moon, micropaleontological examination of sample by optical microscopy and by electron and scanning electron microscopy had produced uniformly negative results. Intensive search for viable organisms using many environmental and media combinations had produced negative results, as had the one quarantine study. Reports given at conference were published in Jan. 30 issue of Science under NASA contract. (Science, 1/30/70) Cambridge Univ. astronomer Dr. Fred Hoyle was principal speaker at banquet given by National Space Hall of Fame and City of Houston during conference. He said it was significant that in year when men first set foot on another world, desire to save their own planet had suddenly blossomed. “Quite suddenly everyone worldwide has become seriously interested in protecting the environment. Something new has happened to create this feeling of awareness about our planet.” He warned that man had to face probability that he could no longer discover important physical laws solely by observation in earth laboratories. “We are in a transition period, and in the future we must rely more on outside laboratories than astronomers did in the past.” (Burgess, CSM, 1/8/70)
msfc announced award of $4 360 260 modification to Saturn V contract with Boeing Co. for installation of accumulators—small gas reservoirs in liquid-oxygen prevalves—in 1st stage (S-IC) to change frequency of oscillation in propulsion system. Installation had been made after second Saturn V had oscillated severely during unmanned Apollo 6flight April 4, 1968. (msfc Release 70-14)
Moon once had magnetic field six percent as strong as earth’s, according to studies of Apollo moon rocks by Colorado Univ. geologist Dr. Edwin E. Larson and Univ. of Toronto scientists William Pierce and David Strangway, Denver Post reported. Studies had revealed moon rocks had stable magnetization, Apollo 11 dust samples were AVi billion yrs old, and solidified crystalline rocks were V/2 billion yrs. Presence of nickel-iron in Apollo 11 rocks indicated that frequent meteoroid activity had fragmented them. Little or no free water or oxygen existed on moon. (D Post, 8/26/70)
New York Times editorial commented on 4.6-billion-yr-old rock brought from moon by Apollo 12: “Rock 13’s appearance at this moment in history is more than a major scientific coup for the Apollo program. The recovery of this staggeringly ancient rock strengthens the argument of those who have pressed for extensive exploration of the lunar surface on the ground that the moon will provide the clues needed to understand the origin and development of the solar system. Thus rock 13 fortifies the scientific case for going ahead with additional Apollo flights despite the dangers which were made so vivid by the hazardous journey of Apollo 13.” (NYT, 5/28/ 70)
NASA’s alsep 1, placed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 crew Nov. 19, 1969,	was functioning satisfactorily after more than 64 days of uninterrupted operation, msc announced. Some 1977 commands had been transmitted to and carried out by alsep 1 since deployment. Scientific and engineering data were being transmitted continuously and radioisotope power remained constant at 74 w. Passive seismic experiment had recorded episode of large tilts on long-period horizontal sensors that lasted one hour and coincided with third lunar sunrise Jan. 16. (msc Release 70-12)
ossa Science Steering Committee’s Planetary Biology Subcommittee, concerned about validity of Lunar Receiving Laboratory tests on lunar samples and unexplained biological effect of lunar soil on some plants, had recommended continuation of quarantine procedures through Apollo 13 mission, Victor Cohn reported in Washington Post. Subcommittee had strongly opposed Jan. 15 suggestion by Interagency Committee on Back Contamination that quarantine be abandoned and had prompted NASA to ask nas for reevaluation by a special committee. (WPost, 2/14/70, A5; NASA Exobiology Off)
Apollo 12 astronauts began goodwill tour of Europe with one-day visit to Lisbon, Portugal. (NYT, 2/24/70)
Moon had been formed as separate planet outside earth orbit and was later captured by earth according to calculations published by Interior Dept, scientist S. Fred Singer and Univ. of Hawaii astronomer L. W. Bandermannin Science. Depletion of volatile substances, which were of lower abundance in lunar surface rocks than in terrestrial rocks, had been explained by late accretion of volatile materials from solar nebula with falling temperature. Scientists had concluded moon had accumulated not in earth orbit but as separate planet. (Science, 10/23/70,438-9)
Apollo seismic experiment scientists, after comparing thousands of signals received by radio frpm sensitive seismometer left on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts,.determined that one or more moon quakes were occurring every 28.4 days, each time moon came closest to earth. Quakes were centered in Fra Mauro highland crater 80 km (50 mi) south of scheduled Apollo 14 landing site. Chief lunar seismologist Dr. Gary V. Latham later said quakes might be source of escaping gases that produced red or orange flashes often seen by astronomers. He intended to ask astronomers to concentrate on Fra Mauro area in future search for flashes. Dr. Latham reported in interview with Washington Post that “seismic record since November now produces strong evidence that the moon has at least some internal heat and seismic activity, (alsep Status Rpt; Cohn, W Post, 7/28/70, Al)
Washington Post quoted German police as saying Astronaut Joseph H. Engle had escaped uninjured from head-on automobile collision in Southern Bavaria. Engle was in Germany to visit Noerdlingen Crater with Apollo 14 crew on mission to familiarize crew with rocks similar to moon rocks expected to be encountered. (W Post, 8/16/70, A30)
Modularized equipment transport system (mets) to be used by lunar explorers starting with October 1971 Apollo 14 mission was described by MSC Chief of Crew Systems Div. Robert E. Smylie in interview at aiaa’s annual Aerospace Sciences meeting in New York. Two-wheel, rickshaw-like cart would double walking range on moon and increase sample collection. Other plans to improve astronauts’ mobility included more flexible spacesuits, modified lm that could stay more than two days on moon, and improved backpack to allow astronauts to work outside spacecraft for more than six hours at a time. Cart, 7.6 cm (30 in) high, weighing 9 kg (20 lbs), had been designed with attachments for cameras, tools, and scientific equipment. It would be carried to moon folded in compartment outside LM. (Wilford, NYT, 1/20/70,46)
msc announced award of $5.1-million NASA contract to Itek Corp. for six high-resolution cameras to be used for lunar photography on Apollo 16, 17, and 18 missions, (msc Release 70-11)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine addressed Economic Club of Detroit in last public appearance as NASA Administrator. He summarized NASA projections of potential space advances to year 2000-advances U.S., U.S.S.R., Western Europe, and Japan, alone or in concert, would have industrial and economic resources to realize. For both America and other countries, response to challenge would “determine their futures.” _ New space transportation system—with reusable space shuttle to make return trips to orbit with passengers and cargo, permanent orbiting space station, and automated and manned space tugs for emplacing and recovering satellites and for transportation between orbits—was “bridge to our future in space.” Space shuttle would be “nasa’s major single effort during the next ten years.” New approach to large payloads based on shuttle booster stage would offset termination of Saturn V after completion of Apollo lunar landings by 1972. Skylab program scheduled to start during 1973 would provide basis for final design of space station. Integrated lunar exploration in early 1980s could use station in lunar orbit as platform for descent to any portion of moon’s surface for up to 14 days. Broad, vigorous, unmanned program to explore planets in 1970s would be start of orderly program to visit every planet in solar system, blazing trail for manned trips to Mars and Venus before end of century. “The space in orbit two hundred miles [320 km] above the earth can be thought of as a vast new continent, equal in area to the surface of the entire globe.” Discovered only a dozen years ago, new continent would “become increasingly important as the leading world source of global information and communication services and then, inevitably, as a new home of men from earth.” Beyond solar system, automated and manned astronomical probes would “extend our understanding of the universe through more intensive investigations in optical and radio astronomy and space physics.” Before century’s end, man might find answers to “the overwhelming questions of man’s origin, his destiny, and of his uniqueness as the bearer of intelligence in the universe.” Man “may indeed be unique— but the odds against it approach a thousand billion billion to one. ... Every experiment so far has been negative, but the search will continue. ... We do not know what may exist, but we are upon the verge of knowing.” Of Apollo program Dr. Paine said, “History may record that the substitution of major international technical competition, in place of war, was the great and unprecedented peacekeeping breakthrough of our era.” Benefit on international social and technical change was “evident to all.” (Text)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird discussed “basic asymmetry” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. efforts in nuclear weapons field at AP annual luncheon in New York: From 1965 to 1967 U.S.S.R. had more than tripled its inventory of strategic offensive nuclear weapon launchers—from 500 to 1700, including 200 heavy bombers—and quadrupled total megatonnage in its strategic offensive force. U.S. in same period had not increased established level of 1710 strategic nuclear missile launchers, had reduced heavy bomber strength of 780 by over 200, and had reduced megatonnage by more than 40%. “Except for the minimum ‘hedge’ that safeguard will provide, we have not responded to the Soviet strategic offensive buildup with new deployment programs. We did not respond in past years because the United States deliberately chose to assume that the Soviet buildup was aimed at achieving a deterrent posture comparable to that of the United States. We have not responded this year because. . .we fervently hope that salt can render such a response unnecessary.” (Text) Cal Tech physicist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg said detailed studies of Apollo 12 moon rocks had shown preliminary estimates of their age to be off by some 800 million yrs. Evidence from Apollo 11 and 12 lunar sample studies indicated moon—and possibly earth and some major planets—had at least one period of sustained turbulence, lasting about 300 million yrs and beginning some billion years after moon and rest of solar system originated. Solar system was estimated to be 4.6 billion yrs old. At news conference following meeting, Dr. Wasserburg said he uid collaborator, Cal Tech physicist Dr. D. A. Papanastassiou, had found age of lava-born Apollo 12 rocks to be 3.4billion yrs, rather than preliminary estimate of 2.6 billion yrs. Apollo 11 rocks were found to be 3.65 billion yrs old. Evidence indicated both areas of moon had been formed from same sustained process lasting some 300 million yrs. There was “widespread outpouring” of lava over sea regions of moon about 3.5 billion yrs ago. Evidence suggested Sea of Storms, where Apollo 12 rocks were found, had almost same age as Sea of Tranquility, Apollo 11 lunar site. (AP, LA Times, 4/23/70) Dr. Rhodes W. Fairbridge, Columbia Univ. geologist, reported finding territory which was earth’s south polar region in Upper Ordovician period, about 450 million yrs ago, in middle of Sahara desert. Finding supported belief that phenomenon of sliding land masses known as continental drift had occurred. (Blakeslee, NYT, 4/21/ 70, 1) At closing session scientists, with exception of ESSA’s Dr. S. Fred Singer, maintained earth and moon had simultaneous and similar origin despite differences between lunar rocks and those of earth. Dr. Singer agreed moon had most likely been captured in earth’s gravitational field “very shortly” after earth’s formation about 4.6 billion yrs. ago. Dr. John A. O’Keefe of GSFC thought earth and moon were once single planet that broke apart. Dr. A. G. W. Cameron of Yeshiva Univ. felt earth and moon had formed in same gaseous cloud, (upi, NYT, 4/27/70) April21: Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., described their initial reaction to Apollo 13 accident to press at msc. Lovell explained: “Fred was still in the lunar module, Jack was back in the command module in the left-hand seat, and I was halfway in between the lower equipment bay.. .when all three of us heard a rather large bang, just one bang. Now, before that, Fred. . .had actuated a valve which nominally gives us the same sound. . .so when this bang came we really didn’t get concerned right away, but I looked up at Fred and Fred had that expression like it wasn’t his fault, and we suddenly realized that something else had occurred, but exactly what we didn’t know.” Swigert said he had felt vibration accompanying bang and then noticed master alarm and main bus B undervolt light. “I transmitted to Houston that we had a problem and proceeded to. . .look at the voltage. . .[which] at that time was completely normal. . ..” Swigert thought bang had occurred in LM and Haise, in lm, thought it had occurred in cm. Lovell said his first impression was “that we had had an electrical problem that caused this bang.... That quickly went away and then I looked out the window and saw this venting and my concern was increasing all the time. It went from I wonder what this is going to do to the landing to I wonder if we can get back home again. It was apparent.. .that the only way to survive the situation was to transfer to the lm. ...” Lovell said decision on date, crew, and destination of Apollo 14 would be made after debriefings and investigation by Apollo 13 Review Board. If NASA “wants this crew to go back to Fra Mauro, we’ll be glad to go. If they decide to send another crew or not to go to Fra Mauro, that’s their decision.” (Transcript)
NASA held series of three Apollo 13 post-recovery press conferences at msc hosted by NASA Administrator, manned space flight officials,' and technical specialists. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said although mission “must be recorded as a failure, there’s never been a more prideful moment in the space program.” Most impressive aspect of mission was “tremendous effectiveness in team work of our ground support operation .... From every state . . . we’ve had people. . . working to backstop the many different system decisions that had to be systematically and methodically faced up to and made. . . . The Flight Operations Directors . . . certainly demonstrated that flight controllers can operate under these very adverse conditions. They’ve been able to do things in a far shorter period of time than we’d ever thought possible be-1 fore.”	’ Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said basic procedures used for every phase of mission were predetermined. “For example, the burn made behind the moon . . . was a standard emergency burn that would be used in case the service propulsion system would not work on a normal lunar mission going into lunar orbit. Each one of these steps had been predetermined and also simulated. But putting them all together into a sequence of steps . . . and working out some of the detailed procedures on how to save power and how to save batteries; how to save water; those things were determined during the course of the flight, both by the men ... on the ground and by the astronauts.” (Transcript)
At annual meeting of American Chemical Society in Houston, Tex., Univ. of Chicago lunar chemist Dr. Anthony Turkevich described lunar highlands as “comparable to the continents of earth, floating like icebergs on a more dense medium of deeper rocks.” Only chemical basis of comparison between lunar plains and highlands had been provided by Turkevich-designed experiment flown on Surveyor mission to highland region near crater Tycho. Compared with Apollo II lunar sample data, experiment data proved plains were darker and denser than highlands because they contained twice the abundance of elements heavier than calcium. Moon’s chemical content also showed “evidence for a crust on the moon.” Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astophysical Observatory presented corroborating evidence based on traces of highland material in Apollo ll samples. He explained meteoroid impact at nearby highland area might have showered lighter-colored material—anorthosite—on plain where Apollo II landed. Anorthositic crust, formed by melting, probably covered moon at one time. Then giant craters, which became plains, were blasted into crust by early impacts and lavas from beneath surface welled into holes and solidified. Dr. Wood estimated depth of crust at 24 km (15 mi), but other scientists were skeptical. In interview following meeting, Cal Tech chemist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg said crust was thin “like the skin of an onion.” (Wil-ford, NYT, 2/24/70, 25)
Laser ranging retroreflector (lrrr) similar to one placed on lunar surface by Apollo 11 crew had been added to alsep package for Apollo 14, NASA announced, lrrr would be placed in Fra Mauro region of moon to make laser distance measurements from earth to moon with 15-cm (6-in) accuracy, (msc Release 70-71)
America’s “sanguine attitude about manned space flight” had been shattered by Apollo IJ’s technical problems, Howard Simons said in Washington Post. “As the first words came that the three astronauts were in peril, earthbound fears began to race along with the moonbound craft. The astronauts seemed remarkably calm, most other persons desperate.” As tension heightened, “inevitable questions began to intrude on one’s innate fears. Would they get back? Could they get back?” It seemed certain situation would revive debate over rescue capability. “Mysterious ‘bang’ in space is bound to further slow an already slowed effort to stretch man’s reach beyond his immediate horizon.” (WPost, 4/14/70, Al)
Second volume of third edition of new Soviet encyclopedia Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsklopediya—to go on sale in October— displayed “factual approach” to U.S. space program, AP said. Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong received half-column biography and small photo as first man to walk on moon. Apollo missions were given nearly two pages, including two-column photo of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on moon and diagram of lunar landing. (AP, LA Times, 911110)
Safely home, the Apollo 13 crew stepped aboard the U.S.S. Iwo Jima recovery ship after splashdown in the South Pacific. Leaving the helicopter (at top, from left) are Astronauts Fred W. Raise, Jr., James A. Lovell, Jr., and JohnL. Swigert, Jr. Li the once-tense Mission Operations Control Hoorn at msc (at bottom), Dr. Donald K. Slayton (left of center), Director of Flight Crew Operations, shook hands with Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee as arriving Astronaut Lovell appeared on the TV monitor. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Dkector, stands behind Lee, with Flight Control Division Chief' Eugene F. Kfanz sitting at the console in front. (July 16-24, 1969) manned missions had successfully landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (NASA Proj Off; FonF, 4/16-22/70, 253-5; W Star, 4/12-14/70; NYT, 4/15/70; 4/18/70; 4/19/70; W Post, 4/15/70; 4/18/70, Al; msc Hist Off; Off NASA Administrator)
Apollo 13 astronauts and families were greeted by crowd of 5000 at Ellington afb on return to Houston from Hawaii. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., said: “Jack and Fred and I are very proud and glad to be back in Texas because there were times when we weren’t sure we would make it back here. We would not have been here today if it were not for the people on the ground. The people in Mission Control guided us all the way, day and night.” (Pasadena Star-News. 4/ 20/70; Lannan, W Star, 4/20/70, Al)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Michael Collins attended unveiling of painting “Crew of Apollo 11” by Ronald Anderson of Dallas, Tex., at National Portrait Galley in Washington, D.C. Oil painting would be presented to Smithsonian Institution. (AP, W Star, 7/27/70, B4)	.
NASA’s Apollo 14 spacecraft was moved from assembly building to launch pad at KSC in preparation for launch toward moon Jan. 31. Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa told press at briefing that launch preparations had “gone quite smoothly” so far. Apollo 14 crew, he said, was “the only crew that’s been six months from launch four times. I personally will have close to 1000 hours in the command module simulator by the 31st of January.” In response to press query Roosa said he would attempt to photograph evidence of moonquakes detected by seismometers: “.. .the current consensus is that these quakes are coming from around the Rima Parry Five Rille and the southern edge of crater Fra Mauro. So this will be a specific photo target. Both with the Hy-con and with the Hasselblad to see if we can see anything new.” (Transcript; upi, NYT, 11/10/70,33)
Apollo 12 seismometer had detected moonquakes at least twice when moon was at apogee, 405 555 km (252 000 mi) from earth, Washington Post reported. Univ. of Hawaii seismologist Dr. Rolf Meissner had said quakes, which had occurred during seven months ending in August, might be caused by sudden venting of trapped gas when tidal stresses from earth’s pull were suddenly relaxed. Finding followed Aug. 10 finding by Dr. Gary V. Latham and NASA team at msc that moon quaked at perigee. Stress pattern was reversed during apogee, Dr. Meissner had said. “What might be happening is the lunar surface layer is pushing down, pulling the interior apart and unblocking gas chambers at some depths in the moon.” While apogee quakes did not appear to emanate from same place producing perigee quakes, they did emanate from same general location—in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 astronauts were scheduled to land. (O’Toole, WPost, 10/27/70, A3)
NASA announced designation of Apollo Applications program as “Skylab.” (NASA Release 70-30)
Apollo 12 astronauts arrived in Djakarta, Indonesia, during world tour. They were welcomed by several thousand persons. (AP, W Post, 3/19/70)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Alan L. Bean received special citation from aec, commemorating first anniversary of deployment of nuclear-powered generator on moon Nov. 19, 1969, during Apollo 12 mission. Bean accepted similar citations for fellow Apollo 12 crewmen Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during ceremonies at aec Hq. in Germantown, Md. (aec Release N-203)
Apollo 13 editorials: Baltimore Sun: “The simple, grateful ‘welcome home’ spoken throughout the world yesterday not only lifted a burden of dread; it celebrated a new and unforgettable triumph in man’s exploration of space and his own resources of courage and ability at their highest.” (B Sun, 4/18/70) New York Times: “Only in a formal sense, Apollo 13 will go into history as a failure . . . Apollo 13’s booster rocket was sent crashing into the moon on schedule, and that did produce some useful and important scientific data. But in a larger sense, Apollo 13’s flight was enormously productive. The emergency which so gravely endangered its crew turned this flight into a crucial—though unintended— experiment in space rescue .... The lessons learned from this near-disaster will help save spacefarers who are still unborn. And Apollo 13’s ordeal must raise more insistently than ever the question of creating an international space rescue organization with the rockets, crews, and other necessities required to give aid to distressed travelers in space.” (NYT, 4/18/70) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “The very real triumph of Apollo 13, the successful return of a crippled craft, could help the United States space program. What NASA can learn from its inquiry into the cause of the accident could further advance space science and technology —and safety. Certainly further evaluation of the space program’s timetable is in order. But man learns from his failures as well as from his spectacular achievements.” (C Plain Dealer, 4/18/70) New York News: “President Nixon has very fittingly proclaimed tomorrow a day of national thanksgiving. And with that attended to, the U.S. space research and exploration program should proceed full-speed ahead, with special reference to more manned moon shots, and the sooner the better. To falter or fail now would be. . .unworthy of Americans or America.” (NY News, 4/18/70) Nature: “One of the striking features of the past days has been the sheer competence of the people who have been concerned on the ground as well as in the sky. As always, NASA has put on a good show, and there is more to this than the mere capacity to keep a stiff upper lip or even to diminish real dangers.” NASA had functioned “superbly” during daring exploits. “A part of the secret has been that there have been enough men on hand to think of everything, or nearly everything. Another has been the logic of the planning.” Conduct of Apollo would be “monument to the way in which pure reason can accelerate complicated technical developments. Nothing decided in the next few months should diminish the importance of this brilliant demonstration. Those who are inclined to complain that there had been an accident should, rather, wonder why it has not happened before.” (Nature, 4/18/70* 197)
dod announced usaf contract awards for operation and maintenance of Air Force Satellite Control Facility tracking stations: $4 300 000 initial increment to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. under $7 772 050 contract and $3 078 000 initial increment under $4 578 444 contract; and $4 500 000 initial increment to Philco-Ford Corp. under $8 424 250 fixed-price contract, (dod Release 241-70) During March: Dr. James A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa Director of Physics and Astronomy Depts., discussed significance of lunar landings, in university lecture series: “The Apollo missions, to me, are straightforward though immensely difficult tasks. They do, however, yield relatively little in the way of fundamental understanding of nature. They are not scientific in that sense. There is a longstanding controversy as to whether a manned spacecraft is a better way to conduct science in space than an automated, commandable spacecraft. I’m sure there is no simple answer to that question. As the general romance and entertainment value of manned flight tend to wear off a little, I think this question will be attacked in a thoroughly pragmatic way.” Apollo 11 lunar landing “might properly be compared to the explorations of Amundsen and Perry and Byrd in the Arctic and Antarctic, or perhaps Lindbergh flying the Atlantic. These are great achievements, heroic achievements, but the general potential of the Moon in its relationship to human life on a large scale is by no means obvious to me. I don’t think any competent person has found a significant, economic, human use fortheMoon.” There was general feeling, mostly from aeronautics and allied industries, that development of space flight was important to U.S. future in same sense that aircraft development had been. “I think this is fundamentally a false analogy.” Space shuttle and space station were feasible. “Whether or not it is sensible to pursue them, I have a great difficulty in judging.” (Univ of Iowa Spectator, 3/70,6)
After return to earth crew, lunar samples, and spacecraft would be quarantined under procedures similar to those for Apollo 11 and Apollo 12. Apollo Mission Director, Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), said continuation of quarantine—thought unnecessary by many scientists—was based “solely upon the fact that a segment of the scientific community considered the hilly upland site to constitute a new lunar environment.... The bio tests . . . physical science, and organic chemistry analyses, have found absolutely no evidence of any life forms or precursors of life.” To reduce risk of lightning from high-potential near thunderstorms which had affected Apollo 12, NASA had tightened rules for launching in bad weather. Spacecraft would not be launched if nominal flight path carried vehicle through cumulonimbus clouds, within 8 km (5 mi) of thunderstorm cloud, or within 5 km (3 mi) of overhang from a cumulonimbus cloud; through a cold front or squall lying clouds extending 3000 m (10 000 ft); through middle cloud layers 1800 m (6000 ft) or more deep; or through cumulus clouds with tops 3000 m (10000 ft) or higher. Capt. Lee said although Apollo vehicle was well protected, lightning discharge did occur and NASA officials were “doing everything we possibly can to avoid it, without restricting ourselves unduly” to never launching at all. (Transcript)
New mineral found in Apollo 11 samples had been named “armalcolite,” incorporating letters of Apollo 11 astronauts’ names, Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, msc announced. Name had been included in Proceedings of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference of Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta (cq.), dedicated to Apollo 11 crew, and had been approved by Nomenclature Committee of International Mineralogical Assn, (msc Release 70-82)
The city of Chicago welcomed the Apollo 13 astronauts anti flight controllers with ticker tape, confetti, and cheers during a parade around the Loop. Honorary citizenship awards were given John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (absent), and the city’s Medal of Merit was given to flight commander James A. Lovell. Jr, nated into a growing number of more precise disciplines—each becoming more productive the narrower its focus became.” But "in recent years this process has been reversed and we are now seeing the growth of interdisciplinary sciences and a striving for a more ali-encompassing grasp of the physical world and even broader relationships. . . . This type of growth is essential if science is to be the guiding force—as it must be—behind our evolving mankind.” (Text)
X-15 rocket research aircraft, holder of 7274-km per hr (4520-mph) speed record for manned aircraft, went on display at Alabama Space and Rocket Center near msfc. Once piloted by Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and one of three manufactured for NASA, the 22 700-kg (50 000-lb) $50-million X-15 was on loan from Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. Second X-15 was on display at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. Third had been destroyed in 1967 crash. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/28/70)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received Robert J. Collier Trophy for “their high courage and stunning success in accomplishing man’s highest adventure in recorded history—the first moon landing.” Award was presented at Washington, D.C., luncheon given by National Aeronautic Assn, and National Aviation Club, (naa Release; NR News, 5/15/70, 1)
U.S. exhibit including Apollo 10 spacecraft was most popular attraction at Poznan International Fair in Poland, AP quoted U.S. pavilion director Kendall Niglis as saying. He had estimated 6000 visitors an hour were filing past capsule. (WPost, 6/19/70, A8)
Apollo //lunar landing had been voted biggest news story of 1969 in poll of Associated Press member newspapers and radio and TV stations, AP announced. Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Apollo 11 commander, had been voted top newsmaker of year. AP poll ranked Vietnam war second biggest story and “story of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy’s political fortunes” third. (Rock, AP, W Star, 1/1/70, A3)
MSC announced award of $875 000 contract to Hycon Manufacturing Co. for five lunar topographic camera systems. Cameras, each equipped with 457-mm (18-in) focal length lens and 61 m (200 ft) of film to take more than 400 photos without reloading, would be flown on Apollo 13, 14, and 15 missions to photograph future landing sites and other targets. (MSC Release 70-31)
Wall Street Journal editorial on Apollo program cutback: “Although the Soviet Union has never said so, it appears that its officials decided some time ago that their [space] program was too much of a drain on resources and had to be slowed. At a time when the U.S. Government’s budget is sinking deeper into the red, it’s certainly reasonable that this nation too should start getting a grip on its priorities.” (WSJ, 9/9/70)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II), scheduled to boost Apollo 17 toward moon in 1972, was successfully static-fired for 378 secs at mtf. (Marshall Star, 3/11/70)
International reaction to Apollo 13 crisis: In Moscow, many persons relied on foreign radio broadcasts for information on Apollo 13 progress; Soviet news media continued to give only brief reports. At U.N. in New York, Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, Soviet delegate to Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, said people of world were hoping for safe return of “courageous astronauts.” Pope Paul VI told audience of 10 000 Romans and tourists in St. Peter’s Basilica, “We cannot forget at this moment the lot of the astronauts of Apollo 13. We hope that at least their lives can be saved.” Japanese businessman said in Tokyo: “How could it happen? Why, they almost shuttled to the moon as safely as we ride commuter trains.” In Paris, radio stations interrupted regular programs with news bulletins and interviews with space experts. La Monde said, “The whole human race is participating with them in the agony of their return.” Thousands flocked to churches in Georgetown, Guyana. They were saying mission should have been called Apollo 12B or Apollo 14, rather than Apollo 13. In Australia, Sydney TV station superimposed Apollo 13 bulletins over film of “Lost in Space.” BBC continued newscasts until 4 am local time to report critical maneuver of spacecraft. Budapest woman said, “Oh God, I hope they return safely.” Hers was “common theme,” Washington Post said; “around the world people, whether lowly or mighty, paused to participate in the first life-and-death drama in deep space.” (Johnson, W Post, 4/15/ 70, Al; Arnold, NYT,4/15/70, 1)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told press at ksc that Apollo 13 mission would be his last space flight. “There are a lot of people standing in line for flights. I’ve had more than my share. So I’ll step aside after this one.” Apollo 13 would be Lovell’s fourth space flight. (AP, W Star, 2/5/70, A2)	.
Three security automobiles burst into flames in fog-like oxygen vapor 335 m (1100 ft) from Apollo 13’s Saturn V booster at KSC Launch Complex 39, Pad A, during rocket fueling for countdown demonstration test. Patrolmen escaped injury and booster was not damaged. Test was delayed nearly four hours, but engineers successfully completed countdown with simulated ignition. Vented oxygen vapor apparently mixed with gasoline in carburetors and was ignited by spark plugs. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, appointed board to investigate accident, (upi, WPost, 3/26/70, A3)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would leave active duty with NASA
JPL Lab-Oratory reproduced crystallotype print from daguerrotype of moon made by John A. Whipple in 1851. Accompanying article included description by Whipple of difficulties in obtaining photo. Whipple account and daguerrotype had first appeared in July 1853 issue of Photographic Art-Journal. Daguerrotype was “one of the oldest close-ups of the Moon on record,” jpl said. (Lab-Oratory, 5/70, cover, 3)
NASA announced modifications to 2nd stage (S-II-9) of Saturn V launch vehicle scheduled to boost Apollo 14 toward moon. Accumulator, compartment to suppress pogo-effect oscillations felt on previous Apollo flights, had been installed in liquid-oxygen line feeding the center engine and filled with helium gas to cushion pressures of fluid flowing through line. Three .acceleration-actuated modules would be installed on center cross-beam structure as backup to initiate cutoff of center engine if oscillations were excessive. J-2 engine propellant-utilization valve had been redesigned from motor driven to pneumatically actuated, to bypass much onboard stage electronic circuitry, simplify propellant utilization, and enhance stage’s reliability. (NASA Release 70-207)
Dr. Gary V. Latham, Columbia Univ. seismologist and principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, during Houston, Tex., press conference withdrew proposal that atomic bomb be detonated on moon. Instead, he said, NASA should find way to hit moon hard enough to create strong internal reverberations. Pressure from scientists and public had led to retraction of original proposal. (W Star, 1/8/70, B4)
MSC announced NASA had awarded United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. $5 461 203 contract supplement for changes in Apollo portable-life-support-system (plss) contract. Agreement formally incorporated changes permitting plss to accept an improved communications system supplied by NASA, (msc Release 70-6)
Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, on behalf of all Soviet cosmonauts, sent message to Apollo 13 crew: “We Soviet cosmonauts are following your flight with great attention and anxiety. We wish wholeheartedly your safe return to our mother earth.” (AP, B Sun, 4/17/ 70, A9)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Apollo 13 crew’s exposure to German measles: “It is an untimely reminder of how much America spends to send men to the moon and how little to combat disease on earth.. .. We are in favor of continued space exploration, to a point, but we cannot help thinking what the money spent on just one shot to the moon could do if devoted instead to the prevention and cure of diseases that afflict millions of earthlings.” (P Inq, 4/8/70)
Enrique G. Regueiro, who broadcast Apollo missions in Latin America, estimated his audience at 100 million out of total population of 190 million. At Washington, D.C., dinner party he said he felt “people in Latin America are more excited about these moon flights than the people of the United States.” (McCardle, WPost, 4/3/70, B3)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., received award of excellence from Governor’s Committee of 100 000 Pennsylvanians at ceremonies in Pittsburgh. Conrad, cited for excellence in science and technology, was born in Philadelphia. Ceremony climaxed day during which Conrad and Apollo 12 Astronauts Alan L. Bean ana Richard F. Gordon, Jr., toured Pennsylvania. (P Bull, 1/19/70, 1/20/ 70)
In message read at opening of Warsaw exhibit of Apollo 11 lunar landing materials, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said, “It is our sincere hope and belief that Poland, with its rich scientific heritage, will play an important role in these [space] ventures.” (C Trib, 2/20/70)
Many Turkish peasants were convinced that flu that had been ravaging Turkey came from germs brought to earth by Apollo astronauts, San Francisco Chronicle said. Peasants thought astronauts had been imprisoned in room for bringing microbes back from the moon and that wind had carried microbes from space capsule to Europe and Turkey. Charges were appearing in Turkish press. (Arnow, SF Chron, 1/20/70)
New York Times editorial hailed decision by U.S. and U.S.S.R. to permit exchange of scientists between world’s largest nuclear accelerators at Serpukhov in U.S.S.R. and at Batavia, 111. [see July 2]: “This increased cooperation in particle physics contrasts sharply with the continued—and even rising—Soviet-American competition in space.” NASA’s Skylab project was case in point. “The semipermanent manned space station.. .is precisely the same goal toward which the Soviet Soyuz experiments are directed. The expensive and wasteful rivalry for priority in reaching the moon that preceded the Apollo II flight is being repeated in the effort to create manned orbiting vehicles for earth reconnaissance and scientific experiments in space.” (NYT, 7/3/70,24)
Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell described planned eva and equipment for Apollo 14 mission at Washington, D.C., press briefing. After landing LM on moon’s Fra Mauro, Mitchell and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would leave LM and explore lunar surface with equipment stored on 9-kg (20-lb) mobile equipment transporter (met). On previous lunar landing missions astronauts had ended up with more equipment than they could carry, met would carry cameras, special sample containers, work table, lunar portable magnetometer, trenching tools, hand tool carrier, extension handles, tether, and other tools, thus freeing astronauts’ hands, met would be pulled over lunar surface by special handle that could be held with pressurized glove without being gripped. (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/17/70, A5)
Apollo launch operations contractors at KSC were reducing work forces from 17 500 to between 16 500 and 17 000 by July 1, NASA announced. NASA and contractors would continue to review future manpower requirements and final determination on civilian work force would be made by Sept. 1. Factors influencing final determination included consolidation of manned launch operations at Launch Complex 39; changes in 1970, 1971, and 1972 Apollo and Skylab schedules; and internal cost-reduction effort of Government and contractors. Apollo 13 Review Board results might also affect planned work schedule. (NASA Release 70-84)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., was named “SwedishAmerican of the Year” and presented Vasa Medal during Swedish-American Day ceremony in Stockholm. Aldrin and his family were . beginning 10-day visit to Sweden, (upi, P Inq, 8/3/70; AP, W Star, . 8/3/70)
The Economist commented on NASA Lunar Science Conference: “It has probably been a long time since so many scientists enjoyed themselves so visibly at a meeting or laughed so much or had reflected in their eyes the sheer pleasure of discovery that only children have. For the moment they are up and Nasa is down.” NASA was “between space programmes and is running short of friends and also short of cash as its budget is daily cut. The rate of moon shots has now been cut to two a year. This really ought not to please the scientists but it pleases them just the same since they have complained bitterly that they cannot conduct research at Nasa’s hectic pace and their work is suffering as a result. This is not exactly the happiest time to be a Nasa administrator waiting daily for the President’s next word but it is a wonderful time to be a moon man.” (Economist, 1/10/70, 15-6)
msc issued rfps for preliminary study of reusable space tug that could be economically operated around earth, near moon, and in support of interplanetary missions. Preliminary study of highly versatile, four-module system would lead to award of nine-month, $250 000 fixed-price contract to investigate space tug missions and operations and determine if single-design vehicle could accomplish all tasks proposed. Space tug was one of new flight hardware items identified in Space Task Group report to President in September 1969. (MSC Release 70-38)
Wristwatch calibrated on lunar time system developed by Kenneth L. Franklin, Assistant Chairman of American Museum-Hayden Planetarium, had been devised by Helbros Watches Div. of Elgin National Industries, Wall Street Journal reported. Watch used three hands of conventional earth watch plus “window” telling “lune” time, based on fact that time from sunrise to sunrise on moon was equal to 29.53 earth days. Franklin called this period “lunation” and divided it into 30 “lunes” each equal to about 24 earth hours. Each lune was devided into 24 “lunours” about an earth-hour long. (WSJ, 4/8/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, spoke on future of national space program before aiaa in Washington, D.C. He said he thought if U.S. “can still afford foreign travel, still afford Scotch whiskey, can still afford to buy our wives Italian shoes, it is mainly due to the space program.” Unprecedented growth in U.S. economy during first decade of space could have been accomplished only “by such programs as demanding as the landing of men on the Moon.” Endeavor focused science and technology “into a direction that raises the entire plateau of knowledge and the plateau of engineering to enable you to do better things.” (Program; SBD, 12/4/70,133)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., on behalf of Apollo 12 crew, received special Emmy Award from National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences in New York for TV photography during Apollo 12 lunar landing. (AP, W Star, 6/8/70, B9) Reusability requirement might be most difficult of all. “One can speculate that if we can do it in aircraft engines, why not rocket engines? But we are talking about heat fluxes and turbomachinery characteristics in the shuttle engine that extend well beyond those experienced in the engines of the [Boeing] 707, 747, or even the military high performance aircraft. It is yet to be shown if we can fly 100 missions (or even 10 or 20) with this high performance engine, and achieve the confidence and maintainability which the airline operations have in hand. .. .reusability adds a new dimension to rocket engine development.” (Text) Prof. Yu. K. Khodarev, Deputy Director of Institute for Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Valery Yevdokimov, head of Academy’s data processing dept., called for studies of what U.S. and U.S.S.R. could do to establish and operate scientific base on moon. Prof. Khodarev said: “We would like to see concrete lists from American scientists of instruments that we could place on the moon for research. Then we can explore further avenues for cooperation in space. We can’t decide how to transport things there until we first decide what we want to take.” There was general acceptance of U.S.S.R. space efforts among Soviet people “but people are looking for a direct payoff—they want something for their money.” Khodarev said U.S. and U.S.S.R. could “cooperate in a Martian program as well as in intense investigations on the moon.” He suggested area for primary investigation from lunar station would have to be decided. “Do we want to look at the moon, or do we want to look into the cosmos from the surface?” During panel discussion Robert L. Lohman of NASA’s Space Station Task Force invited Prof. Khodarev to attend NASA meeting on advanced space programs at ARC later in year. Dr. Takao Ueda of Japan said Japan was working on comsats, TV satellites, and geosynchronous weather spacecraft. (AAS Paper No. 70-044; Bane, LA Her-Exam, 6/11/70; NASA Sci and Tech Info Div)
Science published letter on environment from John Caffrey of American Council on Education: “I date my own reawakening of interest in man’s environment to the Apollo 8 mission and to the first clear photographs of the earth from that mission. My theory is that the views of the earth from that expedition and from the subsequent Apollo flights have made many of us see the earth as a whole, in a curious way—as a single environment in which hundreds of millions of human beings have a stake. ... I suspect that the greatest lasting benefit of the Apollo missions may be. . .this sudden rush of inspiration to try to save this fragile environment—the whole one—if we still can.” (Science, 3/20/70,1561)
Public exhibit of lunar samples by nasa was described by George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, in letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of Special Ad Hoc Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Even with a reasonable allowance for overlap in our attendance figures for individuals who may have seen exhibits more than once, these figures indicate that over six and a half million people in the United States have seen a lunar sample.” Public displays had been accompanied by exhibit and supporting material so that viewers “come away.. .with some appreciation of its broader meaning.” nasa believed “exhibits at 15 major science museums to date, with 41 more planned for the coming year, in addition to the exhibit accompanying the Apollo 11 capsule to all 50 state capitals and the Smithsonian exhibit are especially effective.” (CR, 8/7/70, E7445-6)	_
U.S. space program was “in a kind of limbo, waiting, really, to be reborn and reconstituted,” William Leavitt said in Air Force and . Space Digest. As Apollo stretched out, “NASA space planners are already working toward the first launch in 1972 of Skylab, which is really the unheralded beginning of the long-awaited US manned space-station program.” (AF/SD, 7/70,60-4)
President Nixon sent to Congress Annual Report on Activities and Accomplishments under the Communications Satellite Act of 1962. He said: “Communications between Earth and the Moon, while certainly the most dramatic use, is only one of many ways in which satellite communications can now be employed. The Intelsat Consortium of more than 70 nations has been highly successful in bringing the benefits of communications satellite technology to the people of many nations. This report reflects the steady progress being made toward an improved global communications network. Already we see major improvements in international telecommunications capabilities—improvements that will ultimately benefit all of the world’s people.” Report said 1969 “saw the largest annual increase in the number of operational earth stations in the history of INTELSAT.” At year’s end, 41 earth station antennas were in operation in 24 countries. “Nine other stations or additional antennas are expected to be in service within the first six months of 1970.” (PD, 3/2/70, 275; H Doc 91-264)
Kansas City Times editorial commented on President Nixon’s space recommendations: “The hang-the-cost generosity of Congress that marked the early years of the Apollo moon program seems not to have been rekindled by last summer’s landing on the Sea of Tranquility, for all the justified national pride that feat stimulated. And Mr. Nixon, judging from his last budget message, is disinclined to buck this trend. The President’s conviction seems to be that important and dramatic goals await the U.S. in space, but that the reality of competing demands on the national resources prohibits the setting of binding deadlines for their achievement. His caution is reasonable, even if it does not lend itself to flights of public imagination.” (KC Times, 3/11/70)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean were presented Distinguished Service Medals by Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, in Pentagon ceremony. Conrad also received Navy Command Insignia for his role as Apollo 12 commander. Bean, for whom Apollo 12 was first space flight, received usn astronaut wings, (dod Release 97-70)
Cornell Univ. team of scientists headed by Dr. Carl Sagan had sent shock waves through mixture of methane, ethane, ammonia, and water vapor—gases which simulated “air” on earth four billion years ago—Christian Science Monitor reported. Results, which showed amino acids in great abundance, indicated protein molecules (building blocks of organic life) might have been shocked into existence by thunder and impact of meteors in earth’s primitive atmosphere. Protein molecules evolved from amino acids. (CSM, • 4/4/70) April5: Countdown for NASA’s Apollo 13 manned lunar landing mission, scheduled for launch April 11, began at ksc despite serious problem in helium tank. NASA spokesman said super-cold helium was heating too rapidly, suggesting possibility of leak or contaminants in system. (Wilford, NYT, 4/6/70, 1; WPost, 4/6/70, A4)
NASA announced appointment of Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Apollo 11 commander, as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, effective July 1. He would succeed Charles W. Harper. Harper had been appointed Special Assistant to the Director for Interagency Affairs at arc, nasa announced June 25. Armstrong had served as Naval aviator 1949-1952 and after 1955 as aeronautical research pilot for NACA and NASA. Flight testing included piloting X-15 and X-brocket aircraft, F-100, F-101, F-102, F-104, F-5D, and B-47. He became NASA astronaut in 1962, was command pilot for Gemini VIII mission’s first space docking of two vehicles March 16, 1966, and was first man to step onto moon July 20, 1969. Harper had left ARC in 1964 to become NASA Director of Aeronautical Research and had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics in 1967. He had first joined arc staff in 1941. (NASAReleases 70-72,70-105)
President Nixon sent message to Congress setting forth Federal Economy Act of 1970: “I propose reduction, termination or restructuring of 57 programs which are obsolete, low priority or in need of basic reform. These program changes would save a total of $2.5 billion in the fiscal year 1971.” Among “most significant” items in total savings effort was space program. “After the recent successful Apollo missions, scientific needs for more manned lunar explorations were reassessed. We concluded that fewer manned expeditions to the moon were needed, and production of additional Saturn V launch vehicles and spacecraft has been suspended. Eight Saturn Vs remain in our inventory for manned flights during the early 70s: Savings as a result of these and related space research decisions total $417 million in fiscal year 1971 appropriations.” (PD, 3/2/ 70,271-5)
Lightning and new-generation aircraft were discussed in Science by Rice Univ. space scientist A. A. Few: “It has been estimated that there are approximately 500 lightning strikes per year to commercial jet airplanes operating in the United States alone. Most.. .are triggered by the aircraft, as was very true of the lightning flashes that occurred during the launch of Apollo 12. Because of the larger size of the new-generation aircraft. . .this lightning hazard will increase. If the new aircraft are permitted to fly under the same meteorological conditions that are considered allowable for present aircraft, the probability of the aircraft’s being hit by lightning will be considerably increased.” New aircraft would not be as safe as conventional aircraft in lightning strikes “because of their extensive use of more sophisticated hardware, which is more susceptible to damage from lightning.” (Science, 5/22/70, 1011-2)
Analytical results for lunar material in Sinus Medii derived from alpha-scattering experiment on Surveyor VI (launched by NASA Nov. 7, 1967; softlanded on moon Nov. 9, 1967) were reported in Science by jpl, Argonne National Laboratory, and Univ of Chicago chemists. Amounts of principal constituents at Sinus Medii mare were approximately same as those at Sea of Tranquility. Sodium contents of both maria were lower than those of terrestrial basalts. Titanium content at Sinus Medii was lower than at Sea of Tranquility. Results suggested important differences in detailed chemical composition at different mare areas on moon. (Science, 1/23/70, 376-9)
Tass announced Soviet efforts to aid recovery of Apollo 13 astronauts: fishing trauler Chumikan and two cargo ships were being sent to recovery area, several whaling ships in South Pacific were being diverted to Samoa, and Soviet ships throughout world had been alerted. President Nixon sent message to Soviet Premier Aleksey Kosygin expressing “deep gratitude” and said, “I will let you know fast if we need your government’s help.” Later, New York Times quoted “informed sources” as saying Chumikan was missile instrumentation ship which had already been deployed in area to gather data on Apollo 13 mission with electronic sensing devices. Times said 13 countries had offered to make ships available for recovery, at least six said they would permit U.S. aircraft to fly over their territory during recovery operations, and more than 70 countries had responded to U.S. request not to use radio frequencies used by recovery forces to avoid possible conflicts on airways. (Lindsey, NYT, 4/18/70,12)
Arthur S. Flemming Award was presented by Downtown Jaycees of Washington, D.C., to 10 young men for outstanding and meritorious service in Federal Government, including Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Eugene F. Kranz, Chief of MSC’s Flight Control Div. (WPost, 2/16/70, B6)	.
Experiment to interpret seismic record produced by impact of Apollo 12 lm on lunar surface was described in Science by Univ. of Dayton, MIT, and USAF Institute of Technology scientists. In laboratory simulation, plastic pellets were fired into sand targets at 4° launch angle and 1.68-km-per-sec (1.04-mps) velocity. Shallow elliptical craters were formed, similar to certain lunar craters. Analysis of ejecta suggested lm debris skipped and, with some crater ejecta, reimpacted far downrange but ballistic rain did not account for unusual seismic signal. Experimenters had concluded that deliberate low-angle impact of spacecraft on lunar surface might create serious hazard to men and instruments on and near lunar surface in down-range direction. (Swift, Preonas, et aI., Science, 8/28/70,851-4)
Dept, of Agriculture would start project to determine properties in moon dust that led to growth of plants bigger than those fertilized by potassium, phosporus, or nitrogen, Washington Post reported, usda scientist Dr. Charles P. Walkinshaw had said moon dust “does something to plants that nothing else can duplicate.” He had observed uninterrupted growth of almost 40 different species in moon dust soil. Liverworts, tobacco plants, and ferns had grown larger and to deeper green in moon dust than in other soil. Corn cells buried in moon dust in 1969 were still alive and had grown tough, stringy roots. Dr. Walkinshaw believed moon dust might act as supercatalyst, causing soil nutrients to be absorbed quickly through walls of plants cells, usda Forestry Service and Chevron Chemical Co. planned to investigate how moon dust acted. (Brett, WPost, 12/17/70, G2)
Apollo 13 manned lunar landing mission (April 11-17), aborted after 56 hrs of flight, was officially adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. (NASA Proj Off)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received award for first lunar landing at second international congress of World Wildlife Fund in London. He said earth was oasis of life that must be protected “from its own population.” Wielders of modern technology were not deliberately destructive of earthly environment, but they were as apathetic as most humans about consequences of their actions. Time had come for them to be concerned. (Lewis, NYT, 11/19/70,4)
Review of Apollo 13 accident was nearing completion and understanding of accident was good, LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, told press at MSC. Final report had been delayed pending completion of “critical tests being carried out which will help pin down some of the details of what took place.” One of the key tests at msc was related to special detanking and checkout procedures before launch. Tests had found faulty thermal switches and “demonstrated that if these thermal switches, had failed ... the temperatures ... in the heater tube assembly could have exceeded 1000 degrees F. [800 K] in some spots,” hot enough to bake teflon-coated wires and destroy insulation. Actual flight tank at Beech Aircraft Corp. would be “cycled back through the same series of detanking operations that took place on the 02 tank ... from Apollo 13.” Other tests were being conducted at msc, arc, and LeRC on “the ignition and combustion processes in the tank.” Preliminary data suggested explosion resulted from failure of switches before launch and overheating of heater tube during detanking which destroyed insulation and sparked fire in tank. (Transcript)
Smithsonian Institution’s Museum of Natural History opened exhibition of photographic enlargements of moon particles, including Apollo 11 nickel-iron pellet with 4-mm (0.15-in) diameter discovered by Smithsonian scientists while sifting through moon rock samples. Pellet, called “mini-moon” because of its resemblance to miniature moon in enlarged photo, was magnetic and was believed by Smithsonian scientist Dr. Brian H. Mason to have been formed eons earlier when meteoric fragment crashed on lunar surface. (Schaden, W Star, 8/20/70, B4)
NASA announced appointment of Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs Robert F. Allnutt as Assistant to Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and as member of Apollo 13 Accident Review Board. Allnutt would be succeeded by H. Dale Grubb, President’s Special Assistant for Legislative Affairs. (NASA Release 70-60)
F-5D “Skylancer” aircraft used by Apollo II Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in training was being retired by FRC and eventually would be turned over by NASA to Ohio Historical Society for display in future Armstrong Museum at Wapakoneta, FRC announced. Until completion of museum in Armstrong’s hometown, aircraft, which he flew in 1960s to practice spacecraft emergency maneuvers, would be displayed at usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. (FRC Release 7/70)
Special detanking procedure applied to Apollo 13 SM No. 2 oxygen tank before launch “probably resulted in major damage to the wiring insulation in the tank,” Edgar M. Cortright, Apollo 13 Review Board Chairman, said in Status Report. It appeared that two thermal switches designed to protect tank’s heaters from overheating might have failed. Tests had shown heater tube could have reached 800 K (1000°F) and that temperature would seriously damage insulation around heater wires. Cortright said damage could have resulted in arcing short circuits that were believed to have initiated combustion of insulation inside tank during flight. Burning, in turn, raised pressure of supercritical oxygen and caused tank to rupture. (Status Rpt No 14)
AP quoted Soviet geophysicist Sergey Timofeyev as saying Europe had entered period of colder summers and winters because moon was closer to earth than usual. Situation created “atmosphere tide” that disturbed normal movements of warm and cool air. (NYT, 5/20/ 70) Among 32 NASA officials and scientists attending meeting were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Armstrong received tumultuous welcome from predominantly Russian audience, AP reported. During question-and-answer period before his report, Armstrong said that when he viewed earth from moon, “I thought it was impossible that a little island like that in the sky could have so many problems on it.” He had found it “more pleasant on the moon than on earth as far as gravity is concerned.” In report on experiences on moon, Armstrong said, “Since the sky is black the impression is somewhat like being on a sandy athletic field at night that is very well illuminated with flood lights.” Further improvement in mobility of pressure garments would improve ability of astronauts to carry out lunar experiments. At later session when Armstrong attended as observer, guards had difficulty restraining cheers of audience, which included 800 Soviet delegates and 420 representatives of 30 countries. AP said it was “dramatic and unusual” tribute to foreign visitors in U.S.S.R. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL scientist, reported to COSPAR meeting on study and comparison of 60 Surveyor photos taken in April 1967 and 20 Apollo 12 photos that showed moon’s extreme stillness. Photos indicated only one small pebble had moved during 31 mos at Surveyor III site. Rate of meteoroid impact or surface movement was low in area of Ocean of Storms where Apollo 12 and Surveyor III had landed. Camera and several portions of Surveyor spacecraft had coating of One dust stirred from lunar surface as Apollo 12 LM descended nearby. Only other change observed in Surveyor was that its white paint had turned to tan, “partly due to deposition of material on the spacecraft.” nas-nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1969: “Popular interest in the space program, which reached a high point with the first successful lunar landing, has diminished somewhat. Furthermore, a reassessment of national priorities has resulted in reduced financial support for space research and technology during the past year, and the support will probably be even more limited this year and next. It is our intention, despite these limitations, to try to maintain a reasonably balanced program, with continuing effort in all areas of space research in which we are currently engaged and to support mutually advantageous international cooperation in space research wherever possible.” (Text) Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov told meeting U.S.S.R. would launch two French sret earth resources satellites as part of 1966 French-Soviet agreement on scientific cooperation. French Roseau (Radio Observation par Satellite Excentrique a Automatisme Unique) program, with multisatellite payload to be launched in 1971-1972, had been postponed because of budgetary restrictions and sret (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique) had been retained. Joint French-Soviet space program also included plans for emplacement of French laser reflector on lunar surface by Soviet Luna spacecraft; stero, launching of French experiments for measurement of solar radio emission; and arcade, study of solar energy particles with French and Soviet equipment on board Soviet spacecraft. (NASA Release 70-73; upi. NYT, 5/24/70; Reuters, NY News, 5/24/70; AP, NYT, 5/26/70, 31; Reuters, B Sun, 5/26/70; AP, W Star, 5/27/70, All; SBD, 5/27/70, 125; jpl, Release 554)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent brief medical examination, donned spacesuits, and practiced countdown procedures at KSC for 2 1/2 hrs in preparation for launch toward moon April 11. (AP, NYT, 3/27/70, 23)
Display of Apollo 11 lunar rocks and Apollo 12 space helmet opened at New York State Museum in Albany, N.Y. Display had been lent by General Electric Co. and NASA. Exhibit would continue through April 26. (upi, NYT, 4/18/70,12)
Apollo 13 astronauts, on European goodwill tour, arrived in Dublin for three-day visit that would include meeting with clergyman who had held all-night vigil for them during Apollo 13 mission abort. (Reuters, NYT, 10/14/70)
President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo Mission Operations team at MSC. Citation read: “We often speak of scientific ‘miracles’—forgetting.. .that these are the product of hard work, long hours and disciplined intelligence. The men and women of the Apollo mission operations team performed such a miracle, transforming potential tragedy into one of the most dramatic rescues of all time. Years of intense preparation made this rescue possible. The skill, coordination and performance under pressure of the mission operations team made it happen. Three brave astronauts are alive and on Earth because of their dedication, and because at the critical moments the people of that team were wise enough and selffiossessed enough to make the right decisions. This extraordinary eat is a tribute to man’s ingenuity, to his resourcefulness and to his courage.” Award was accepted by Sigurd A. Sjoberg, Director of Flight Operations, on behalf of himself, Glynn S. Lunney, Milton L. Windier, Gerald D. Griffin, and Eugene F. Kranz. Following award cereriiony President and Mrs. Nixon left Houston for Honolulu with Apollo 13 astronauts’ wives, Mrs. James A. Lovell, Jr., Mrs. Fred W. Haise, Jr., and parents of bachelor astronaut, John L. Swigert, Jr. In Honolulu, President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo 13 astronauts. He said in part: “we have received over 100 messages from foreign governments—from the Soviet Union, from Poland, other countries behind the Iron Curtain, from countries in the free world. This is truly a welcome from all the people of the world to three very brave men.” Citation on each medal read: “Adversity brings out the character of a man. Confronted suddenly and unexpectedly with grave peril in the far reaches of space, he demonstrated a calm courage and quiet heroism that stand as an example to men everywhere. His safe return is a triumph of the human spirit—of those special qualities of man himself we rely on when machines fail, and that we rely on also for those things that machines cannot do. “From the start, the exploration of space has been hazardous adventure. The voyage of Apollo 13 dramatized its risks. The men of Apollo 13, by their poise and skill under the most intense kind of pressure, epitomized the character that accepts danger and surmounts it. Theirs is the spirit that built America. With gratitude and admiration, America salutes their spirit and their achievement.” (PD, 4/27/70,548-50)
Stewart Alsop said in Newsweek: “The story of the failure of the Russian moon-exploration project... is interesting and rather puzzling. The first test of the Soviet space vehicle comparable to Apollo was operationally successful in March 1967. The most recent SL-12 mission—an unmanned, nonrecoverable lunar probe—aborted in February, the eleventh to do so. “The Soviet Government and the Soviet press had not a word to say about this string of failures.... But in the American intelligence community there is no doubt at all about the failures, and no doubt either that the Soviet space-exploration program has been a thoroughly miserable performance.” (Newsweek, 4/27/70)
NASA Hq. briefing explained to university administrators effects of NASA budget cuts on funds for educating space scientists. Termination tof sustaining university program in FY 1971 would eliminate more than 200 predoctoral training grants which had been funded at $4.18 million. Funding for multidisciplinary research grants also would end. Students would not be cut off immediately, since grants had been step-funded and would be reduced over three years. NASA Assistant Administrator for University Affairs F. B. Smith said other agencies might assume funding of some grants, since university r&d funding in total Federal budget would increase by $114 million during FY 1971. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, said increase would not compensate for leveling off of r&d budgets in past few years nor for effects of inflation. He noted Government support for graduate students was declining generally and said Government did not need as many scientists as previously. Total $21 million would be cut by NASA in contracts and grants to universities. In ossa, university R&D grants in bioscience would be cut by 30%. Cuts would eliminate a high-energy astronomical observatory. oart would experience 30% cut in university r&d, chiefly affecting electronics and space vehicles research, omsf contracts with mit for Apollo program would be reduced by $2 million. University grants and contracts which survived would be reoriented in FY 1971, with emphasis on what universities could do for NASA. (nasa Off of Univ Aff.; Gruchow, Science, 2/20/70, 1107)
Name “tranquilite” had been given to new mineral discovered in Apollo 11 moon rock by scientists Paul Ramdohr and Josef Zaehringer of Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics at Heidelberg, West Germany, Baltimore Sun said. Tranquilite—named for moon’s Sea of Tranquility, Apollo 11 landing site—was compound of titanium, iron, and magnesium related to earth mineral titanifer-ous magnetite. International Nomenclature Commission would review designation of new mineral before name became permanent. German team also had confirmed theory that lunar rocks had lain on moon’s surface for 500 million yrs and had never penetrated deeper than 0.9 m (3 ft). (B Sun, 9/5/70, A10)
NASA released Ecological Surveys from Space (NASA SP-230). Monograph listed feasible uses of spacecraft in 1970s an<l described scientific and technical studies of new images and concepts of earth acquired by venture into space. Publication contained photos taken from aircraft and from Gemini and Apollo spacecraft. (Text)
National Space Club’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Ald-rin, Jr., and Michael Collins at 13th Annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. Astronauts were cited for successfully accomplishing lunar landing that “climaxed a decade of dedication and technological advancement, and gave millions of Americans pride in their country and its achievements.” Other awards included Goddard Historical Essay Award to Prof. John M. Logsdon of Catholic Univ. and Frank H. Winter of National Air and Space Museum and NSC Press Award to Thomas O’Toole of Washington Post. Astronautics Engineer Award was given to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; and Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award, to Grumman Aerospace Corp. for Apollo lm. (Program)
Atlanta Constitution editorial commented on resignation of Dr. Thomas O. Paine as NASA Administrator: “Dr. Thomas O. Paine didn’t ride the Apollo spaceships. But he will be remembered in the history of space exploration as the man who guided America’s space agency through its great adventure that ended in a moon landing.” Dr. Paine had “served his country well and deserves its thanks.” (Atlanta Constitution, 7/31/70)
Aviatrix Ruth Law Oliver, exhibition flyer who set speed record in 1916 by flying Curtiss biplane 1094 km (680 mi) from Chicago to Binghamton, N.Y., in 6 hrs 7 min, died at age 85. Mrs. Oliver had been co-owner of Ruth Law’s Flying Circus and had become known for being first woman to loop-the-loop and fly at night and for piloting aircraft over Washington, D.C., in 1917 as part df Liberty Loan campaign during World War I. (Hoffman, W Post, 12/4/70, B18) December 1-2:	Principal investigators of candidate experiments for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) met with NASA officials and study contractors at msfc. Meetings were part of preliminary design and definition study phase of program to prepare scientific carrier for astronomy experiments that would study universe from earth orbit after 1974 launch, (msfc Release 70-248) December 1-3:	Third annual Earth Resources Survey Program Review was held at msc. A.M. Woll of Bureau of Indian Affairs said Indians looked to NASA for help in management of their natural resources. He described project in which geologists had located possible water or mineral source by examining feature 6.4 km (4 mi) in diameter on photo taken by Apollo 9 astronauts to assist Indians at San Carlos Reservation in eastern Arizona to plan water and mineral resources. Photo had shown strange circular formation. Indians also hoped to locate minerals from photos taken from NASA aircraft. nrl scientist N.W. Guinard described use of radar to detect and map oil spills. Tests could be accurate in seas experiencing high winds in which photos would not show oil traces. Radar also was more effective than photography at higher altitudes and could be used in all weather. During meeting LaRC scientists proposed that Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Water Quality Administration, and NASA combine forces in technological assault on pollution in James River in Virginia. Wallops officials described plans for regional workshop in March with Smithsonian Institution and states of Maryland and Virginia to discuss need for regionalized environmental information system. (H Chron, 12/3/70; H Post, 12/4/70; Lannan, W Star, 12/20/70, 2; MSC PAO) December 2:	U.S.SR. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CCCLXXXI, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 1013-km (629.5-mi) apogee, 967-km (600.9-mi) perigee, 104.8-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos CCCLXXXII, launched from Baykonur, entered orbit with 5040-km (3132-mi) apogee, 320-km (199-mi) perigee, 143-min period, and 51.5° inclination. By Dec. 7 spacecraft had changed orbit to 5072-km (3152-mi) apogee, 1615-km (1004-mi) perigee, 158.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Orbit changed again Dec. 8. By Dec. 31 it had stabilized at 5071-km (3151-mi) apogee, 2584-km (1605.6-mi) perigee, 171-min period, and 55.8° inclination. (Space-warn, 12/15/70; SF, 6/71,213-4; GSFC SSR, 12/31/70; SBD, 12/17/70, 190-1; 12/18/70,203)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong was one of 10 persons named to receive National Civil Service League’s 15th annual career service awards. Each honoree would receive $1000, inscribed watch, and citation at banquet May 8. (W Star, 3/19/70, A2)
President Nixon received 45-min briefing by NASA officials at GSFC on problems of Apollo 13 mission. Dr. John F. Clark, GSFC Director, said President was deeply concerned about mission’s difficulties. Later President entertained Danish Prime Minister Hilmar Bauns-gaard at White House dinner. President said: “I think tonight of three men ... in outer space coming around the moon . . . . I do know that they have the spirit of the Vikings. They are men of adventure. They are men of courage. Back home—I talked to the wives of two of the men and the mother of the one who is not married—they have women, who like the wives and the mothers of the Vikings of old waited at home with faith that their men would come back.” President, at his request, was informed during dinner of success of Apollo 13 maneuver which put spacecraft on homeward course. (PD, 4/20/70, 538; Lyons, NYT, 4/15/70, 1; Beale, W Star, 4/15/70, FI)
At NASA Hq. industry briefing on space program for 1970s and beyond, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “I think that when we talk about reducing the overall aerospace program by 12 percent, we have to look at the other side of the point too.. .we will still be spending $3.3 billion in the 71 budget, and I think by any possible measure that puts the space program very, very high in the nation’s priorities.” Major reduction would be in manned spaceflight “from a little over $2 billion in FY 70 to $1,474,000,000 in 71.” With “the manned lunar landing behind us, with almost all the initial buy of 15 vehicles now completed, we are able to take a major reduction in the Apollo account as that program reaches a logical termination. We had hoped to continue the Saturn V at limited production of several a year. The decision was made under these austere conditions that we would terminate that production and take the savings.” Peak NASA expenditure of $6 billion in 1965 included outlay for buildup of total NASA base. Fact “that we are now down between the three and four billion mark by no means means that we will be operating at a substantially lower space activity than we had at the peak. It reflects more the fact that the base is now completed; we can put a much higher percentage of our expenditures into program.” However, FY 1971 budget would delay Apollo Applications flight until end of 1972; stretch Apollo lunar flights to two a year, with Apollo 16 occurring before aa program launch in 1972-1973 and Apollo 17 and 18 after aa program missions; delay ATS-F and ats-G by one year, and Viking-Mars lander from 1973 to 1975; and reduce NASA operational base by shutting down erc and possibly mothballing Mississippi Test Facility. Dr. Paine said NASA aeronautics effort would increase. “We feel that much of the work that will be going forward in the shuttle program will probably have some spin-off into the aeronautics area.” Emphasis would be placed on v/STOL and quiet engines. Orbiting Solar Observatory launch recommended by Space Task Group for 1975 would be delayed to 1976. Interplanetary Monitoring Probes originally scheduled for 1971 and 1972 would be launched in 1972 and 1973 and ISIS would be moved from 1970 and 1972 to 1971 and 1973. Synchronous Meteorological Satellites each would slip one year, to 1972 and 1973, and Applications Technology Satellites, one year, to 1973 and 1975. lunar roving vehicle would be carried on Apollo 16,17, 18, and 19. Decision on whether to fund two or three space shuttle definition studies would be made after proposals were received. In space station area experimental requirements would be emphasized. Two Phase-B definition studies were under way. Summer study of utilization of space stations would be international conference “with, we hope, strong participation from the European space research organization.” nerva studies would continue. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told conference that “with the technology we already have in hand” antipollution program could be initiated “to produce a space reflector—maybe it will have to be a mile [1.6 km] in diameter—that can direct the sun’s energy to create holes over our cities which would act as chimneys to evacuate smog.” (Transcript)
Actions in response to Apollo 13 Review Board Report [see June 15] were recommended by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, in memo to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. They included oxygen tank modifications, addition of third oxygen tank on Apollo 14 and 15, modification of fuel-cell oxygen reactant valve to separate Teflon-coated wires from oxygen environment, caution and warning system modifications, addition of second-level limits sensing in Mission Control Center, comprehensive review of consumables and emergency equipment in lm and CM, and tests and analysis recommended by Review Board. (Hearing, Sen Com on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Apollo 13 Mission Review, 6/30/ 70, 52, 57)
Editorials on Apollo program cutback: New York Times: “Throughout the last decade this newspaper opposed the top priority then accorded Project Apollo on the ground that too much money was being diverted from urgent social needs. But now that these huge sums have been spent the need is to obtain the maximum yield, scientifically and otherwise, from that investment. Surely, NASA, which has been able to reach the moon, can find a better solution than the one now offered for adjusting to austerity in space research. One desirable alternative would be to enlist foreign resources in the exploitation of Apollo technology, perhaps by offering to send teams of British, French or Soviet astronauts on the journey pioneered by Apollo 11.” (NYT, 9/4/70)
Management of U.S. and Soviet space programs were compared in Science by Dr. Foy D. Kohler, former U.S. Ambassador to U.S.S.R., and Dr. Dodd L. Harvey, both of Univ. of Miami: Programs had been roughly equal in complexity and in input of resources. “If, as has been asserted, the U.S. moon undertaking represented a task equal in technological complexity to the total of all the great tasks performed by man from the building of the pyramids through explosion of the atom bomb, hardly less can be said of Soviet space enterprise.” Soviet investment in space program had been comparable to that of U.S., “if not substantially greater.” Both programs had depended for success on effective organization and use of existing organizations and expertise and both had required extensive organizational and administrative innovations and new management techniques.In both programs most of basic scientific knowledge and technology already existed. Organization and management had been complicated by necessity of serving both military and nonmilitary objectives and by pressures of diverging national interests. Both programs represented “organizational triumphs of a high order.” Aspect of U.S. moon landing now generally forgotten was “that a number of knowledgeable people were convinced it could not be done.” Programs differed in that “to the Soviet regime.. .the name of the game in space has been ‘the system,’ not scientific and technological excellence as such.” In U.S., National Aeronautics and Space Act “reflected the operation of the representative process at what could be called its best.” Its provisions “subjected space activities to continuing congressional control in accord with long-established processes.” U.S. space effort represented “new sort of partnership between government, industry, and universities. . . a partnership that has benefited and strengthened each of the participants without impinging on their interests and integrity.” Soviet space effort had had less impact on national economy than had U.S. effort. Soviet sources had revealed continuing shortcomings in computer technology and hardware upon which space program was dependent. Soviet scientists and technologists not directly engaged in space program did not receive direct knowledge of space program’s technical discoveries and innovations and were denied use of research tools and techniques employed. “The Soviets themselves are evidencing increasing agitation over their inability to match the United States in transferring ‘great prestige’ and ‘great accomplishments’ in science and technology to meet the general needs of society.” Authoritative statement indicated U.S.S.R. intended to triple space expenditures in next few years, while in U.S. “prevailing national mood seems to be moving strongly against investments for the future in favor of maximum utilization of resources for the immediate betterment of conditions of life.” This raised question, “Has the whole operation represented but another highly successful one-shot exercise in crisis management, or has it represented incorporation into American society of a new way to organize, systematically and purposefully, the development and use of scientific and technological resources to the furtherance of national goals?” (Science, 9/11/70,1049-56) On Sept. j7 LunaXVIentered near-circular lunar orbit with 110.1km (68.4-mi) altitude. Tass said ground controllers put spacecraft into elliptical orbit with 104.6-km (65-mi) apolune and 14.5-km (9mi) perilune. Rocket firing thrust spacecraft toward moon and braking rockets were fired 295 m (968 ft) from lunar surface. Main braking rockets were shut down 19.8 m (65 ft) above surface and Luna XVI softlanded on moon’s Sea of Fertility at 10:18 am Baykonur time (1:18 am edt ) Sept. 20. Scientists at Bochum Observatory in West Germany monitored spacecraft’s signals and reported TV pictures transmitted during and after landing were of excellent quality. After collecting lunar samples and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna XVI lifted off from moon. It had spent 26 hrs 25 min on lunar surface. Tass announced that spacecraft’s mission was the “solution of a radically new task—automatic unmanned delivery of lunar ground to earth.” Samples, Tass said, were obtained with earth-operated electric drill that penetrated to 350 mm (13.7 in) and were placed in container by a “manipulator” and hermetically sealed in. Spacecraft’s landing stage was used as launch pad for liftoff from moon on command from earth. After liftoff spacecraft entered “ballistic trajectory of flight to the earth close to the predetermined one.” Luna XVI entered earth atmosphere at 10:00 am Baykonur time (1:00 am edt) Sept. 24 and parachuted onto steppes of Kazakhstan 26 min later, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered by helicopter for delivery to Soviet Academy of Sciences. Luna XVI was first unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. In last mission in series Luna XV had landed on moon July 21, 1969, but had not returned to earth. (.NYT, 9/13-25/70; B Sun, 9/22/70, Al; SBD, 9/18/70, 78; 9/25/70, 102)
Crippled flight of Apollo 13 had been chosen top story of 1970 by AP member editors, AP announced. (WStar, 12/28/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, sent memorandum to NASA officials on NASA’s receipt of President’s Safety' Award for reduction of injuries to NASA employees for past three years: “NASA has earned this award in the face of the ever present and peculiar hazards that are associated with the pioneer research operations of our aeronautical and space programs. ... Safety is reflected in the successes that we.. .have realized in our ventures in space. It is gratifying to realize that this award was based on achievements during the period of preparation for and completion of our first moon landings.” (NASA Hq WB, 8/31/70)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew completed 12-nation Asiatic goodwill tour which began Dec. 26, 1969. On return to Washington, D.C., he was accompanied by Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and wife, who had joined tour at Bangkok, Thailand, Jan. 3. Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan and wife had accompanied Agnew party as far as Afghanistan and had returned to U.S. Jan. 9. During tour Vice President distributed chips from Apollo 11 moon rock to government representatives and passed out foreign flags that had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (Off of VP; Naughton, NYT, 1/13/70, C3)
At Washington Heart Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, received Spacemedic Award “for outstanding contributions to the study of hearts in space.” He also reported evidence from Apollo 12 mission that prolonged space flight might intensify action of some bacteria normally found on human skin. Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Charles Conrad, Jr., had sustained temporary post-flight infections from staphylococcus bacteria carried from earth, which had increased in virulence during flight. (AP, HPost, 2/3/70; W Post, 2/3/70)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
NASA FY 1971 interim operating plan news conference was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said principal decision was “how best to carry out the Apollo and other existing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future. ... In our discussions, it became clear that the vitality of our national space program depends on a determined and vigorous continuation of plans for a reusable space shuttle followed by a space station in the manned flight program”; early development of erts, ATS, and HE AO; Grand Tour unmanned flights to distant planets; unmanned Viking Mars landers; Pioneer flights to Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter; and ‘a healthy aeronautical research program.” “With all of these considerations in mind. . .actions have been taken that will effectively reduce NASA’s FY 1971 budget request of $3,333 billion to an interim operating plan of $3.2687 billion.. .and to minimize NASA’s budgetary requirements for future years.” Budget request for Apollo was being reduced by $42.1 million to $914.4 million by canceling Apollo 15 and 19 lunar missions and by phasing down manpower levels at major Apollo facilities more rapidly. Although Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and nas-nrc Space Science Board had strongly recommended, after special review, that NASA carry out all six remaining lunar landing missions, NASA had “most reluctantly concluded that a reduction. . .should be made.” Remaining Apollo missions would be redesignated 14 through 17 and would be flown before start of Skylab operations in November 1972. Schedule would allow additional flexibility by providing Apollo hardware for possible use in Skylab, space station, or other programs where manned operations or heavy boost capability would be required. Advanced mission studies would be reduced by $1 million. Tracking and data acquisition network operations would be reduced $8 million by reducing number of manned flights and by more rapid phasedown in operating levels. Construction of facilities would be reduced to $25 million by deferring Polymer Research Laboratory at arc, Calibration Laboratory at MSC, and Multispectral Photo Laboratory at msfc and by rehabilitation and modification effort and facility planning and design. Research and program management minimum operating budget would be established at $678.7 million, amount included in previous appropriations bill and $13.6 million below NASA’s FY 1971 request. Dr. Paine said NASA had concluded “that it is prudent and realistic. . .to make these decisions now.. .to avoid more drastic and disruptive actions which would result if the decisions were postponed until later in the fiscal year. We also no longer have the capability to prepare in parallel two Apollo spacecraft, as would be required to maintain an option to reach a later decision on the number of Apollo missions.” Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers explained Apollo schedule changes: Apollo 14 would be launched as planned Jan. 31, 1971, followed at six-month intervals by Apollo 16 (renamed Apollo 15) with advanced capability for greater exploitation of lunar exploration, Apollo 17 (renamed Apollo 16), and Apollo 18 (renamed 17), last launch in series. Beginning with Apollo 15 launch in July, eva would be increased from two periods to three and man-hours per mission, from 18 hrs to 40 hrs. Weight of landed scientific payload would be doubled, from 227 kg to 454 kg (500 lbs to 1000 lbs); SM experiment package would be added; and range and efficiency of surface operations would be increased by improved suit mobility, improved life support system, and addition of lunar roving vehicle. Crew for new Apollo 15 would be same as previously planned—Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin. Skylab core module would be launched by Saturn V in November 1972, as scheduled, and would be revisited by Saturn IBs and csms up through June 1973. Beyond that, activities would be “at a standstill as far as orbital operations are concerned until the shuttle comes on line, hopefully in the 1976-77 time period.” (Text; Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and wife, Janet, participated in ceremonies in Rome, Italy, during which Mrs. Armstrong christened Alitalia Boeing 747 named for her husband. Later Armstrong and wife flew in 747 Neil A. Armstrong from Rome to New York. (C Trib, 6/6/70)
Apollo 13 launch would open “decade in which space will have a new shape. . .leaner shape, with spending well below the hell-bent-to-the-moon space budgets of the 1960s,” Victor Cohn said in Washington Post. It would also be “subdued shape, lowered and Nixonian. Political and popular enthusiasm for expensive space travel is down several percentage points.” New shape “might turn out to be a more sensible one for many seasons.” It might place “more stress on using space flight to learn the facts of the universe and ways these facts can be applied to improve life on earth.” NASA was still undergoing “wrenching change, with many controversies that are far from ended. There is still a deep split between many space scientists and many aerospace leaders and technologists over the best ways to use America’s new capability.” (WPost, 4/5/70, Bl)
President Nixon announced reorganization of Council on Physical Fitness and appointment of members. Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., President’s Consultant on Physical Fitness, would serve as Council Chairman. (PD, 9/28/70, 1264)
Analysles of argon in Apollo II crystalline rocks at LRL were reported in Science by MSC scientist Dr. Donald D. Bogard, State Univ. of New York scientists Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer and Dr. John G. Funkhouser, and Max Planck scientist Dr. Josef Zaehringer. Crystalline rocks from Sea of Tranquility had yielded potassium-argon dates as old as 3.8 billion yrs. Crystalline rocks from Ocean of Storms gave potassium-argon ages as old as 2.8 billion yrs. Scientists concluded that maria were ancient lunar features. Potassium-argon ages of rocks from Ocean of Storms showed more argon loss than rocks from Sea of Tranquility, indicating Ocean of Storms rocks had experienced more severe shock effects or longer cooling rates. (Science, 10/9/70,161-2)
Soviet press and radio underlined importance of Luna XVI mission. Tass carried interview with unidentified deputy chief designer of spacecraft, who demonstrated prototype of drill used to obtain lunar samples and said similar device “will bring one day rock samples from Venus, Mars, and other planets of our solar system to earth. Man will go to other planets sometime in the future, but before this is possible, these planets will have to be explored for a long time by automatic stations. At present, an apparatus of a radically new type has been designed in principle. In the long run it will be modified to suit specific tasks. .. .A flight to Mars will require somewhat different technical solutions than a flight to the moon. But the main complex elements of Luna 16—its ability to take off in the directon of a desired celestial body, make a soft-landing on the surface of the planet, operate on it and then start off in the direction of the earth or the planet from which it started—will remain unshakable.” In Izvestia Georgy I. Petrov, head of Soviet Institute for Space Research, said man would still play a role in lunar research, but only in limited way. He said short visits by man appeared useful but he proposed manned orbiting moon stations equipped with automatic spacecraft capable of descending to moon, moving over surface, conducting scientific research, and returning to orbiting station. (Gwertzman, NYT, 9/23/70, 11)
msc announced award of $57 264 989, cost-plus-fixed-fee NASA contract to General Electric Co. for spacecraft checkout, reliability and quality assurance engineering, and systems engineering in support of Apollo and Skylab programs. Contract, which definitized letter contract, covered work from October 1969 through December 1972. (msc Release 70-31)
Apollo II Astronauts Michael Collins (left) and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (right), were presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Dr. Robert C, Seamans, Jr. (center (eft), Secretary of the Air Force. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, represented Astronaut Nei! A. Armstrong, who was unable to be present. veloping itpr for use by NASA on Nimbus-E, scheduled for launch in 1972. (essa Release 70-28)
Two photographs taken from Apollo 9 spacecraft in March 1969 had been used as backdrop for experimental topographic map of Phoenix, Ariz., area, New York Times reported. U.S. Geological Survey scientist Dr. A.P. Colvocoresses had said that “on ordinary maps the lines and symbols used to represent geographic features in such terrain leave many areas essentially blank. On this map, however, there are no blank areas. .. . The map is easy to ‘read’ because the photo shows the actual land surface, enhanced by superposition of cartographic details.” (NYT, 3/26/70)
President Nixon honored visiting West German Chancellor and Mrs. Willy Brandt at White House dinner on eve of Apollo 13 launch. He said: “We are particularly happy that tomorrow you will go to see the takeoff of Apollo 13. We are very honored that tonight among our very honored guests is Wernher Von Braun, which reminds us of the debt we owe to those who have helped our space project and who are of German background.” President said he had telephoned Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and Apollo 13 colleagues as they were having dinner together at msc. “I wished them well and told them that the Chancellor would be there to see the take off and they promised much better weather than when I saw it last year.” (PD, 4/13/70,508-10)
Chicago Tribune article blamed Apollo program for demise of usaf’s Project Blue Book ufo study: “Wonderful as the saucers were, the moon shots probably killed them. The idea of little men with bulbous heads and wagging antennae landing.. .wasn’t a bit more amazing than the spectacle of human beings traversing space and walking the surface of a dead world. And, in addition, the latter was undoubtedly true.” (CTrib, 1/5/70)
Interview on Apollo 13 cuisine with msc chief of food and nutrition Dr. Malcolm Smith, Jr., was published by New York Times. Increased use of spoons, use of bowls, and facilities for spreading sandwich fillings on slices of fresh bread would provide Apollo 13 astronauts more nearly normal eating procedures than on previous missions. Freeze-dried pork and scalloped potatoes would contain chunks rather than be of baby food consistency but meal would still be lukewarm. Wider variety of fresh bread had been baked for Apollo 13 mission, in lidded pans to provide uniform crust as insurance against loose crumbs which had been problem with former freeze-dried cracker sandwiches. Loaves were passed through 1900 K (3000°F) flame to destroy all mold-producing spores. Two slices of bread made from irradiated flour would be carried to test potential alternate method of preserving food without refrigeration. Apollo 13’s food was 70% freeze-dried, mainly because of space limitation; bread was treated with nitrogen gas to retard staling. Other “firsts” in foods to be carried were pecans to stimulate astronauts’ appetites, dehydrated orange crystals modified to prevent caking, and instant rice product to be reconstituted by hot tap water. Dr. Smith was already planning for 120-day Skylab missions, when hot food would be welcomed. Major obstacle was difficulty in heating food at zero g. He hoped to place test heating device aboard Apollo 14. (Hewitt, NYT, 4/8/70, 51)
First published eyewitness account of lunar samples brought from Sea of Fertility by Soviet Luna XVI was given in Izvestia by B. Konovalov: Lunar dust turned greenish and sometimes reddish under direct light but in general looked like “dry mud.” Later New York Times said Izvestia correspondent Konovalov had been permitted to observe lunar material at special Soviet Academy of Sciences laboratory in Moscow, where initial examination was taking place. Exact location of laboratory and names of top officals in Luna XVIprogram were being kept secret. Konovalov had reported container of samples had been placed in cylindrical stainless steel chamber with portholes. Pumps had sucked oxygen from chamber and sterilizing gas had been injected. Chamber had been filled with helium gas to prevent reaction with moon samples. Then container, which included moon rock and its electrical drill, had been opened for observation. Rock had been placed on steel trough containing scale divisions. Some material would be taken in special bags to other laboratories for examination. Konovalov’s reference to lunar “dust” had been first use of term by Soviet journalist, New York Times said. Previous references had been to “lunar surface,” “lunar ground,” or “lunar rock.” Soviet scientist Aleksey Turgarinov said on Moscow TV that lunar samples were blue and had been removed from hermetically sealed container in low vacuum and sterile conditions. Tass said rocks would be kept in quarantine and would be given to Soviet Academy of Sciences for special research program. Research results would be published. (WPost, 9/26/70, A7; Gwertzman, NYT, 9/27/70, 12)
Initial plans for international docking system that would eliminate current “key-in-lock” approach of U.S. and Soviet space programs had been presented by NASA representatives at Oct. 26-27 U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation meetings in Moscow, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. U.S.S.R. had reciprocated with detailed plans of docking system similar to Apollo’s. “While the proposed American scheme is a long-term project,” NASA engineers believed “the Apollo system and the new Soviet one are enough alike to be modified for compatibility.” (NYT, 11/21/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received British Interplanetary Society awards commemorating man’s first lunar landing at special meeting of Society in London. Awards were silver replica of Apollo 11LM presented to NASA and gold medals for Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (Spaceflight, 5/70, 191)
msc scientists reported three kinds of earth bacteria had died when exposed to lunar soil gathered by Apollo 11: staphylococcus aureus scraped from Apollo 11 astronauts when they returned to earth; azobacter vinlandii, solid bacterium; and pseuodomonas aeroginosa, used in laboratory studies, lrl chief of preventative medicine Dr. William Kemmerer said conjecture was that all were killed by poison in Apollo 11 core-tube material. Tube held lunar soil gathered from five to eight inches beneath lunar surface. There had been no ill effects in similar tests with Apollo 11 soil or Apollo 12 surface or underground samples. (Cohn, W Post, 3/12/70, Al)
President Nixon sent $200.8-billion FY 1971 budget request to Congress, including total space budget of $4,954 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $3,148 billion (plus $185.5 million for aircraft technology); dod would receive $1,674 billion; aec, $99 million; essa, $26 million; Dept, of Interior, $4 million; nsf, $2 million; and Dept, of Agriculture, $1 million. Total NASA new obligational authority (noa) requested, $3,333 billion, was $404.9 million less than FY 1970 noa of $3,737 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $486.4 million, from FY 1970 level of $3,889 billion to $3,403 billion. Reductions placed proposed NASA FY 1971 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,606 billion would go for r&d, $34.6 million for construction of facilities, and $692.3 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $729.6 million, to $956.50 million in FY 1971, reflecting successful completion of manned lunar landing goal, would be partially offset by increase to $515.2 million for manned space flight operations. The $515.2 million would include $364.3 million for Apollo Applications, $110 million for space shuttie and station, and $40.9 million for operations. Advanced missions would receive $2.5 million, same as in FY 1970, to bring total for manned space flight to $1,474 billion, down $557.5 million from FY Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $45.9 million, from $519.7 million in FY 1970 to $565.7 million. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program, for airborne research ($3 million), s<Jlar observatories ($16.1 million), and Explorer satellites ($25.6 million). Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would increase from $20 million in FY 1970 to $32.9 million. Funding for biosatellites would decrease from $6 million in FY 1970 to $1.5 million. Earth resources survey would receive more than 50% increase in funding, from $26 million to $52.5 million, with $41.5 million allocated for Earth Resources Technology Satellite. New projects funded were navigation and traffic control studies (with dot), $3 million, and Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) study, $1 million. Total for advanced research and technology programs would be reduced from $272 million in FY 1970 to $264 million, nerva rocket funding would increase from $27 million to $32 million. Increases also were proposed for v/stol aircraft technology ($15 million in FY 1971, from $9.5 million in FY 1970), subsonic aircraft technology ($11.9 million, from $9.4 million in FY 1970), and supersonic aircraft technology ($21.9 million, from $18.9 million in FY 1970), within total $185.5 million requested for aeronautics. Sustaining university program was being phased out, with no funds requested for FY 1971. dod space funding, down $82 million, reflected cancellation of mol program. FY 1971 funding would support satellite development, portions of missile development, and range operations. AEC’s requested $99 million reflected slight decreases for development of nerva rocket and space nuclear electric power sources for space applications. Funds for Depts. of Interior and Agriculture would support participation in erts project. NSF’s $2-million space funding was for research rockets and satellite and observation instruments. faa 1971 budget reflected restoration of $275 million in Federal funds for development of two prototype ssts. (NASA Release, 2/2/ 70; US Budget for FY 1971; bob Special Analysis)
msc announced rca had received $3-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification for final development and production of lunar communications relay units (LCRU), bringing total contract to $10 million. LCRU would be carried on Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 15 to transmit astronaut voice, TV, and telemetry communications directly from moon to earth. On earlier Apollo lunar landing missions astronauts communicated with earth via lm on moon. (MSC Release 70-106)
aiaa announced selection of 29 new fellows who would be honored at annual meeting in Houston Oct. 19-22. Fellows included Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, cited for Apollo 11 mission; m/g Lee V. Gos-sick, usaf Aeronautical Systems Div. Commander, for military-aeronautical leadership; and I. Irving Pinkel, LeRC, for design and implementation of aircraft safety systems, (aiaa Release)
White House announced in Key Biscayne, Fla., that President Nixon had asked Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L.Bean to visit Latin America, Europe, Africa, and Asia as his personal representatives. Tour, to take 40 days, would begin Feb. 16. Astronauts would be accompanied by wives. (PD, 2/16/70, 178-9)
lrl scientist Frederick J. Mitchell reported microorganism—Streptococcus mitis—thought to have been accidentally deposited in Surveyor III camera before April 17, 1967, lunar launch had been recovered from inside camera after it was returned to earth by Apollo 12 crew in November 1969. Streptococcus mitis was common respiratory organism and had produced no disease on animal inno-culation. Mitchell said microorganism was probably deposited on camera when camera’s shroud was removed for repairs and then replaced. Procedures and high vacuum of space were thought to have been responsible for preservation of organism in lyophilized (freeze-dried) state during launch, 3-day moon journey, and 950-day stay in hostile lunar environment. Organism had been found after laboratory testing of camera parts at MSC. Investigators had predicted possibility of organisms surviving under such circumstances. (NASA Release 70-76)	.
faa released aviation forecast covering FYs 1970-1981: Passengers carried in scheduled service by U.S. carriers would increase after 1971 at average rate of 12% annually. Figure more than doubled that forecast for remainder of national economy, but was below 18% annual rate 1965-1969. Passengers carried by U.S. scheduled carriers would reach 522 million in 1981—more than triple 1969 total of 168 million. Domestic travel would account for 460 million of 1981 total; international travel, 62 million. Revenue passenger-miles flown by U.S. scheduled carriers would grow from 120 billion in 1969 to 450 billion in 1981. (faa Release 70-40) May 6-7; NASA held Conference on Materials for Improved Fire Safety at MSCto demonstrate to industry NASA-developed technology available to consumers. Rep. Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.) said in keynote address: “The successful r&d program conducted by NASA in the field of nonmetallic fireproof materials has produced a ‘quantum jump’ that can greatly affect many major industries and has profound life-preserving implications.” (CR, 5/13/70, E4249-51; MSG Roundup, 5/22/70,1) May 7; Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced that Apollo 14 would be launched no earlier than Dec. 3 toward landing on moon’s Fra Mauro, intended landing site of aborted Apollo 13 mission. “Our present assessment is that the modifications to the oxygen tanks in the Service Module that have already been identified will require several months. ... We will take whatever time is necessary and not commit to a specific launch date until the Apollo 13 Review Board completes its work and makes its findings and recommendations.” Flight crew for Apollo 14 would be same as originally announced: Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot). (NASA Release 70-67)
House passed by 229 votes to 105 H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization, after agreeing to recommit bill to House Committee on Science and Astronautics with instructions to reduce Apollo program funding by $14.5 million and space flight operations funding by $15.5 million. Action brought authorization total to $3,601 billion, $30 million below $3,631 billion reported by House Committee on Science and Astronautics on March 12, but $268 million more than $3,333 billion requested by Administration. (CR, 4/23/70, H3377-23)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, submitted his resignation, effective Sept. 15. In letter to President Nixon at Western White House, Dr. Paine said: “Now is an appropriate time for a change of command at NASA, and this coincides with my wish to return to private life. During my direction Americans orbited the moon and walked on its surface, achieving our boldest national goal on time and within budget. We have made the transition to the post-Apollo internationally oriented space program of the 1970’s, and the Congress has approved the new direction and pace in the 1971 budget. We will shortly publish a prospectus for man’s conquest of space through the year 2000 which charts a long-range plan for future progress. . . . It has been a privilege and honor to have led the nation’s space program through critical times. . . .Iam most grateful to you for having given me this unique opportunity to serve my country during mankind’s first journey to another world.” Dr. Paine later told press in San Clemente, Calif., he had accepted challenging position with former employer, General Electric Co., involving “important national problems and technical opportunities outside aerospace and defense” fields and assured them that resignation had “absolutely nothing” to do with budget cuts. President accepted resignation with deep regret and expressed gratitude for Dr. Paine’s “outstanding leadership” of U.S. space program: “Your contribution to man’s knowledge of the Earth as well as the heavens has been major, and the course you have done so much to set will help guide our efforts for years to come. . . . You have earned a unique and permanent place of honor in the history of man’s exploration.” (PD, 8/3/70,997; Lyons, NYT, 7/29/70)
Ten msc employees had applied for joint patent on device and process for recovering water and its constitutent elements from lunar soil, NASA announced. Chemical process used hydrogen and solar energy to reduce iron oxides and produce water vapor, which could be electrolyzed to yield oxygen and hydrogen. Calculations showed process could produce 0.5 kg (1 lb) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar soil; if iron oxides were first concentrated magnetically, yield increased to nearly 6.4 kg (14 lbs) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar material. (NASA Release 70-202) Washington Post editorial commented on Soviet Lunokhod I: “The appearance of this vehicle, as well as the landing on the moon and return to earth of Luna 16, makes it clear that the Russians hope to regain some of the prestige they lost in the race to land men on the moon.... In terms of the American space program, this new success of the Russians should have little impact other than to persuade the administration and Congress not to cut back its funds any further. There is no logical reason for NASA to go like gang-busters in an effort to match the Russians in unmanned space exploration since the decision has already been made to proceed with a scaled down and more rational space program. The first big trophy in space activities went to the Russians, the most recent big one to the Americans, and it is reasonable to suspect that future ones will be divided between the two nations.” (WPost, 11/20/70, A26)
Washington Evening Star editorial on SST: “Backers of the SST program say it is necessary for maintenance of technological primacy and a favorable world trade position, and that, besides, this bird is another of those inevitabilities. But certainly the nation that placed the first men on the moon isn’t hurting for technological status. As to the other arguments, the United States is capable of putting the kibosh on everybody’s SST ambitions, through denial of U.S. landing rights, if the environmental sacrifices appear too forbidding.”(W Star, 8/21/70)
Apollo 14 crew, following splashdown in Pacific Feb. 9, 1971, would be flown to MSC from Samoa instead of from Hawaii, reducing return time to msc by five or six days, nasa announced. Crew would arrive in Houston in mqf about Feb. 12 and would remain under lrl quarantine until Feb. 26. (NASA Release 70-221)
Washington Post editorial on Luna XVI: “. . .the flight of Luna 16 is a major achievement for the Soviet Union. Its scientists have concentrated in recent years on a system of landing and retrieving unmanned spacecraft, an activity that the United States had not emphasized, and Luna 16 shows that the system works.” In long-term space exploitation “it seems to us that the manned approach will be most useful. Men will be out there some day, following the trail marked by the Apollo craft, and in the meantime the American effort can properly be devoted to finding a way to get them out of the earth’s atmosphere more cheaply and to making the best possible uses of earth-orbiting space stations and laboratories.” (WPost, 9/29/70, A18)
Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at National Press Club Luncheon in Washington, D.C., denied interest in running for office of Senator from Wisconsin: “I’m a public servant and I intend to be that way.” He hoped to devote “next two years at least” to helping develop strong, well-balanced space program. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/30/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., received gold medal from Federation Aeronautique Internationale in New Delhi for promoting peaceful space exploration. (AP, HPost, 11/22/70)
Results of Apollo 12 experiment to measure permanent and induced magnetic fields on lunar surface with magnetometer deployed on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms during EVA were reported in Science by ARC scientists Palmer Dyal, Curtis W. Parkin, and Charles P. Sonett. Magnetometer had measured steady magnetic field of 36±5 gammas on lunar surface. Surface gradient measurements and data from lunar orbiting satellite Explorer XXXV (launched July 19, 1967) indicated field was localized rather than global. Data suggested source of field was large magnetized body that had acquired field during epoch in which inducing field was much stronger than any now on moon. (Science, 8/21/70, 762-4)
Largest solar-cell-array system ever devised to power spacecraft had been designed by msfc engineers, NASA announced. Each of arrays, to turn sunlight into electric power for Saturn Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount, would provide 10 500 w at 328 K (55°C) during 58-to 69-min sunlight portion of each orbit. Skylab power-generation systems would produce 21 000 w at peak operation. Number of solar cells in workshop array had not been decided; 164 160 cells would be used in atm array, (msfc Release 70-121)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
Aug. 15 closing of Antigua Tracking Station in Caribbean would reduce Manned Space Flight Network to 13 stations, 4 aircraft, and 1 ship, NASA announced. At peak complement—during July 17-24, 1969, Apollo 11 mission—network had had 15 stations, 8 instrumented aircraft, and 4 tracking ships. (NASA Release 70-101)
Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples were seen by 41 million persons in U.S. and abroad during year. Samples were shown at 128 events covering all 50 states, with total attendance of some 12 million. Outside U.S., samples were shown to almost 30 million persons in 110 countries, including almost 14 million visitors to Expo ’70 in Japan. NASA facilities across U.S. were inspected by 3 million persons, with heaviest influx at msc (over 1 million) and ksc (1.2 million). (nasa Release 71-8)
Washington Post editorial commented on launch of Project Tektite II: “As the astronauts get ready to soar to the heights, it is worth mentioning that a group of aquanauts have sunk to the bottoms—in this case, the crew of Tektite II.... The drama of undersea exploration is considerably less than probes into outer space; but, in many ways, the world on the floor of the sea is more mysterious, more demanding—and potentially richer in what it offers mankind—than anything on the craterscape of the moon.” (WPost, 4/10/70, A18) April 11-17: NASA’s Apollo 13 (AS-508)—carrying three-man crew, LM-7 Aquarius and CSM-I090dyssey—was launched on lunar landing mission, but 56 hrs into flight toward moon mission was aborted because of SM oxygen tank rupture. In most serious inflight situation experienced in manned space program, crew foljowed lm “lifeboat” emergency plan, transferring to lm and using its systems and supplies to swing around moon and back to earth on fastest feasible course. Emergency procedures were used to make electrical power, water, and oxygen last to end of journey. Crew returned to CM and jettisoned lm before reentry and splashed down safely in Pacific April 17. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 185.5-km (115.3-mi) apogee and 181.5-km (112.8-mi) perigee. During 2nd-stage boost S-II center engine cut off 132 secs early and remaining four engines burned 34 secs longer than predicted. Space vehicle velocity after boost was 68 m per sec (223 fps) lower than planned, causing S-IVB orbital insertion burn to be 9 secs longer than predicted, but sufficient propellants remained for translunar insertion. Onboard TV was initiated at 1:35 GET for 5 1/2 min. Second S-IVB burn, on schedule at 2:41 get, injected spacecraft on translunar trajectory. csm separated from S-IVB and lm Aquarius. Onboard TV initiated after separation for 72 min clearly showed csm “hard-docking” with lm, ejection of csm/lm from S-IVB/IU at 4:01 get, S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) evasive maneuver, and spacecraft exterior and interior. First S-IVB APS burn, lasting 217 secs beginning at 6:00 GET, aimed stage for lunar target point so accurately that second burn was not required. S-IVB/IU hit lunar surface at 77:57 GET (8:10 pm est April 14) at 259 m per sec (8465 fps) and energy equivalent to 11.5 tons of tnt at 2.4° south latitude and 27.9° west longitude— 137.1 km (85.2 mi) from Apollo 12 seismometer that detected impact. Seismic signal for S-IVB/IU was similar to signal from Apollo 12 lm Intrepid that had impacted moon Nov. 20, 1969, but was 20-30 times larger and lasted 3 hrs 20 mins—four times longer. Signal was so large that ground command had to reduce seismometer gain to keep recording on scale. Suprathermal ion detector experiment (side) deployed by Apollo 12 crew recorded jump in the number of ion counts after S-IVB/IU impact. Instrument, in lunar shadow, recorded no ions at time of impact; count increased from few ions 22 secs after impact to 250 and up to 2500 before decreasing to few ions and back to none. Scientists speculated ionization had been produced by 6300 K to 10 300 K (6000°C to 10 000°C) temperatures generated by impact or that particles that reached up to 60 km (37 mi) had been ionized by sunlight. Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse correction No. 1 (MCC-1) was not necessary. MCC-2, for 3.4 secs at 30:14 get, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 114.9 km (71.4 mi). MCC-3 was not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 49 min, beginning at 30:03 GET, including dumping waste water from spacecraft fuel cells with moon visible in background. While joking with Mission Control, Swigert suddenly remembered that he had failed to file his Federal income tax return, but was assured that he could be granted an extension. “Hey, we’ve got a problem here,” Swigert told ground controllers. “This is Houston, say again please.” “Houston, we’ve had a problem,” Lovell replied. And Haise reported “a pretty large bang associated with the caution and warning. A few minutes later crew reported spacecraft was venting something—later determined to be oxygen—out into space. Astronauts could see blizzard of particles flying out of sm, presumably from ruptured tank. Despite desperate efforts improvised on board and suggested by Mission Control, nothing seemed to halt drop in oxygen pressure. Spacecraft dipped repeatedly, apparently because of venting gas. By 57:24 get, Mission Control reported tank No. 2 pressure was “slowly going to zero and we’re starting to think about the lm lifeboat.” Swigert replied, “Yes, that’s something we’re thinking about, too. We’ve been talking it over. ...” Decision was made to abort mission. Astronauts hurriedly had to salvage enough oxygen to supply CM during reentry and keep gyros operating until lm navigation equipment could be powered up. With only minutes of power remaining, crew fed oxygen into reserve tank and hooked up emergency batteries to csm navigation gyros until lm was powered up. Crew activated lm, powered down csm, and used lm systems for power and life support. Astronauts remained calm as they wrestled with procedures to stabilize spacecraft and stretch consumables. All information on April l !-17: Officials conferred at the flight directors' consote in the MSC Mission Operations Control Room as Apollo 13 astronauts attempted to bring (heir crippled spacecraft safely back to earth. Dr. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, leans an elbow on the console at far left. Circling to the right in front of him are Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager fames A. McDivitl; Deputy Director of Flight Operations Howard W. Tindall, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director at NASA Headquarters; and Dr, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations. Apollo Mission Director Chester M, Tee stands in front of Dr. Kraft. Sealed at the console (center, left to right) are Flight Directors Gera id D. Griffin and Glynn S. Lunney. Behind the console (left to right) are Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin and Vance D. Brand. Flight Dynamics Officer Philip C. Shaffer, Retro Officer fohn S. Llewellyn, Flight Dynamics Officer Charles F. Dreferich, and Lawrence S. Can/u, guidance navigation and control engineer at MSC. mission—including details of accident and emergency procedures— were made public immediately as data were received, Public’s apparent boredom at beginning of mission was transformed into deep concern for astronauts’ safety. Messages and offers of aid were sent to U.S, from world leaders and prayers were offered by religious leaders on every continent. MCC-4 was conducted with lm’s descent propulsion system (dps) at 61:30 GET, placing Apolio 13 on free-return trajectory around moon on which CM Otfyssey would splash down in Indian Ocean at 152:00 GET. Both lm guidance systems were powered up and primary system used for 263.4-sec dps burn at 79:28 get as spacecraft swung out from behind moon, two hours after closest approach. Bum produced 262-m-per-sec (860 fps) differential velocity, shortened predicted return time to 143:53 GET, and moved predicted landing point to mid-Pacific. After maneuver, passive thermal control was established and lm was powered down to conserve consumables. “Aquarius has really been quite a winner,” Haise said to Mission Control about three hours later. “When this flight’s all over we’li really be able to figure out what a LM can do.” During remainder of transearth coast crew continued emergency procedures to deal with shortage of water to cool LM electronic systems, decreasing temperatures in both cabins, and buildup of carbon dioxide in lm. Fearing that CM instruments needed for reentry might freeze, crew kept spacecraft in passive thermal control—“barbecue mode” of rotation to let sun uniformly heat all sides, Astronauts met cooling water shortage by filling every plastic bag they could with water from CM and carrying it to lm. Shortage of air-cleaning lithium hydroxide in LM was met by rigging combination of cm and lm cartridges; following instructions worked out on ground, crew built adapter and ran lunar spacesuit air hoses from LM fans through tunnel to connect to cm air-scrubbing canisters. Transmission of health data was eliminated and communications held to minimum to conserve electricity. Crew tried to keep warm by wearing boots carried for walking on moon, sleeping in narrow tunnel between LM and CSM that seemed warmer, and wearing extra clothing. Apr// 75-/7; MCC-5 at 105:19 get, by 15-sec LM DPS burn, decreased velocity by 2.3 m per sec (7.5 fps) and raised entry-flight-path angle to -6.52°. Crew partially powered up csm to check thermal conditions. Because of unusual spacecraft configuration (with LM still attached) and LM’s inability to survive reentry heat, officials on ground developed new reentry procedures and verified them in ground-based simulations. A 30-man team at MIT’s Charles S. Draper Laboratory worked throughout night studying stressed Apollo 13 guidance system and working out new trajectories. Simulations and programming of emergency problems were conducted by NR engineers in Downey, Calif., by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., in LM at KSC, and by Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and David R. Scott at msc, so that almost every move Apollo 13 crew made had first been proved out on ground. MCC-7 was successfully accomplished at 137:40 get with 22.4-sec LM RCSburn, resulting in predicted -6.49° entry-flight-path angle. Crew viewed and photographed SM when it was jettisoned at 138:02 get, reporting that one entire panel was missing near S-band high-gain antenna and that great deal of debris was hanging out. CM was powered up and lm was jettisoned at 141:30 get. SNAP-27 nuclear generator carrying 3.9 kg (8.6 lbs) of radioactive plutonium fell from lm into Pacific northeast of New Zealand. “Farewell, Aquarius, and we thank you,” Mission Control responded to spacecraft’s report “lm jettison.” “She sure was a good ship,” Swigert added later. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Odyssey splashed down in mid-Pacific southeast of American Samoa at 142:54 get (1:07 pm est April 17), 6.4 km (4 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Iwo Jima. Astronauts—exhausted but in good health—were picked up by recovery helicopter and were safely aboard recovery ship less than one hour after splashdown. Primary Apollo 13 mission objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected Fra Mauro area; deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were not achieved. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced April 17 that Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, would be established to determine cause of accident. Apollo 13 flight crew performance was outstanding throughout mission; calm, precise reaction to emergency and diligence in configuring and maintaining lm was noteworthy. Despite lack of adequate sleep and low temperature in spacecraft, neither performance nor spirits faltered. Similarly, performance of flight operations team was outstanding in planning and aiding crew to safe return. Apollo 13 was 10th Apollo mission and third manned lunar landing attempt. Accident was first inflight failure in 22 manned flights in U.S. space program. Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) and Apollo 11
Results of study by arc geologist Dr. William L. Quaide contradicted 4.5-billion-yr age reported for oldest sample at Jan. 5-9 Lunar Science Conference in Houston, arc announced. Most of thick layer of lunar soil and rocks at Tranquility Base appeared to have been formed from local volcanic bedrock underlying Apollo 11 landing site. Bedrock had been dated by three methods at approximately 3.65 billion yrs old. Same dating methods had shown one sample to be almost 1 billion yrs older, or 4.5 billion yrs old. Dr. Quaide had found when individual particles of rock were taken from soil and dated they again measured at 3.65-billion-yr age. (arc Release 70-1)
Discovery among Apollo 12 lunar samples of 4.6-billion-yr-old radioactive rock from moon’s Ocean of Storms was announced simultaneously by Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Lunar and Earth Sciences Div., at MSC press conference and by Cal Tech scientist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg at cospar meeting in Leningrad. Rock— oldest lunar material discovered to date—was first solid evidence that solar system was 4.6 billion yrs old. Rock was chemically unique and had highest concentration of radioactive elements yet observed in lunar samples, msc analysts said 85-g (3-oz) rdck, size of lemon, had 20 times as much uranium, thorium, and potassium as any other Apollo It or Apollo 12 rock, (nasa Release 70-80; Wil-ford, NYT, 5/27/70,1)
Ivory Coast President Felix Houphouet-Boigny presented gold plaques to Apollo 12 astronauts, who had arrived in Abidjan March 6. They would leave for Tanzania March 8 during world tour. (Reuters, WPost, 3/8/70, A7)
Dr. Carl Mclntire, head of International Council of Christian Churches and Fundamentalist Bible Presybterian Church, had announced purchase of property in city of Cape Canaveral, Fla., including Cape Kennedy Hilton Hotel, Washington Post reported. Property would be used for multimillion-dollar “Reformation Freedom Center and Christian Conference.” Dr. Mclntire had said site, 1.6-km (1-mi) strip from Banana River to Atlantic Ocean, “is alongside the rocket gantries and the moon shots” and would lend to God-inspace-conquest theme. Post said property had been valued speculatively at $25 million. (WPost, 12/30/70, A4)
Apollo 14 spacecraft underwent second day of flight-readiness tests after all-night vigil by guards following anonymous telephone threat that KSC would be blown up. Deadline of 11:00 pm given by caller passed without incident. Tests were interrupted for several hours during night to replace faulty computer but engineers expected to complete simulated countdown and liftoff satisfactorily. (UPl.W Star, 12/20/70, A2) December 19:	Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Cal Tech experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Christian Science Monitor editorial on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space discussions: “While not wishing to minimize the long road which still lies ahead before America and Russia have peacefully resolved all their major disagreements, we see the new space pact as an extraordinarily heartening development. It has created a new bond, a new mutual interest, a new feeling of joint participation. It is from the multiplication of such ties that international peace and friendship grow. And from such a vision of space togetherness there can come a stronger desire for greater brotherliness on earth.’’ (CSM, 10/31/ 70) During October: Scientists at Boeing Space Center in Kent, Wash., were studying piece of Surveyor III, 5 cm (2 in) long, returned from moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, to determine why original white paint had discolored, Boeing Co. said. White paint reflected intense solar rays in space and helped prevent heat buildup inside spacecraft. Boeing researchers thought paint degraded in space because of contaminating film from rocket exhaust, constant proton bombardment, or other radiation from sun. If discoloring came from contamination, paint could be restored to whiteness through oxygen plasma process. If paint had changed through radiation damage, Boeing could replenish depleted atoms. Results of study would enable Boeing to renew reflective paint of future spacecraft which might need to function for 10 to 20 yrs. (Boeing Release S-0788)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, NASA oart, at Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and NASA officials. (Daily Appointments Calendar)
msc announced award of $34 065 390 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. Southeast Div. to define letter contract for systems engineering and conduct flight readiness assessment for Apollo program. Contract would cover Jan. 1, 1970, through Dec. 31, 1970, with options for 1971 and 1972. (MSC Release 70-45)
usn announced support aircraft carrier U.S.S. Hornet would be inactivated by June 30. Ship, which had served as recovery vessel in Apollo missions, would be mothballed after 26 yrs of service, (dod Release 38-70)
Work of Grover Moreland, “Neil Armstrong of the rockcutters, the man entrusted with. . .stretching the first precious lumps of moon matter into as many research laboratories as. . .possible.. .without losing a particle,” was described in Washington Sunday Star magazine Sunday. Moreland had prepared 60 or 70 thin sections from Apollo 11 samples and 15 or 20 from Apollo 12. They were studied under petrographic microscope for mineral content and origin and under electron probe for detailed chemical analysis. He shaved sections as thin as 0.15 mm (0.006 in) and had perfected method of impregnating porous matter with plastic to prevent crumbling. (Schad-en, Sunday, 9/6/70,14-5)
Results of acquisition measurements of round-trip travel time of light from McDonald Observatory, Tex., to laser ranging retroreflector deployed on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts—made Aug. 20 and Sept. 3, 4, and 22, 1969—were reported in Science by astronomers from Univ. of Maryland, GSFC, and Univ. of Texas. Uncertainty in round-trip travel time was ± 15 nanoseconds, with pulsed ruby laser and timing system used for acquisition. Uncertainty in later measurements of planned long-term sequence from McDonald Observatory was expected to be order of magnitude smaller. Succes-ful performance of retroreflector at several angles of solar illumination, as well as during and after a lunar night, confirmed prediction of thermal design analyses. (Science, 1/23/70, 368-70)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., visited Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan, during world tour. They climbed out of mock spaceship in U.S. Pavilion and onto simulated lunar surface. (AP, W Star, 3/24/70, A2)
Importance of studying asteroids was cited in Science by Dr. Hannes O. Alfven of Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm and Univ. of California at San Diego and Dr. Gustaf O. S. Arrhenius of Scripps Institution of Oceanography: “There are now good reasons to believe that the asteroidal belt represents an intermediate stage in the formation of the planets. This links the present conditions in the asteroidal region with the epoch in which the earth and the other planets were accreting from interplanetary grains. Hence, in order to understand how the solar system originated it may be essential to explore the asteroids.” Since manned Mars landing would take place after 1980, “it is of interest to discuss whether a sample of an asteroid may be obtained in an easier way, at an earlier time, and as a technologically intermediate step.” Asteroid sample could be obtained by landing spacecraft on asteroid or by capturing small asteroid and landing it on earth’s surface or storing it in earth orbit for later investigation. (Science, 1 /9/70, 139-41) Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received honorary Doctor of Engineering degree from Purdue Univ. Later he told students and press he had no political ambitions but did not criticize astronauts who did. “After all, politics should have something more than lawyers representing the people.” (AP, W Post, 1/10/70; KC Times, 1/10/70).
Survey of U.S. news coverage in five most important Soviet newspapers Jan. 1 to June 30, 1970, was published by Washington Post. U.S. space program, including Apollo 13, had been mentioned 30 times. U.S. economic problems had received 89 mentions and reports of U.S. “sick society,” including crime, had appeared 82 times. (Astrachan, WPost, 7/13/70, Al)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell tested Apollo lm in vacuum chamber at ksc in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission. Mission was scheduled for Dec. 3 pending evaluation of Apollo 13 Review Board Report. (UPi. NYT, 6/18/70,9) June /6-J7: Final critical-design review of manned lunar roving vehicle was held at MSFC to decide on final design configuration leading to hardware manufacture and testing. First of four flight-mode] lunar rovers was scheduled to fly aboard Apollo 16 lm, set for 1971 launch, (msfc Release 70-112; MSFC PAO) June /7:U.S.S,R. launched Cosmos CCCXLI^from Plesetsk into orbit with 350-km (217.5-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 64.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 25. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/18/70,224)
Budget limits had caused cancellation of one lunar landing and stretchout of remaining seven Apollo missions into 1974, Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in interview following LSI dedication in Houston, Tex. Eighth lunar landing had been dropped to permit use of Saturn V rocket to launch first U.S. space station in July 1972. (UPI, NYT, 1/5/70, 1)
Press comment on Apollo program cutback: Washington Post editorial: “There has rarely been a major program that has gone up the hill and down again as fast as has the manned space program. Just a year ago NASA was riding high on the success of Apollo 11. Now it is scratching operations and scrambling for money to keep even a portion of the original program and its progeny in business. This, in our view, is bad because if it is carried too far it threatens to turn the entire manned space effort into the most spectacular (and most expensive) stunt in history instead of the first step in a genuine effort to learn a little more about some of the secrets of the universe. NASA’s decision to focus on the future rather than on a full study of the moon will help at least to keep the option of a worthwhile space program open.” (WPost, 9/6/70, B6) Richard D. Lyons in New York Times: When U.S. politicians first proclaimed national effort to land men on moon influential scientific leaders had scoffed. “A decade later the scythe of discontent with Apollo has swung full circle. Now it is the politicians who are attacking the program while the scientists wring their hands over lack of support.” Nixon Administration had “not been kind to the space program, although the President repeatedly stated that he supports it enthusiastically. The main reason is money, or the lack of it, which was almost no object when Apollo was bom.” (NYT, 9/6/70, 4:7)
Group of msfc engineers successfully completed week-long testing of Skylab program hardware in simulated weightlessness aboard usaf KC-135 four-engine-jet research aircraft. Tests included operation of flight-configuration doors for film cassette compartments, retrieval and replacement of film cassettes, and evaluation of handrails and foot restraints. Lunar soil penetration experiment aboard aircraft studied load-bearing characteristics of lunar soil and how lrv wheels would perform on moon. KC-135 was flown in parabolas, with 30 secs of weightlessness achieved on each parabola in technique which most clearly duplicated zero g. (msfc Release 70-169; MSFC PIO)
Discovery that velocity of sound waves through Apollo 11 and 12 moon rocks was roughly one third that through earth’s rocks was reported in Science by Edward Schreiber of Queens College, City Univ. of New York, and Orson L. Anderson of Lamont-Doherty Observatory. Scientists compared sound velocity in various earth materials with that of lunar samples. Materials which exhibited “compressional velocities that are in consonance with those measured for lunar rocks” included provolone, emmenthal, muenster, and cheddar cheese—“which leads us to suspect that perhaps old hypotheses are best, after all, and should not be lightly discarded.” (Science, 6/26/70,1579-80)
Thermal properties of lunar magnetic rocks at high temperatures were evaluated m Science by Univ. of Oregon volcanologists Tsutomu Murase and Alexander R. McBirney: “Thermal conductivity of a synthetic lunar rock in its melting range is about half that of a terrestrial basalt. The low conductivity and increased efficiency of insulating crusts on lunar lavas will enable flows to cover great distances without being quenched by high radiant heat losses from the surface. For a given rate of heat production, the thermal gradient of the moon would be significantly, steeper than that of earth.” (Science, 10/9/70,165-7)
Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., described plans for EVA on lunar surface at KSC news conference. Haise said he and Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., would explore hilly region, collect samples, and climb 180-220 m (250-400 ft) up Cone Crater. “We hope to get back to at least the base. . . . From a sampling standpoint there really is a very definite ejecta blanket of rock fragments that’s thrown out of the hole at the base of the cone and it would certainly be of interest to get up to the rim, . .and even if you just got pictures of that it would be of extreme interest. Another benefit. . .high ground would give you a magnificient panorama. You could see a good deal more of the countryside that you can see from. . .walking around. ...” Haise would drill three holes 3 m (10 ft) deep in lunar surface— two to hold heat sensors and one for sample collection—using battery-powered, rotary-percussion drill. Depth of 3 m (10 ft) “compared to the center of the moon may not be very deep, but it does give a look-see through the surface structure at least in place that in time represents several million years.” (Transcript)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell took fourhour walk-through of planned eva activity in ksc training area in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission Jan. 31, 1971. (Marshall Star, 12/9/70,1)
Science published report of Apollo 12 Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination Team. Samples from Ocean of Storms were about one billion years younger than Apollo 11 samples from Tranquility Base. While most conclusions reached on Apollo 11 rocks also applied to Apollo 12 rocks, Apollo 11 crystalline rocks displayed one texture (lath-shaped ilmenite and plagioclase with interstitial pyroxene) and similar modes (50% pyroxene, 30% plagioclase, 20% opaque, 0 to 5% olivine), while Apollo 12crystalline rocks showed wide range in texture and mode. Most Apollo 12 igneous rocks fitted fractional crystallization sequence, indicating that they represented either parts of single intrusive sequence or samples of number of similar sequences. Breccias were of lower abundance at Ocean of Storms site than at Tranquility Base, “presumably because the regolith at the Ocean of Storms is less mature and not as thick as at Tranquility Base.” Complex stratification existed in lunar regolith, “presumably due mainly to the superposition of ejecta blankets.” Apollo 12 sample 12033 indicated presence of layer of volcanic ash. Greater carbon content in Apollo 12 breccias and fines than in crystalline rocks was “presumably due largely to contributions of meteoritic material and solar wind.” Amount of indigenous organic material capable of volatilization or pyrolysis, or both, appeared extremely low in Apollo 12 samples. Content of noble gas of solar wind origin was less in fines and breccias of Apollo 12 rocks than in fines and breccias from Apollo IVs Tranquility Base site. Breccias contained less solar wind contribution than did fines, indicating that breccias were formed from fines lower in solar wind noble gases than were fines at surface. Presence of nuclides produced by cosmic rays showed Apollo 12 rocks had been within 1 m (3.3 ft) of surface for 10 million to 200 million yrs. Igneous rocks had crystalized 1.7 billion to 2.7 billion yrs ago. (Science, 3/6/70, 1325-39)
Aerospace industry sales continued anticipated decline in 1969, to $24.9 billion from $26.1 billion—decrease of 4.6%. Commercial aerospace sales, primarily jet transports, increased 13.7% in 1970 from $4,342 million in 1969, to $4,910 million. Increase reflected delivery of wide-bodied jet transports. Space sales continued decline, to $3,606 million from $4,272 million in 1969, beciause of completion of Apollo program hardware phase and decline in military space expenditures. Aerospace industry remained Nation’s largest manufacturing employer during 1970, with more than 1 million workers. Employment in aerospace industry declined from average of 1 347 000 workers in December 1969 to 1 067 000 in December 1970. Production workers dropped from 696 000 in December 1969 to 515 000 in December 1970, a 26% decrease. (Aerospace, 12/70, 3)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins at ceremonies in Washington, D.C. Medal honored exceptional research, exploration, and discovery. (Program; upi, WNews, 2/16/70)
Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, delivered graduation address before Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif.: “To the man in the street, we may have made it look too easy to prevent nuclear wars for more than 20 years, to deter or contain limited wars, and even to put men on the moon. The average American may well be bored by the third moon landing, but the Soviet planners—who know exactly what magnitude of effort is involved—do not get bored. They see us researching and developing new strategic and tactical weapons; they see us producing the largest airplane in the world and developing a new superiority fighter and advanced bomber; they see us committed to a larger and faster supersonic transport. And, knowing full well that they had a significant head start, they see us on the moon—in living color.” They “know in the Kremlin—far better than most of our own laymen know—the time, the effort, the skill and dedication, and the vast commitment of resources all this requires. To them, what we do does not look easy— and in any contest of endurance, it must by now have become obvious that our far greater productivity must inevitably prevail.” (Text)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Luna XVII: “It is a time for congratulations to the Soviet effort this time. . .and perhaps time to take a lesson. For future probable explorations to lethal Mars, Venus and other planets almost certainly cannot employ manned landings. All the same, there is no reason to abandon plans NASA has made to land men and a wheeled Rover vehicle they can drive on the moon. There is always the possibility that the man on the scene can pick up more than back-seat drivers 240,000 miles [386 000 km] away.” (PInq, 11/19/70)
Apollo 14 lunar landing crew would conduct active seismic experiment during first eva period, NASA announced. Crew would set off 21 small explosions while on lunar surface and would arm mortar to rocket-launch 4 grenades by ground command after crew left moon. Explosions would create seismic waves for detection by geophones emplanted in surface to provide data on structure of moon. (NASA Release 70-150)
Prince Philip of Great Britain inspected Apollo 13 rocket during tour of KSC. (UPI, WPost, 2/15/70, A2)
U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX (launched June 2) set new manned flight endurance record at 6:35 pm Baykonur time, when it surpassed 13-day 8-hr 35-min record set by NASA’s Gemini VII(Dec. 4-18, 1965). Apollo Astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., sent congratulatory telegram to SoyuzIXcrew: “Your accomplishments are adding new evidence supporting the capability of men to live and work in extended periods in space. We wish you continued success in this important mission and a safe return to earth.” Lovell told press in Houston that mission suggested U.S.S.R. would develop permanent earth-orbiting space station: “Soyuz now seems to be purely an aeromedical flight, pushing men to their limits to see how weightlessness and the pure oxygen environment affects their work in space. It all fits very naturally with the space station concept.” (Astrachan, WPost, 6/16/70, Al; SBD, 6/16/70,211)
Apollo 12 astronauts and wives arrived in Bucharest, Romania, only Communist capital on their world tour itinerary. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said it was “warmest welcome we’ve had yet,” as crowd of estimated 15 000 persons braved icy winds along 16-km (10-mi) motorcade route from airport. In rare exception to strict rules, Romanian authorities allowed vehicles in motorcade to fly U.S. flag, practice usually reserved for official or state occasions. After stopover in Vienna, astronauts and wives would continue to Africa. (UPl, W Star, 3/1/70, A17)
President and Mrs. Nixon and party of Apollo 13 astronauts and families attended services at Kawaiahao Church in Honolulu commemorating National Day of Prayer and Thanksgiving [see April 17]. President said: “There are very deep ideological differences that divide the world today. But when it was learned that these men were in danger, there poured into the White House from all over the world messages from the Communist countries, from people of various religions, saying that they wished their best, offering their assistance. When they learned they were back, there was an outpouring of relief and rejoicing from people, regardless of their political or religious differences .... If only we could think in that way about every individual on this earth, we could truly have world peace.” Following service Presidential party flew from Hawaii to San Clemente, Calif. (PD, 4/27/70, 550-3)
Senate confirmed nomination of Col. James A, McDivitt (usaf), Apollo 9 astronaut and Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager at MSC, to be brigadier general. (CR, 1/2/71, S21852)
Apollo 15 prime and backup crews were among 14 astronauts who observed explosion by Canadian Defence Research Establishment of 453 500 kg (500 tons) of TNT in international test near Suffield, Alberta. Blast produced 70-m-dia (230-ft-dia) crater 4.6 m (15 ft) deep, with central uplift similar to that observed in many lunar craters. Astronauts had been invited to view processes in crater formation. Explosion was second 453 500-kg detonation in series to determine effects on military equipment and civilian shelters of blast forces and ground shock equivalent to those from small tactical nuclear weapon, (msc Roundup, 7/31/70,1)
MSC announced it had awarded Bendix Corp. $8-million, costplusfixed-fee contract modification for fabrication of fifth Apollo lunar surface experiments package (ALSEP) for deployment on moon during Apollo 16 mission. Modification brought total estimated value of contract to $76 million. (MSC Release 70-73)
nae President Eric A. Walker announced election of 51 engineers to NAE membership. They included Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for “contributions to the proposal, formulation, and management of Project Apollo”; Gerhard Neumann, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. Aircraft Engine Group, for “contributions to the development of variable stator compressors and high by-pass turbofan engines for jet aircraft”; Kendall Perkins, Corporate Vice President, Engineering and Research, of McDonnell Douglas Corp., for “contributions to aerospace technology, and engineering management in the design of aircraft and spacecraft”; and Dr. Paul Rosenberg, President of Paul Rosenberg Associates, for “pioneering contributions to space pho-togrammetric systems, radar prediction techniques, information storage and retrieval, and the kinematics of human spine motion.” (NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt, 4/70, 1)
Apollo 11 spacecraft, first manned vehicle to land on moon, would start year-long tour of state capitals April 17, NASA announced. (AP, P Bull, 2111110)
U.S. laser reflector placed in moon’s Sea of Tranquility by Apollo II crew was measuring variations in distance between site and McDonald Observatory in Texas with accuracy within less than 0.3 m (1 ft), New York Times quoted Univ. of Maryland scientist Dr. Carroll 0. Alley as reporting. Accuracy was determined by shortness of pulses and accuracy with which travel time of pulses to moon and back could be measured. New lasers being developed might cut accuracy margin to less than 25 mm (1 in) and could produce reflections bright enough to be observed in telescopes of small observatories. Dr. Alley was chairman of committee of international specialists seeking to encourage widespread ranging of lunar reflectors such as French laser reflector landed on moon by Soviet Luna XVII. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/70)
Nomination by President Nixon of Apollo 10 astronauts Cdr. John W. Young and Cdr. Eugene A. Cernan, both USN, for permanent promotion to captain was announced by White House. President and Mrs. Nixon honored Apollo 13 astronauts and wives at White House dinner. (PD, 6/15/70,756)
U.S., Japanese Government, and U.S.S.R. pavilions attracted largest crowds on opening day of Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan. Apollo 12 moon rock was primary interest of 8000 visitors per hour who passed through U.S. exhibit. (Shabecoff, NYT, 3/16/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, reviewed results of Apollo 13 accident investigations and announced postponement of Apollo 14 mission to Jan. 31, in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cort-right, Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, summarized prepared statement before Committee. Recommendations of Apollo 13 Review Board [see June 15] would be implemented before Apollo 14 was approved for launch, Dr. Paine said, csm systems would be modified to eliminate potential combustion hazards in high-pressure oxygen. Unsealed f&n motors would be removed from oxygen tanks and additional oxygen tank would be added to Apollo 14 CSM. Electrical wiring within high-pressure oxygen systems would be limited to stainless-steel-sheathed wires, and Teflon, aluminum, and other potentially reactive materials would be used as little as possible and kept away from possible ignition sources. Spacecraft and Mission Control warning systems would be modified to provide more immediate and visible warnings of system anomalies. MSC was reviewing spacecraft emergency equipment and procedures and use of csms and LMs in “lifeboat” modes. ossa, OMSF, and oart had been directed to apply Review Board recommendations throughout NASA and submit report on assessment and actions taken or proposed by Aug. 25. Lessons of Apollo 13 would be disseminated throughout industry and technical community. Dr. Paine had forwarded copy of Review Board report to Soviet Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh “so that lessons which might be learned from our accident can be applied to prevent a similar hazard to Soviet Cosmonauts.” Aerospace Safety Research and Data Institute at LeRC would conduct additional research on materials compatibility, ignition, and combustion at various g levels and on characteristics of supercritical fluids, expanding its review of oxygen handling in aerospace programs. Research would “be of direct long-term benefit to NASA in. . .future programs, and will help other sectors of the economy.” Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would review NASA management processes in implementing Review Board recommendations and Apollo 13 Review Board would reconvene later in year. Postponement of Apollo 14 mission would move Apollo 15 launch date to July or August 1971, Dr. Paine testified. It was too early to detail costs and budgetary impact of modifications and program changes necessitated by Apollo 13 accident but best current estimate would be “in the range of $10 to $15 million of increased costs, which we plan to handle within our total Apollo budget.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers presented specific plans for reassessing all Apollo spacecraft subsystems. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, outlined actions planned to carry out Review Board recommendations. (Transcript)
News conference on results of Apollo 12 lunar surface experiment’s was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, said first anniversary of alsep was “scientific and technological triumph. The design specification was for one lunar day and night. Our design goal was for one calendar year.” Year after deployment alsep had received and processed over 6500 commands, had undergone 2600 533-K (500°F) swings of temperature, and was still being operated remotely 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said unmanned vehicle, such as U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I, could not explore surface as well as men could because men could deploy more equipment more effectively, perform more experiments, and collect more samples. He noted that Apollo 11 had collected 22.7 kg (50 lbs) of samples; Apollo 12, 34 kg (75 lbs); and Luna XVI, 90 g (0.2 lb). Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory said seismic events were being recorded at rate of about one per day; some were impacts from grapefruit-size meteoroids and some appeared to be small moonquakes. In region of Apollo 12 station there were at least nine places at which moon-quakes occurred “every month at or near the time when the moon comes closest to earth in its monthly orbital cycle.” Most active zone for moonquakes was about 193 km (120 mi) southeast of al-SEP, near rilles in Fra Mauro crater, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Charles P. Sonett of arc said data indicated moon’s temperature increased very slowly with depth below surface, probably rising no higher than 1273 K (1332°F)—too cool for molten core characteristic of volcanic body. Dr. Conway M. Snyder of jpl described behavior of thin cloud of ionized gas detected after ascent stage was crashed into moon. Solar wind of ionized particles should have blown the gas downwind; it traveled upwind and was detected by alsep instruments. Cause of acceleration of the particles was unknown. (Transcript; Schmeck, NYT, 11/19/70,32; O’Toole, WPost, 11/19/70, A14)
NASA discontinued use of Guaymas-Empalme station in Mexico for space observations because of changes in Apollo mission profile. Station would be operated by Mexican government for Mexican scientific programs. NASA and Mexican National Commission for Outer Space (cnee), which had cooperated in operation of station, would continue cooperation in developing system approach to use of weather data from U.S. weather satellites acquired by automatic picture transmission (apt) cameras. They also would develop capabilities and applications for earth observations using advanced, airborne, remote-sensing instrumentation. Plans were being completed for new cooperative project for synoptic meteorological sounding rocket launchings. With release of Guaymas-Empalme station, built in 1961, NASA had closed three ground stations in tracking and data acquisition network, as well as retiring three tracking ships and four aircraft, in past year, (nasa Release 70-198)
International reaction to Apollo 13 spashdown: European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that TV audience at splashdown might well have been biggest TV audience of all time. In American Samoa, girls were limbering up for siva-siva dance to greet astronauts. Pilgrims prayed their thanks in India. Press item from Johannesburg, South Africa, said witch doctor named Mago-mezulu had tossed bones which told him Apollo 13 astronauts would return safely but that “these men have interfered with God and he has turned them back. This is a warning that the Americans should stop landing on the moon.” Thousands in Lima, Peru, received permission to take early lunch to watch final moments of splashdown. In Canada, Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau expressed “great relief.” Queen Elizabeth wired congratulations from England to President Nixon. Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster John Cardinal Heenan said, “Thank God.” Telephone operator at U.S. Embassy in London was inundated with calls. She said, “People were sobbing with obvious relief and happiness. I just don’t know what to say to them” (Johnson, WPost, 4/18/70, Al; Arnold, NYT, 4/18/70, 1; Waldron, NYT, 4/18/70, 13)
U.S. Ambassador to Guyana Spencer King said in Guyana that Apollo moon rocks would go on exhibition there during February observance of Guyana’s becoming a republic. (NYT, 1/27/70)
Photos of central Alabama taken by Apollo 9 astronauts had been of major significance for geological exploration in the state, AP reported. Alabama State Geologist Philip LaMoreaux had said photos were “new aid and approach in locating stable areas for construction, exploration for minerals and studying geologic structures as an aid in oil and gas exploration.” (Huntsville Times, 2/3/70)
Construction and launch of orbiting sun reflector with diameter of 914 m (3000 ft), to light entire metropolitan areas of large cities with five times the brightness of full moon was technologically feasible, NR Space Div. scientific adviser Dr. Krafft A. Er-icke said during NASA conference on space application technology at Mountain View, Calif. Reflector could be important crime deterrent. (AP, Glendale News-Press, 9/11/70)
Editorial by Robert Hotz in Aviation Week & Space Technology outlined space outlook for 1970: “Space will. . .see some titanic struggles in the market-place as the key programs in the space transportation system of the mid-1970s come up for contractor selection. Many observers will be misled by the relatively small dollar increases in Fiscal 1971 space budgets. Many new programs can be initiated with the same level of funding that was required for the Apollo era, plus some heavy reprogramming of existing projects that are approaching technical obsolescence much faster than any planners imagined. By judiciously paring its present programs and getting only a modest boost for Fiscal 1971, NASA can lay the foundations for the next decade’s major space program. Military space, temporarily deflated by the manned orbiting laboratory cancellation, will trend toward a broader program involving several major new fields. Commercial and non-NASA space will provide a modestly expanding market, and the big battle between celestial and terrestrial communications is shaping into a major clash.” (Av Wk, 1/12/70, 11)
NASA officials attended opening of art exhibit by Robert Rauschenberg at Fendrick Gallery in Washington, D.C. Exhibit included 25 lithographs from “Stoned Moon” series. Rauschenberg had been one of artists invited by NASA to witness Apollo 11 launch and convey impressions of first lunar landing mission. (Richard, W Post, 11/30/70, Dl ; Fendrick Gallery)
alsep 1 had operated without interruption for over 1948 hrs since being deployed on lunar surface Nov. 19, 1969, by Apollo /2crew, msc announced. To date alsep 1 had received and implemented 2034 commands, (msc Release 70-19)
Flight Crew Health Stabilization program to minimize possible exposure of Apollo flight crews to disease or illness would be introduced before Jan. 31, 1971, Apollo 14 mission, nasa announced. Program provided that crew health be stabilized through epidemiology, din-cial medicine, and immunology programs and limitation of outside contacts with flight crews; prime and backup crew members reside solely in K$c crew quarters for 21 days before launch; access to primary training areas used by crew members be controlled; access to areas during crew occupancy be limited; crew activities be limited to primary areas of Manned Space Operations Building and Flight Crew Training Building, flight line at Patrick afb, Fla., and launch pad white room during 21-day prelaunch period; and crew members use personal vehicles when traveling between primary areas. If crew members were required to go to msc for training, they would live in crew reception area of lrl or in their own residences, where they would be excluded from contact with everyone but their wives. During 60 days before launch, all illnesses in family members of prime, backup, and support crews and close contacts of these families would be reported to medical officials. (NASA Release 70-159)
In speech before Young Communist League in Moscow, Cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev said: “Every country follows its own path in space exploration. The main trend in Soviet space research is the construction of orbital stations that can make long flights. The United States in recent years concentrated its efforts on putting a man on the moon. In the future these paths will merge into a wide road of mankind far into space.” (upi, NY News, 5/27/70, 34; upi NYT, 5/31/70) t _
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s May 24-June 5 visit to U.S.S.R. was reviewed in Christian Science Monitor: “To those few Russians who saw him, the first man to walk on the moon was unquestionably a big hit. But overall, his 12-day goodwill visit was an unobtrusive affair that stayed very much in the realm of Soviet officialdom.” Armstrong had arrived in Leningrad May 24 to attend May 20-29 cospar Conference. “Although he was in Leningrad for five days, only one Leningrad newspaper made any mention of him and Russians for a long time were not aware he was even in the country.” It was only after his arrival in Leningrad that Armstrong was invited by Soviet government to stay longer in U.S.S.R. He had “no exposure to Soviet public” during Novosibirsk visit. In Moscow, press had given more coverage. Armstrong had told press he had been “most emotionally moved” by meeting with Mrs. Yuri Gagarin and Mrs. Vladimir Komarov, widows of Soviet cosmonauts. (Saikow-ski, CSM, 6/5/70)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, replied to Sept. 10 letter by 39 lunar scientists protesting NASA’s cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19: “Forced into the development of an interim operating plan occasioned by the Presidential veto of the Independent Offices Appropriations Bill and reduced funding levels, the NASA management had to determine how best to carry out the Apollo and other ongoing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future programs. Had your views on the Apollo program been as forcefully expressed to NASA and the Congress a year or more ago, this situation might have been prevented.” (Text)
Accuracy of Apollo 12 LM lunar landing was described by Henry S. F. Cooper, Jr., in post-mission report from ksc published by the New Yorker. After successful completion of mission, Cooper had talked with Flight Dynamics Officer David Reed, who had been in charge of LM trajectory during lunar landing. Cooper reported that Reed and other flight engineers had been “too accurate in plotting their trajectory, for Commander (now Captain) Charles Conrad, Jr., who was at the controls, had to change the LM’s landing point at the last minute. ‘He was afraid he’d land right on top of the Surveyor if he kept on going according to plan, and later, when we fed the data from the lm into a computer, we found that if he’d gone on in the way he was, he would have hit it,’ Reed told me.” (New Yorker, 1/3/70, 46-56)
U.S. space program problems were described in Washington Post by Thomas O’Toole: U.S. needed to begin development of space shuttle “now, which in a way is the worst possible time for it.” Country was “weary of big new space projects, particularly while the spectacular Apollo project is -still unfolding. . . . Also, the space agency is without an appointed administrator, which means that NASA cannot exercise its full role with Congress or the White House.” NASA managers “go on sailing a skipperless ship. But what they find more disturbing is the feeling that nobody at headquarters cares whether the ship gets a captain or not.” It was no secret that “men who run the space program are deeply disappointed in the Nixon Administration.” They felt “that the White House neither understands nor cares to understand what the space program means or what it can do for the country.” There was feeling Congress had ceased to care, too. House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight had canceled hearings on Apollo future because, “outside of Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, none of the subcommittee members was concerned enough. . . .to agree to the urgency of the hearings.” (WPost, 9/27/70, Bl) September 28:	Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying American Science & Engineering, Inc., experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were given ticker-tape parade welcome in Chicago, where they addressed 800 at luncheon and later spoke to 2500 high school students. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., third Apollo 13 astronaut, was indisposed, (upi, HPost, 5/2/70)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight released Manned Space Flight: Present and Future. Staff study concluded that growth of national space program in decade had “provided major national technological and scientific resource of personnel and facilities.” Decline in resource could increase risk in accomplishing current programs and was causing “dislocations in affected communities throughout the United States.” With termination of Apollo fabrication, 8 Saturn Vs and 6 Saturn IBs, 12 cms and sms, and 1 or 2 lms would be available for manned flight. After 1974, U.S. would have no capability for lifting manned payloads over 27 200 kg (60 000 lbs) into space and would have only three vehicles that could lift 27 200-kg payloads unless Saturn V production was resumed or substitute was developed. Launch rate of less than two manned vehicles per year could materially increase risk of manned launch and spaceflight operations; production rate of two or more Apollo spacecraft and launch vehicles per year would minimize annual cost without inordinate increases in total vehicle cost over current costs, while maintaining critical skills of major subcontractors. U.S. would have no long-duration manned earth-orbital capability after 1973 without extension of orbital workshop program or initiation of development of space station. Early development of low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system appeared to offer greatest opportunity for reducing space flight costs while increasing flexibility and variety of missions in near-earth orbit. For increased flexibility in low-cost earth-to-orbit recoverable transportation system, development of chemical space tug was advised. Report noted that nasa maintained the only U.S. manned space flight capability and advised major decisions on manned space flight program to prolong capability beyond 1974. (Text)
Instruments placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts recorded 306 K (91°F) drop in temperature and 40% decline in light intensity as moon went through partial eclipse, msc scientists said no other significant readings were recorded. (AP, W Post, 2/21/70, A3; WPost, 2/22/70, A2)
NASA named flight and support crews for Apollo 15 lunar landing mission scheduled for autumn of 1970. Prime crewmen were Astronauts David R. Scott, commander; Alfred M. Worden, cm pilot; and James B. Irwin, lm pilot. Backup crew consisted of Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., Vance D. Brand, and Harrison H. Schmitt. Support crewmen were Scientist-Astronauts Karl G. Henize and Robert A. Parker. (NASA Release 70-46)
Apollo 13 astronauts were taken in three helicopters from U.S.S. Iwo Jima to Tafunda Airport in American Samoa, to set foot on solid ground for first time since mission launch. They were greeted by Samoan Governor John M. Haydon. Governor presented IRS form 1040A to Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., who had forgoten to file his income tax before departing on mission. Colorfully dressed crowd of more than 3000 cheered astronauts during half-hour reception before their departure in usaf C-141 jet aircraft for Hawaii to meet President Nixon. (Trumbull, NYT, 4/19/70,1)
Edgar M. Cortnght, LaRC Director and Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, summarized report of Review Board before House Committee on Science and Astronautics and commented: “Total Apollo system of ground complexes, launch vehicle, and spacecraft constitutes the most ambitious and demanding engineering development ever undertaken by man. For these missions to succeed, both men and equipment must perform to near perfection. That this system has already resulted in two successful lunar surface explorations is a tribute to those men and women who conceived, designed, built, and flew it. Perfection is not only difficult to achieve, but difficult to maintain. The imperfections in Apollo 13 constituted a near disaster, averted only by outstanding performance on the part of the crew and the ground control team which supported them. The Board feels that the Apollo accident holds important lessons which, when applied to future missions, will contribute to the safety and effectiveness of manned space flight.” (Testimony)
Senate unanimously passed S.R. 388 “that the Senate of the United States commends the Apollo 13 astronauts ... for their fortitude and courage; extends its support to their families, their friends and all who are involved in their mission; and urges all businesses, commercial operations, communications media, and others who wish to and can comply to pause at 9 p.m. today, April 14, 1970, in order that all persons who so desire may join in asking the help of Almighty God in assuring the safe return of the astronauts.” (CR, 4/14/70,85644-5)
Boeing Co. announced completion of lunar roving vehicle (LRV) qualification unit, last in series of test units leading to manufacture of first LRV flight model. Fabrication of major components for three flight-model lrvs would begin soon, with first LRV delivered to nasa April 1,1971, and carried to moon on Apollo 15 in July 1971. (Boeing Release)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight, by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in Freedom 7Mercury spacecraft. Apollo 13 astronauts visited Grumman Aerospace Corp. plant at Bethpage, N.Y., where lm Aquarius was built. Astronauts received rousing cheer from 15 000 workers. Aquarius received rousing cheer from astronauts. (UPI, W Star, 5/6/70, A2; MSC Hist Off)
msc released Surveyor III spacecraft parts, returned from moon to earth by Apollo 12 crew, from lrl quarantine for examination by principal investigators, (msc Release 70-10)
Study of Apollo 12 lunar samples had confirmed earlier conclusion from Apollo 11 sample study that lunar soil contained 1.9% meteoric material of similar composition to carbonaeceous chondrites and that moon had formed in earth’s neighborhood, Enrico Fermi Institute and Univ. of Chicago chemists reported in Science. Four Apollo 12 core and soil samples were “enriched in a number of trace elements of meteoric origin to virtually the same degree as Apollo 11 soil.’’ Meteoritic average influx rate of 4 billionths g per sq cm (1.4 billionths oz per sq in) seemed valid for entire moon. (Ganapathy, Keays, Anders, Science, 10/30/70, 533-5)
Technical progress made through space program was described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in commencement address at Whitworth College in Spokane, Washington: Chrysler Corp. was using computer-controlled equipment derived from Apollo checkout equipment to test distributors in its automobile ignition systems. U.S. Bureau of Public Roads had found automotive safety device that originated in Apollo spacecraft couches was trimming 97-km-per-hr (60-mph) impact to equivalent of 8 km per hr (5 mph) when used in conjunction with special highway guardrails. Nationwide insurance company had announced collision premium reductions of 20% for cars equipped with device. (Text) May 25:	Dedication ceremonies were held at Goddard Park in Auburn, Mass., memorial built by Auburn Rotary Club to honor late rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Park contained replica of first liquid-fuel rocket invented by Dr. Goddard and Polaris rocket donated by USN. (CR, 6/3/70, E5170)
Apollo 12 astronauts arrived in Luxembourg and met with Grand Duke during 40-day, 21-nation tour. (AP, W Star, 2/25/70, A5)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences conducted hearing on S.R. 49, providing for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum at Roswell, N. Mex., as fitting memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified: “Americans can ill afford to ignore the contributions of Robert H. Goddard in the history of the coming of the space age. Young Americans need to appreciate that what appear as unsoluble problems today are not new to man’s experience. Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s rocket artifacts and his lifelong labors should be an inspiration to each generation of youth as they grapple with their concerns of their day and their dreams of a better world of their tomorrows in a dynamic universe. This nation cannot afford not to have Robert H. Goddards in the future.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, testified: “It seems very important that we and our children after us never lose awareness of what key individuals such as Robert Goddard provided to a fuller understanding of the progress of mankind. He, like Konstantine Tsiolkovsky of Russia and Hermann Oberth of Germany, correctly theorized on the use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel with liquid oxygen for high-energy thrust. Based upon the liquid-hydrogen work at the Lewis Research Center, NASA developed the upper stages for the Saturn V which enabled us to achieve the Apollo missions to the moon.” Hearing took place on 44th anniversary of first successful launching of liquid-fuel rocket by Dr. Goddard. (Testimony; CR, 3/17/70, S3828-30; Huntsville News, 3/17/70)
Lunar Science Institute near MSC in Houston, Tex., was dedicated at ceremonies attended by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, other nasa officials, and some 70 space scientists who had gathered early for Jan. 5 opening of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference at MSC. Dr. Paine said, “This is the institution to help us bring all the expertise we need together to solve the riddles of the moon.” LSI, created by 49-university Universities Space Research Assn., had one-year contract with NASA, renewable annually. Facilities would be open to all scientists, including those from Iron Curtain countries. Dr. William W. Rubey, Univ. of California and Rice Univ. geologist, would be Director. (HPost, 1/5/70)
NASA announced it would initiate studies and analyses of satellite and other data on Gulf Coast area in FY 1971 at mtf. In Washington, D.C., Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said activities would use data from Earth Resources Technology Satellites A and B, Apollo manned flights, and aircraft operations. Study would be supported by mtf laboratory and Slidell, La., computer facility in line with earlier NASA invitation to other Government agencies to collocate study and analysis activities at mtf. (NASA Release 70-98)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Apollo 13 commander, received insignia of Chevalier of French Legion of Honor from French Ambassador Charles Lucet during ceremonies at French Embassy in Washington, D.C. (CR, 7/31/70, S12536-7; Dixon, W Star, 7/30/70, Cl)
Apollo 10 and 11 photos of lunar far side had revealed number of probable igneous intrusions, including three probable dikes that crosscut wall and floor of 75-km (46.6-mi) crater, Farouk El-Baz of Bellcomm, Inc., reported in Science. Intrusions were distinguished by their settings, textures, structures, and brightness. Recognition of probable igneous intrusions in lunar highlands supported indications of heterogeneity of lunar materials and plausibility of intrusive igneous activity on moon, in addition to extrusive volcanism. (Science, 1/2/70,49-50)
President Nixon spoke at Pioneer Day ceremonies in Salt Lake City, Utah: “Just a year ago. . .1 welcomed back from the moon three men who had been pioneers in landing on the moon. ... I can only say that the spirit that took those three men to the moon. . .has built the greatest country on earth.” (PD, 8/3/70,995)
James H. Wyld Propulsion Award was presented to Hans G. Paul, Chief of MSFC Propulsion Div. and Joseph G. Thibodaux, Jr., Chief of MSC Power and Propulsion Div. during aiaa 6th Propulsion Specialist Conference in San Diego, Calif. Paul was cited for “outstanding leadership in research and development of Saturn launch vehicle propulsion”; Thibodaux, for “outstanding leadership in research and development of Apollo spacecraft propulsion.” (MSFC Release 70-114)
At White House press conference former astronauts Michael Collins, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, and William A. Anders, NASC Executive Secretary, described arrangements that had kept President Nixon informed on Apollo 13 crisis. President had had access to direct TV, radio, and telephone contact with MSC Mission Control. He had talked with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, and Astronaut Frank Borman there. Collins and Anders had set up “squawk box” into Mission Control outside President’s office and briefed President and his staff on developments. President’s chief concerns had been CM-SM separation, and crew’s safety and physical condition. Collins said, “The fact that we had this incident really changes very little. We have always known that such a situation could develop and he [President] does not feel that it should unduly cloud the future when it comes to space exploration.” (Transcript)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on NASA FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Manned space expenditures for FY 1971 would be about 25% less than in FY 1970 and about half FY 1966 peak. “We are able to make these rapid changes . . . as the result of two fundamental policies .... One of these policies is that the great bulk of the NASA program is carried out under contracts with industry, university laboratories and other institutions in the private sector of our economy. The other ... is that NASA must maintain a civil service staff sufficient in quality and numbers to properly supervise the work performed under contract .... Essentially all the reductions being implemented in the manned space flight programs in Fiscal Year 1971 are in those efforts carried out urtder contract.” In FY 1971 NASA proposed to complete definition of space shuttle and space station and continue studies of systems, missions, and payloads for further economies in future years. In Apollo program, Myers pointed out, scheduled stretchout of manned lunar landings would “add to operational costs of the lunar exploration program, although not to our costs this year.” In Skylab program, design, development, and ground testing of subsystems and assemblies of Saturn Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and atm were well advanced. Fabrication had begun on first flight articles, with delivery scheduled for late 1971. In space shuttle program, shuttle would be “designed so that it can be maintained in a state of launch readiness for lengthy periods and yet be launched within two hours notice into an orbit of any inclination. In the event of an emergency in space, it would be able to carry engineering or repair specialists to overcome the problem or rescue an endangered crew.” (Testimony)
NASA was “bracing itself for the inevitable backlash of opinion,” now that “public jubilation” over Apollo 13's safe return had subsided, Economist said. “But so far the reaction has been surprisingly mild. The newspapers have generally argued that people had become too over-confident about the dangers of space travel and that the exploration of the moon must continue. President Nixon has made it clear where he stands; he announced to Dr. Thomas Paine. . .that he had ‘a great organization’ and that he himself was a firm believer in manned space flight.” (Economist, 4/25/70,43-4)
NASA said it had confirmed Aug. 12 observation by astronomer V. E. Bell at Lodi (Calif.) Observatory of bright blue-white flare on lunar surface near Fra Mauro highland area, when moon was closest to earth. International astronomical group Astronet had reported similar sighting in crater Lassell K Sept. 1. Observation reports were in response to Aug. 10 alert by Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program’s principal seismic investigator, made through Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory. (W Star, 9/2/70, A6)
Milton Klein, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “During the past year, the aec program to provide technology for space nuclear power has furnished operational systems for an earth satellite and the surface of the Moon, and in the near future will provide nuclear power for a new navigational satellite and probes of Jupiter and Mars. Moreover, nuclear power will be imperative for the deep space unmanned planetary missions, the space station/space base and a variety of other missions planned for the new decade and beyond.” Basic technology program had demonstrated “nuclear rocket technology is ready to fulfill this vital role in space and forms the basis for the development of the flight rated nerva.” (Testimony)
Loss of 0.56-g (0.02-oz) fragment of 0.45-kg (1-lb) Apollo 11 lunar rock from gsfc was reported by NASA. Sample, one of several used by gsfc scientists to study effect of shock waves in lunar material, had been reported missing by gsfc scientist Dr. Nicholas M. Short. NASA was investigating. (NASA Release 70-113)
NASA released preliminary time line for Apollo 14 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft would lift off from KSC at 3:23 pm est Jan. 31, 1971; land LM north of moon’s Fra Mauro crater at 4:14 am est Feb. 5 for 34-hr stay; and splash down in Pacific at 4:01 pm est Feb. 9. (NASA Release 70-166)
msc announced establishment of Space Shuttle Program Office and appointment of Robert F. Thompson as Manager. Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Manager for Command and Service Modules, would succeed Thompson as Manager of Apollo Applications Program Office. Clifford E. Charlesworth, a flight director, was appointed to new position of Apollo Applications Program Deputy Manager. (MSC Release 70-25)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong held press conference on his reactions to first anniversary of manned lunar landing July 20, 1969: “I really had hoped, I think, that the impact [of lunar landing] would be more far-reaching than it has [been], I had hoped that it might take our minds away from some of the more mundane and temporal problems that we as a society face. ... I think if we could. . .direct our attention a little farther into the future, to try to foresee problems that are going to occur in the next years and decades, then perhaps we could be attacking these solutions from the front side when it’s. . .more easy to provide a viable solution and a meaningful one.” While scientific discoveries resulting from Apollo II had been numerous and were still continuing, Armstrong felt “actual discovery, or revelation, was that man could in fact live on the moon in a rather normal fashion.” This was “necessary key to all future plans for the use of our natural satellite, whatever they may be and however they might develop.” Armstrong described his feelings in looking at moon from earth: “I see the moon from the back yard as a friendly place. And I see a lot of landmarks. I can no longer look at it just as a spot in the sky; but, rather, I actually pick out, of course, the Sea of Tranquility, Clavius, Aristarchus, and places I know and have flown by.” Asked if he expected to fly in space again, Armstrong said, “I’d be surprised if I don’t have the option of buying a ticket.” (Transcript)
Four-man LaRC team emerged from space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, Calif., after successful completion of 90-day test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft [see June 13]. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong greeted crewmen John H. Hall, Terry Donlon, Stephen G. Dennis, and Wilson Wong. Project chief engineer Karl Houghton said test could have continued beyond scheduled 90 days. (AP, NYT, 9/12/70, 8; Langley Researcher, 9118/70, 1)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were honored by City of New York at luncheon in Philharmonic Hall. Astronauts were greeted by Mayor John V. Lindsay and serenaded by N.Y. Police Dept. band. (AP, B Sun, 6/4/70, A3)
Four particles of moon rock no bigger than tea leaf went on display at Science Museum in London. (Reuters, WPost, 3/27/70, C5)
Apollo 13 editorials: Washington Post: “The footprints are still imperishably graven on the lunar dust and the flag still flies on the surface of the moon, but it all seems more distant, unreal and unattainable now. The loud bang that rocked Apollo 13 and echoed back to us from outer space last week did more than challenge our comfortable assumptions about manned space flight. It reminded us how much we have taken for granted, how much has been achieved and how far man has yet to go.” (WPost, 4/19/70, Bl) Washington Sunday Star: “. . .men, the world over, instinctively recognize the metaphysical importance of the reach into space. Lovell, Haise, and Swigert were not just three Americans on a dangerous mission. They, and those who will follow, are ambassadors of life to new, unknown regions. The success of these first halting steps into space has brought a new vision to a slightly weary world and given mankind a new pride in its humanity. It is a gift without price. It is an offering that must not be withdrawn because of a momentary setback and a dramatic demonstration of the dangers that have always been present.” (W Star, 4/19/70) Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin: “Of all the machines man has made to plumb the depths of space, surely none has served him better or more faithfully in desperate circumstances [than the LM]. So Aquarius and the men who designed and manufactured her earned the plaque in Smithsonian, just as the astronauts and the Apollo 13 ground crew earned the Freedom Medals President Nixon has awarded them.” (P Bull, 4/19/70)
Space/Aeronautics editorial commented on Apollo 13 accident: “It has shown us how vulnerable are the men who go into space in their tiny, fragile capsules. It has stunned us into the realization that accidents can and will happen in space, that not every mission will run off like clockwork, that manned space flight is, and will always be, dangerous. Public awareness, finally, that this is so could immeasurably strengthen the space program. If so, Apollo 13 may prove to be one of the most important missions we have flown to date.” (S/A, 5/70,21)
Robert J. Perchard of Bourne, Mass., had obtained exclusive royaltyfree patent license from NASA to manufacture and sell inflatable life raft developed for manned space flight program, NASA announced. Patent had been issued to NASA Nov. 11, 1964. Nontippable raft with radar-reflective surface had been part of survival equipment aboard all Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft. Under NASA patent policy exclusive royalty-free license could be granted if commercial use of invention had not occurred within two years after patent’s issuance. Perchard had become interested in developing new life raft after death of his son at sea during Coast Guard air rescue mission. (NASA Release 70-3)
msc announced NASA contract awards: Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $3 248 000 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated 18 changes previously authorized by NASA for modification of vehicle readiness review procedures, vibrational testing, rendezvous radar, quality assurance and reliability procedures, and descent engine updating. Agreement brought total estimated value of contract to $1 673 119 200. Federal Electric Corp. received 10-mo, $3.29-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for support services at msc. Extension brought total value of contract to $7,394 million since June 1, 1969. (msc Releases 70-75,70-76)
Apollo 12 lm in final moments of descent to lunar surface had caused dust shower that pocked Surveyor III and sand-blasted camera, NASA announced. Burton G. Cour-Palais, Chief of Meteoroid Sciences Branch at MSC, reported that Surveyor III TV camera experienced little meteoroid damage during 950 days of exposure to space environment, but had numerous shallow craters of recent origin— apparently caused by lm 183 m (600 ft) away. LM-caused craters were “shallow. . .mostly of recent origin, as indicated by their whiteness against the sandy brown color of the TV camera housing painted surface.” White craters were concentrated on arc of TV camera facing lm, 10 to 100 times as many as on side away from lm. Preliminary assessment of meteoroid impacts indicated more than five impacts on camera housing and four on polished tube. (NASA Release 70-23)
House leaders of both parties urged that U.S. push ahead with space exploration despite Apollo 13 abort. Speaker John W. McCormack (D-Mass.) said in floor speech, “There may be a small minority who will urge that we pull back our space efforts. This is not my position. Neither am I convinced it will be the view of the Congress or the overwhelming majority of American people.” House Minority Leader Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) said he concurred. Chairman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics said committee would not conduct investigation of Apollo 13 accident but would review findings of NASA inquiry board. (CR, 4/20/70, H3247,3276; upi, WPost, 4/2/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, spoke during 10-day “Emphasis Space” program at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. on “very basic question” of why U.S. should be spending “all of this money out in space when we have so many problems here on earth.” He said answer was “indeed that human values have the highest priority. I would submit that the American space program is indeed a program that has tremendous human values. ... we in the space agency who are effecting technical change feel that history shows that the interaction between technical change and social change is extremely close. We believe that the activities that we are carrying out will have a tremendous impact on the way our children and our children’s children will live. We are in the business of creating new wealth and new power that can be used by all men.” Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said that lunar flights were “enhancing man’s knowledge of the environment in which he lives. .. .space has proven to date that it is something that man can use that is of benefit to man. . . . The question is do you want it used.” Space program was at point “where it is up to the people to decide through the government what uses we will put space to.” (Neb Wes Univ’s New Dimensions, 9/70; AP, San Diego Union, 5/3/70)
No harmful effects had been found in lower animals exposed to lunar material, LRL Lower Animal Test Team of 14 investigators reported in Science. Selected species of fish and invertebrates had been exposed to Apollo //lunar samples for 38 days in tests to detect extraterrestrial replicating agents possibly harmful to life on earth. No pathological effects or evidence of replicating organisms were detected. (Science, 7/31/70,470-2)
Baltimore Sun editorial on Apollo 13 launch: “If there is less national emotional interest in the moon flights now as they become almost routine, and as their goals are related to specific scientific quests, rather than to the romance of just making the flight and landing, there is still great interest and concern for a safe voyage. That America is not jaded by these brave and difficult ventures is shown in the large crowds that show up for launches in Florida and the attention televised coverage draws in the rest of the nation.” (B Sun, 4/13/70, A12)
Cancellation of 8 743 070 first day covers of moon landing postage stamp—nearly trebling previous top of three million covers canceled—was announced by Postmaster General Winton M. Blount. Requests for souvenir envelope commemorating July 20, 1969, Apollo 11 lunar landing had been received from 100 different countries and reached 60 000-80 000 daily within days after stamp was announced July 9, 1969. Stamp sales totaled 9 614 685, with value of $961 468.50. Previous record had been set in 1962 for stamp commemorating first U.S. earth-orbiting flight by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (PO Dept Philatelic Release 3)
NASA announced award of $l-million contract to TRW Inc. for initial design of subsatellite to be placed in lunar orbit on Apollo 16 and 18 missions. Satellite would operate for year, providing information on charged particles and earth’s magnetic field in lunar vicinity. (MSC Release 70-56)
Situation at KSC and in area on first anniversary of Apollo 11 launch was described by John N. Wilford in New York Times. Since July 1969, employment at KSC had dropped from 23 500 to 16 500 with major Apollo contractors hardest hit. At least 750 workers would be laid off as result of $12.2-million cut in Patrick afb contract with Pan American World Airways, Inc., for operation of tracking stations. ‘‘For the entire Cape Kennedy area, it has been a year of economic woe, frustrated growth plans, for-sale signs and broken personal dreams. This is no ghost town, but the space-rush boom— which in a decade doubled the Brevard County population to 230 000— is definitely over.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, had said, “We are on a downward trend but this should reach a level as of September.” (NYT, 7/17/70, M27)
SoyuzlXCosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, on 10-day U.S. visit, toured Washington, D.C., and placed wreaths on graves of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee in Arlington National Cemetry. At NASA Hq. press conference they said U.S.S.R. did not plan to put man on moon and had disbanded training program for female cosmonauts. (Valentine, W Post, 10/20/70, A2)
NASA announced publication of The Moon as Viewed by Lunar Orbiter (nasa SP-200). Book by Leon K. Kosofsky of NASA Apollo Lunar Exploration Office and Farouk El-Baz of Bellcomm, Inc., contained stereoscopic and other photos of Aristarchus, Schroter’s Valley, Rimae Parry, and Tobias Mayer Dome—lunar craters and valleys. Photos were taken on five Orbiter missions preparatory to Apollo flights. (NASA Release 70-82)
nsf problems in stabilizingiU.S. basic science research during FY 1971 “with budgetary squeezes on mission-oriented agencies such as NASA, and aec, and Mansfield-amendment effects rippling through dod,” were described by nsf Director William D. McElroy in interview published by Astronautics & Aeronautics magazine: “We can identify positively right now the order of $70 million [in basic science research] that has been previously supported by other agencies. .. .we don’t have $70 million additional money to pick that up, so there is going to be a squeeze here.” Though nsf FY 1971 budget would show $73-million increase over FY 1970 amount of $438 million, only $10 million could be earmarked for picking up programs cut by other Government agencies, (A&A, 12/70, 12-14) During 1970: U.S. orbited 38 spacecraft in 28 launches—including Apollo 13's CSM Odyssey, lm Aquarius, and S-IVB stage intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 88 payloads in 81 launches; France, 2; Italy, 1 (for NASA on NASA launch vehicle); Japan, 1; and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 21 orbited by dod in 17 launches and 17 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for NATO and 1 for dod. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launch of Apollo 13, but mission was cut short by an oxygen tank rupture. Three-man crew, taking emergency measures and using lm as “lifeboat,” returned safely to earth after looping around moon. Analysis of Apollo system and modifications necessary to prevent or meet future emergencies and reevaluation of Apollo program caused rescheduling of Apollo 14 from 1970 to early 1971 and reduction in number of remaining Apollo missions from six to four. Unmanned program included orbiting of Intelsat-III F-6, Intelsat-Ill F-7, and Intelsat-III F-8 comsats for ComSatCorp; Noaa I meteorological satellite for noaa and prototype meteorological satellite Itos I; NASA’s Nimbus IV in support of world weather program; Uhuru (Explorer XLII) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched for NASA by Italy); Serf II Space Electric Rocket Test; and Ofo Orbiting Frog Otolith, carrying two bullfrogs. Launched as secondary payloads were Oscar V(U.S.-Australia) amateur radio-propagation satellite carried on Itos I; DOD’s Topo 7 geodetic satellite, on Nimbus IV\ RM Radiation/Meteoroid Satellite, on Ofo; and Cepe Cylindrical Electrostatic Probe Experiment, on Noaa I. Almost 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched to altitudes between 160 and 1600 km (100 and 1000 mi) to study space physics and astronomy, including 19 during solar eclipse. One of the 19 detected unexpectedly high amount of neutral hydrogen streaming into earth’s atmosphere. Meteorological sounding rockets included 46 Nike-Cajuns and more than 200 boosted Dart and Areas rockets. About 60 high-altitude balloons—including one carrying Strato-scope II optical telescope—were launched to altitudes as high as 45 700 m (150 000 ft). In joint NASA-USAF lifting-body program M2-F3, HL-10, and X-24A lifting-body vehicles made 22 flights. HL-10 reached mach 1.86 (1970 km per hr; 1224 mph), setting new lifting-body speed record. M2-F3 made its first glide flight and X-24A made its first supersonic flight, reaching 1223 km per hr (760 mph). In aeronautics, YF-12A aircraft made 60 flights in joint nasa-usaf research program. Boeing 747 jumbo jet began commercial operations, and maiden flights were made by usn F-14A Tomcat air superiority fighter, Lockheed L-1011 airbus, and Douglas DC-10 airbus. C-5A cargo transport was delivered to Charleston afb for operational use. SST development continued—amid much debate over costs, sonic boom, and environmental pollution—with Congress approving funding through March 1971. Full-scale hypersonic research engine was tested for first time in LaRC’s 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel at mach 7.4, and thick supercritical wing was flown on modified usn T-2-C aircraft. Other aeronautical research included studies on runway slipperiness, v/stol avionics, aircraft noise, landing radar, and pilot warning indicators. dod space program included orbiting of last two Vela nuclear detection satellites, Topo I geodetic satellite (launched by nasa), and U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat (launched by nasa). In joint NASA-AEC effort, SNAP-19 and SNAP-27 radioisotope generators completed one year of continuous operation on lunar surface, candidate fuel element for nerva completed 10 hrs of electrical corrosion testing, and Peewee-2 experimental reactor was fabricated and delivered for testing in early 1971. U.S.S.R.’s 88 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 2 Lunas, 1 Zond, 1 Soyuz, 1 Venus, 2 Intercosmos, 4 Meteors, and 5 Molniya Is. Unmanned Luna XVI landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. Luna XV/flanded on moon and released Lunokhod I unmanned explorer that traveled across lunar surface and conducted experiments by ground command. Venus VII landed on planet Venus and transmitted data on Venusian surface and atmosphere. Only manned mission was Soyuz IX, which carried two cosmonauts on 18-day earth-orbital mission, a new space endurance record. Two countries orbited their first satellites: Japan launched Ohsu-mi and Communist China launched Chicom I. France launched two satellites—Dial, carrying West German wika minicapsule, and Peole applications satellite. (Pres Rpt 71)
NASA announced plans to place White Sands, N. Mex., Test Facility on standby status in June 1971 because of reduced FY 1971 budget requests and reduction of Apollo program work. Move could reduce employment from 641 to caretaker force of 50 following completion of 1970-1971 tests of Apollo lm and Skylab program CMS and sms. Facility would be kept in condition for resumption of work in 60-90 days. In announcing decision Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said, “The NASA facilities at White Sands are unique and valuable. We plan to consider them carefully for possible use in future NASA programs, and to undertake a survey of possible uses by other government agencies.” (NASA Release 70-31)
Apollo 13 editorials: National Observer: “At a time when Americans were becoming bored with successful flights to the moon, the ordeal of Apollo 13 reminded the nation of the dangers and difficulties of space. But because of courage, care, and uncommon resourcefulness—because, in fact, of history’s most dramatic field expedient—the astronauts made their way safely back to earth. The first walk on the moon was a wonder of wonders, but the return of Apollo 13 was the gladdest moment of them all.” (National Observer, 4/20/70) Wall Street Journal: “Assuming all feasible precautions are taken, then, the issue of death potential should not really be a major factor in assessing the space program, and particularly the very costly moon program. That program should be judged on whether any gains from it are proportionate to the totality of its costs. Some scientists and laymen believe the costs are disproportionate. At any rate, that is the proper criterion for weighing the future of space exploration, not the admitted and awesome danger of death in eternal orbit.” (WSJ, 4/20/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, addressed American Newspaper Publishers Assn, in New York: “Our mental concepts and life habits are Earth-oriented. The ability to go the Moon or Mars is regarded as something less than important, and this is only natural. But I am firmly convinced that the space program will prove to be one of the most important, creative, and beneficial to mankind ever undertaken by the United States. ... I think we must clearly establish in this new decade our goals and objectives as an agency first, and then define the hardware needed only after we know exactly where we are headed.” Hardware “on hand or that would be fine to develop” should not “tell us where we’re going.” (Text) U.S. detection in 1950s of Soviet radar three times size of football field was described before Association by Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering: “It was so big that when we first found out about it we were hesitant even to identify it as a radar. Much later we learned that it was far too powerful for most of the applications we could imagine. Assuming it was a radar, many argued that it made sense only as part of a detection, tracking and control network for satellites. The non-radar proponents even tried to make it into such things as a space communications system. The location of the first such radar argued that. . .this equipment probably would form part of an abm system.” (Text)
Press editorials commented on President Nixon’s statement on Nation’s space program. New York Times: “If the President’s program is fulfilled pn schedule, the economics of space activity—both its costs and its dividends for nonscientists here on earth—will be revolutionized. The reconnaissance activities of earth resources satellites have enormous potentials for aiding agriculture, forestry, the search for new minerals, and the exploitation of the seas. The prospect of communications satellites that can broadcast radio and television programs directly to homes everywhere offers exciting new perspectives for further unifying all peoples, while simultaneously raising delicate political problems. . . . When it becomes available, the reusable space shuttle will. . .facilitate construction of a permanent manned orbiting space station that will open up new areas of scientific and economic activity in the near neighborhood of earth.” (NYT, 3/9/70) Washington Evening Star: “The 1970’s promise to be an exciting decade in space, not just a comedown from the exhilaration of the initial moon landings. The next 10 years will be even more satisfying if another of the President’s goals—increased international cooperation in space—is realized. To that end, Soviet space scientists have been told about the U.S. plans. The Russian leaders would do well to consider the economies and other benefits that could come from pooling skills and resources as man reaches farther and farther beyond his planet.” (W Star, 3/9/70) Washington Post: “It was appropriate that President Nixon should announce his proposed plans for exploration in space on the last day in this century when a total eclipse of the sun was visible in the United States. Opportunities to make strides in learning about our universe do not come often and must be seized when they arrive. The scientists. . .did the best that could be done in Saturday’s brief moment of darkness to learn more about the forces in the sun that dominate our solar system. And the President seems to have done about the best that can be done with the resources now available to keep our space program on the right track. “The emphasis the Administration is giving to unmanned flight activities—the commitments to launch vehicles in 1977 and 1979 for grand tours of our outermost planets are the most exciting—will test the willingness of the nation to spend huge sums on basic research. The future programs of NASA, at least for the next decade, will have little of the appeal that seized the public during the race to land men on the moon first. And the worth of these programs, in terms of knowledge they may yield about the solar system and the usefulness of that knowledge, is difficult to appreciate fully. The test in the future will be whether we are willing to pay for these probes for knowledge without the exhilarating experience of watching the first man step onto the moon’s surface, and of beating the Russians.” (W Post, 3/9/70)
Apollo 14 flight crew completed mock flight to 60 900-m (200 000-ft) simulated altitude in altitude chamber at MSC, in preparation for Jan. 31, 1971, launch to moon. (AP, NYT, 9/2/70, 9)
Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said in Memphis, Tenn., that U.S. could probably explore Mars or other planets in 13 to 15 yrs but “it will be terribly expensive.” Following speech at annual Navy League convention, he told press: “I don’t believe we will ever see one nation do it. I look for a multiple-nation group..,. Some have as good or better technology and such a combination would not impose abnormal costs on any one.” (AP, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/22/70)
Oral history of space flight on 647 reels of tape assembled over six years had been presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Washington Daily News reported. Assembled by Michael Kapp, Vice President of Capitol Records Co., tapes began with reminiscences of Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, and went through Apollo 11 mission. Six-record LP album had been excerpted from tapes. (W News, 10/27/ 70)
Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, asked astronomers worldwide to study moon each month at its closest approach to earth to determine whether surface cracks were opening and closing under gravitational attraction. Request was made through Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Center for Study of Short-Lived Phenomena, which mailed “alert” cards to subscribers. Dr. Latham and NASA team at msc had determined from lunar seismograph left on moon’s surface by Apollo 12 crew that moon’s surface might show 7.6-cm (30-in) bulge earthward during these periods. It was also during these periods that astronomers studying moon with ground-based telescopes had reported sudden flares of color. If optical observations from telescopes of opening and closing of lunar surface cracks could be correlated with detection of moonquakes [see July 26], Dr. Latham said, “it would be strong evidence that the glows are produced by the escape of gases from the lunar interior through cracks which open and close each month.” (SAO-PAO; Alert card; W Star, 8/9/70, A19)
As Apollo 13 approached critical point in efforts to return safely to earth, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press in Houston, “The performance of the entire NASA team with the remainder of this mission will undoubtedly have an effect on a view that Congress has of the activities that we are proposing for the future.” Specific problems encountered by Apollo 13 were “things that will be reviewed by the Congress.” (Wilson, W Post, 4/15/70, A13)
Manufacture of 15th and final Saturn V 1st stage (S-IC-15) had been completed by Boeing Co., prime contractor, and stage was being shipped to mtf, msfc announced. Stage, scheduled to boost Apollo 19 toward moon in 1974, would be static-fired in late September. S-IC program had begun in December 1961. Eight of 15 S-IC stages had flown on Apollo missions, 6 manned and 2 unmanned, (msfc Release 70-162)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, in invited testimony on space benefits and potential, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that during first 12 yrs in space U.S. orbital payloads had increased 10 000 times, from Explorer I’s 14-kg (30.8 lbs) to Apollo 13’s planned 136 000 kg (300 000 lbs); speed record 13 times, from 3000 km per hr (1900 mph) to 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph); and flight altitude 10 000 times, from 38 400 m (126 000 ft) to 377 400 km (234 500 mi). Astronauts had logged 5843 hrs in space, safely flying 113 400 000 km (70 472 000 mi). Twelve Americans had orbited moon and four had walked on its surface. NASA had launched 155 unmanned spacecraft to return scientific and practical data, 23 in cooperative international programs. “Today we live in a different world because in 1958 America recognized the challenge of space and boldly made the required national investment to meet it. Since then over a billion children have been born all around the world, the first space age generation. Because of the space program they will learn a new science, a new cosmology, and a new view of man and his destiny in the universe. . .. Today’s children can look ahead confidently to new opportunities and to great new strides that man will make in the twenty-first century.. . . Their generation will view the earth as a whole for the first time, and be able to deal with technology, with science, and with philosophy as a unified experience, common to all men of the blue planet earth.” Appendixes to prepared statement described NASA’s technology utilization program: 1.6 million scientific and technical publications distributed in 1969, including 3 211 500 microfiche copies; contribution to U.S. schools including spacemobile project, which had reached 3 306 410 students live and 20 391 500 via TV in 1969; and space research laboratories built at 34 institutions of higher learning during 1960s, in which more than 1000 students had worked towards doctorates. NASA had received 968 830 letters in 1969; its exhibits were viewed by 37.6 million persons and its films, by 9.8 million directly and by 248 million on TV. News media coverage of NASA activities in 1969 included 3497 newsmen from 57 countries accredited to Apollo 11. (Testimony; Schlstedt,B Sun, 4/7/70)
Interagency Committee on Back Contamination suggested elimination of requirement for quarantine after lunar exploration because no evidence of back contamination had been found after Apollo 11 and 12 missions. Committee report released to press said, “There is no need to impose quarantine on the crews, the lunar samples or equipment on subsequent missions.” (AP, WPost, 1/16/70, A5)
House Committee on Appropriations approved H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill containing $3.197-billion NASA appropriation—$136 million less than $3.333-billion NASA budget estimate. Appropriation provided $2,500 billion for r&d, $18.3 million for construction of facilities, and $678.7 million for research and program management. Report recommended postponement of Apollo 14 mission until 1971 “to give ample time for study, report, and correction of the Apollo 13 problems.” Bill also allocated $497 million to nsf—$16 million less than nsf budget estimate of $513 million. (House Rpt 91-1060; Subcom on Independ Off)
aiaPresident Karl G. Harr, Jr., said in Aerospace Technology: “In terms of its scope and novelty no single enterprise matches man’s landing on the moon—the Apollo program. Nor has any other enterprise in history broker* so much new technical ground. The technical and managerial ingredients of these space accomplishments, as well as of comparable national security programs, are available for broader applications in the nation’s service. The problem is how to harness them effectively for such purposes. The Apollo program centered on a clearly stated goal with adequate funding for its attainment. Because it represented achievement of a national goal, lines of authority and responsibility were clear, simple and strong. Our nation’s environmental problems, however, often do not enjoy such clear delineations. . . . The greatest need is for the development of innovative means to overcome such constraints so that technology’s revolutionary new tools can be more effectively applied to the pressing needs of our society. . . . The transfer of aerospace technology to domestic areas is underway and is already making significant contributions.” Magazine cited computer technology used by NASA to evaluate spacecraft systems and by USN to study pilot behavior as space age spinoff which might “soon be used to conduct highway safety research or to design new houses and urban renewal projects.” (Aero Tech, 3/70,3)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, on goodwill trip to U.S.S.R., watched TV broadcast of Soyuz IX launch during party in his honor in Moscow and was told by Cosmonaut Georgy Beregovoy that mission was “especially in honor of your trip here.” Armstrong later presented moon fragment and small Soviet flag carried on Apollo 11 mission to Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin. Kosygin said he would “always cherish this gift as a symbol of a great achievement.” He told Armstrong, “The Soviet peoples are second to none in admiring your courage and knowledge.” (upi, W Star, 6/2/70, Al; AP WPost, 6/3/70, A19)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 16516, NASA FY 1971 authorization bill, with amendment reducing total authorization to $3,316 billion—$285 million less than $3,333 billion requested by Administration. Committee’s recommended total—providing $2,606 billion for R&D, $32.5 million for construction of facilities, and $677.3 million for research and program management—was lowest recommended by Senate Space Committee since 1961 and $399.6 million less than total recommended by Committee in FY 1970. Committee rejected House increase of $130.5 million over Administration request for Apollo program. It also rejected increases of $139.5 million for space flight operations, $5.6 million for ATS project, $2.3 million for selected aeronautics research efforts, $500000 for technology utilization program, and $2.05 million for construction of Earth Resources Technology Laboratory “at this time.” It restored House cuts of $1.5 million to advanced manned missions program, $5.6 million to Explorer satellite project, and $4.2 million to tracking and data acquisition. Committee strongly urged Executive Branch to develop formal interagency agreement defining responsibilities for experimental and operational erts systems. (Senate Rpt 91-833)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman appeared as host on ABC TV program “Mission Possible—They Care for a City.” Program outlined attempts to improve environment of San Francisco. (W Star, 3/17/ 70)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “Of course Peking still runs far behind America and Russia in nuclear and space development... . But not nearly so far behind as only a few years ago. And apart from conjectures about progress in missilery, "Following Star' [satellite] is a reminder of the potential military dimensions of space which may acquire a new importance now that China has entered the extraterrestrial realm.” (B Sun, 4/28/70, A10)	_ April29: Members of Apollo 13 Review Board entered Apollo simulator alMSC and, using recorded data, reconstructed tense moments after explosion disabled spacecraft April 13. Board member Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said purpose of reconstruction was to give investigators better appreciation of accident from crewmen’s point of view. (W Post, 4/30/70, A27) *	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, presented Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy to Apollo If crew—astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, since named Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs—in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award, established by National Geographic Society in 1961 for USAF members and units, honored crew for making most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress during 1969 by accomplishing first manned lunar landing, (dod Release 35970)	.	. *	essa announced award of $1.6-million contract to Gulton Industries Data Systems Div. to construct infrared temperature profile radiometer (ITPR), advanced satellite instrument for obtaining temperature sounding through atmosphere to earth’s surface, essa was de
Space applications of plutonium 238 were discussed by Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, at Fourth International Conference on Plutonium and Other Actinides in Santa Fe, N. Mex. Most noteworthy use of plutonium-238-powered, radioisotope thermoelectric generator (rtg) had been as SNAP-27, power source for Apollo 12 experimental package left on moon, rtg’s were “of particular interest as space electric power sources for missions requiring a long life and high reliability, where there are long periods of darkness or great distance from the sun, or where orientation or other problems tend to reduce the effectiveness of solar cells as an energy source.” Significant number of future space missions might require plutonium 238 power source. Element “finds another extremely important use in space as the power source for waste disposal.” Heat from plutonium 238 decay would both produce bactena-free drinking water from waste products and incinerate waste itself. After Apollo, exploration of moon might continue with robot vehicles. “The maintenance and servicing of space stations and nerva engines in space may be done more easily and safely by robots than by man.... Nuclear power would be an obvious candidate power system.” (Text)
NASA’s congratulations on Luna XVI achievement were telegraphed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting Administrator, to Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences: “This impressive technical achievement promises to add significantly to man’s knowledge of the Moon. Along with scientists throughout the world, we look forward to the first reports on analyses of these samples.” (NASA Release 70-156)
Office of Science and Technology sent to Congress The Next Decade in Space, report of Space Science and Technology Panel of President’s Science Advisory Committee: National program for next decade in space should focus on using “space capabilities for the welfare, security, and enlightenment of all people.” Recommended goals were to contribute to Nation’s economic strength and security and expand earth-oriented research and applications of space science and technology; explore solar system with phased program of lunar exploration, search for extraterrestrial life, and diversified planetary exploration; and use space platforms to expand knowledge of universe and basic physical laws. Panel urged that U.S. develop technology to expand capability for automated equipment controlled by man in remote location for space exploration and civil applications, reduce cost of space operations by cost reduction for expendable vehicles and payload development, strengthen biomedical basis for possible long-duration manned space flights, and encourage international cooperative programs. Panel recommended NASA and dod continue joint study of reusable space transportation system “in the expectation that a decision can be made for a FY 1972 budget decision on an STS development program.” Design target should be replacement “of the largest possible part of the national launch vehicle stable,” including Saturn V. “We urge the deferral of a development decision on space stations more elaborate than the aap space station.. .concept until the prior availability of the STS can be'confidently anticipated.” It was “likely that some form of multiply reusable space transportation system will indeed become the most attractive major new technology development for the decade.” Other recommendations were basic biomedical research program supplemented by 12- to 18-mo Apollo Applications flight program, to provide human factors information for more ambitious space station; possible second-generation space station to utilize sts; and earth-orbital manned space flight activity with systems using sts. (Text)
Experiment to determine if ozone was trapped in solid carbon dioxide polar cap of Mars was described in Science by Univ. of Colorado and York Univ. of Toronto, Canada, scientists. Experiment showed that solid carbon dioxide was effective trap for ozone at temperatures as high as 156 K (-179°F). “Ultraviolet reflection-absorption spectra of ozone in solid carbon dioxide at 127°K [-231°F] indicate that the ozone observed over the polar cap of Mars may be trapped in solid carbon dioxide.” (Broida, Lundell, etai., Science, 12/25/70, 1402) Dr. Edward H. Teller, physicist and atomic scientist of Univ. of California, advocated abolition of secrecy surrounding U.S. scientific research “so we can clearly understand what we are talking about ” in growing debate over impact of science and technology on society. “Secrecy in science should be abolished so that the democratic process can be better able to work in making the decisions on how science is applied.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/28/70,1) Dr. Bentley Glass, retiring aaas president and Academic Vice President of Univ. of New York at Stoney Brook, said number of scientists and technologists in U.S. had doubled in decade to form 20% of professional labor force. Growth rate was much faster than that of population and could not surpass limit of about 25% of professional force. Dr. Glass believed that the greater the volume of research, the less likely any one project would produce truly original results. “It is in fact becoming more and more difficult, as scientific knowledge grows, to make a totally new and unexpected discovery or to break through the dogmas of established scientific views.” SHOT session on Perspectives of Apollo History, chaired by Dr. James Lee Cate of Univ. of Chicago with Dr. John M. Logsdon of George Washington Univ. as commentator, presented sample narratives: “Space Science and Automatic Spacecraft Behind Apollo” by R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian; “The Saturn Family of Rockets” by Dr. John S. Beltz of Univ. of Alabama at Huntsville; and “The Apollo Command Spaceship” by Dr. Loyd S. Swenson, Jr., of Univ. of Houston. Narratives directed attention to problems of contemporary scholarship and to basic elements of Apollo. (Program; NASA Hist Off) Jeffrey V. Odom, manager of National Bureau of Standards metric study, told aaas seminar that report on metrication would be submitted to Congress in August 1971. Report was expected to include recommendations for gradual conversion to metric system in U.S., possibly over 10 yrs. New York Times, noting metric system proponents, emphasized that 90% of nations in world already used system and that U.K. expected to be almost completely converted by 1975, said NASA was first U.S. Government agency to convert to system in its scientific and technical publications. (Wilford, NYT, 12/29/70, 17) Stewart L. Udall, former Secretary of the Interior, in aaas speech accused science establishment, particularly nas, of failing to exert moral and political leadership on issues of technology impact on man. He proposed that consumer advocate Ralph Nader organize team of young scientists to make “dispassionate and intensive study of the National Academy and the whole scientific enterprise in this country.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/31/70, 3:6) Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman and aaas President-elect, left aaas meeting before radical young scientists assumed podium to accuse him of “crime of science against the people.” (Auerbach, W Post, 12/31/70, A4)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell completed testing of Apollo 14 lm in vacuum chamber at KSC, in preparation for launch to moon Jan. 31, 1971. (W Post, 9/19/70, A7; SBD, 9/21/70, 85)
Awards ceremony to observe successful completion of more than four years of Saturn V launch vehicle test firings was held at mtf. mtf employees, contractors, and groups of Government workers received special plaques and awards. Guests included local, state government, and NASA officials. Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., presented flag flown around moon on board Apollo 10 to mtf employees to express Apollo astronauts’ gratitude, as facility marked last day of space operations, (msfc Release 70-229)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, said chances were high that Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II would develop German measles next week and that, in his opinion, Mattingly’s lack of immunity would not permit him to fly on Apollo 13 April 11. NASA had not officially ruled out Mattingly for flight, but countdown was proceeding on schedule and backup cm pilot John L. Swigert, Jr., was undergoing intensive training in Apollo simulators at KSC. (O’Toole, WPost, 4/10/70, A2)
International reaction to Apollo 13 emergency continued: Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, General Secretary of World Council of Churches, said in Geneva that people of world were praying for astronauts. In Santa Ninfa, Sicily, devasted by earthquake in January, Mayor Vito Bellafore said, “After the first Apollo success people did lose interest; it seemed that it was only a mechanical exercise. Now we see again the human drama, and all of our worry is for those three lonely men.” London Times said Apollo 13 would leave “scar on the American space program.” Best outcome of accident would be “greater sense of deliberation in the exploration of space.” (Lyons, NYT, 4/16/70, 1)
Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin sent message to President Nixon: “We follow with concern the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 13 in which failure developed. I want to inform you the Soviet government has given orders to all citizens and members of the armed forces to use all necessary means to render assistance in the rescue of the American astronauts.” Italian Defense Ministry ordered Italian armed forces to be ready to give immediate help as needed if Apollo 13 splashed down in Mediterranean. Reuters reported that U.K. Prime Minister Harold Wilson pledged help of Royal Navy ships for possible recovery work and that French President Georges J. Pompidou made similar offer of his navy, (upi, W Star, 4/15/70; Reuters, WPost, 4/16/70)
MSC announced contract awards: NR Space Div. would receive $305 700 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee supplemental agreement ■ to Apollo spacecraft contract for four csm modules for Skylab program. Agreement definitized March 1969 letter contract and brought estimated cost of contract for both Apollo and Skylab to $3 618 006 813. NR Space Div. also would receive $250 000for preliminary planning study of reusable space tug with multipurpose applications. ILC Industries would receive $ 13-million extension to contract for Apollo space suits and support through 1971, bringing total contract value to $46 543 299. (msc Releases 70-61, 62, 63; NASA Release 7088)
Discovery of tektite glass in Apollo 12 sample 12013, reported June 5th by gsfc scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe, was debated in Science by Dr. O’Keefe, Univ. of Houston geologist Elbert A. King, Jr., and lrl scientists R. Martin and Weldon B. Nance. Analyses of sample by King, Martin, and Nance had led them to conclude that “there is no existing chemical or mineralogical observation or data that uniquely support the idea that tektites originate from the moon. There are abundant chemical data that support a close genetic relationship between tektites and terrestrial rock materials. These data have been presented or summarized by numerous authors. Tektite glass has not been found in samples from Apollo 12 (or Apollo 11).” Dr. O’Keefe responded: “They find that the material is crystalline rather than glassy. The crystals are, however, evidently rather fine; from statistical considerations it can be judged that the agreement of the two major-element analyses given for samples of only a few tens of millograms is likely only if the crystals are of the order of 100m m [0.04 in] or smaller in diameter. This raises the question whether they are the products of devitrefication. In any case, the former existence of a liquid of this composition seems to be implied. Evidence of somewhat similar liquids was found in the Apollo 11 sample.” (Science, 10/9/70, 199-200)
NASA announced appointment of Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Project Integration for Apollo Applications Program, as NASA Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program, omsf. (nasa Release 70-6)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, held press conference at NASA Hq. to comment on his resignation, submitted July 28: “When I faced up to the job in the Space Agency. . .there were two major responsibilities. . . . One. . .was the meeting of the commitment. . .[to] land on the Moon within the decade. . .and the second was to lay out the post-Apollo program which would follow. . . . The action that was taken yesterday by the Congress in conference, which essentially gave us more than ninety-eight percent of the monies that the President had approved for the 1971 budget, but more importantly followed a very intensive review by Congress of the proposals we had made for the new space program of the seventies, in many ways represents a major step forward in the second concern which I had, which was to lay out the post-Apollo program and secure initial approval for it in the Administration and the Congress.” NASA “had reached the point where the person who heads up the space program should be prepared now to devote very many months to the prosecution of this new program. . .and it was my conclusion that this was an excellent time for a change of command at NASA, since, for personal reasons, I could not give it the many months of continuing activity which would be required.” Questioned about future space projects, Dr. Paine said he had found “great depth of support” for space program in U.S. and in foreign countries. Space program was valuable to Nation and world, was on solid foundation, and would probably be funded by Government on its present level or a little higher. He identified key issues facing NASA in FY 1972 budget as future of Apollo program, particularly with suspension of Saturn V production and continuing need to reassess best use of each booster, and question of relative priority within limited resources of space shuttle, space station, space tug, scientific missions, application of satellite programs, and increased aeronautical r&d. “It’s very important. . .that we take a very long-range view because, the direction that the space program takes in the 1970’s is indeed going to cast a shadow through to the end of the century.” (Transcript)
Apollo II Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Dr. Thomas D. Barrow, President of Humble Oil & Refining Co., had been named cochairmen of Goals for Texas in the Coastal Zone Conference to be held in Houston, Sept. 10-11, Houston Chroicle said. (H Chron, 8/28/70)
Edward H. White II Memorial Museum was dedicated at Hangar 9 of Brooks AFB, Tex., in honor of Astronaut White, who died in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire. Museum, near White’s home town of San Antonio, Tex., would be devoted largely to aerospace medicine. In dedication address, l/g John W. O’Neill, afsc Vice Commander, said: “Space is our new world, a final frontier. ... it is also a medium through which attack is possible, which means that we must learn everything we can about it for the defense and security of the nation.” Space science and technology had spawned “new generations of materials, systems and processes, for both military and consumer goods.” Of 12 000 new products and techniques developed during last decade, “very large percentage derives directly from space and missile development.” Most “satisfying and gratifying” space spinoffs were in health and medical field—“new type of wheel chair adapted from the moon walker. . .or chemicals used in the treatment of tuberculosis and mental illness that were originally derived from missile fuels. Or spray-on instrumentation for remotely monitoring the condition of heart patients. Or the numerous new materials and techniques being applied to. . .health care.” (Text)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of William M. Huey, special consultant to faa Administrator and Deputy Administrator, to fill new position of faa Deputy Assistant Administrator for General Aviation Affairs, (faa Release 70-89) Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, said in speech at meeting: “nasa and the aerospace industry are not uniquely qualified to solve our domestic problems. The domestic problems, including those of the physical environment, are largely social, economical, and political. The need for new technology, for research and development, does exist in some areas, but certainly is not the driving force in obtaining solutions.” Solutions “must come from sociologists, economists, and politicians—not engineers and scientists. We in aerospace should. . .assist wherever and whenever we can: We have developed techniques of management that may apply; there are technological problems that we are qualified to tackle; and there are areas where space technology, and the applications of space technology, apply directly. We should assist, but we should not think or encourage others to believe that we can solve all of our domestic problems.” Space program had “one major deficiency—a gap in manned space flight after Skylab, a hiatus of four years or more when no American will be in earth orbit, or anywhere in space.” Gap had to be accepted because of lack of funding. Decision to cancel Viking or delay space shuttle would be wrong. “Viking is the major scientific experiment of the decade, and a delay in starting the shuttle would only delay the hiatus, not eliminate it.” If shuttle development was advancing when gap occurred, Dr. Low believed gap would not be “unacceptable.” NASA was building “the next generation of space vehicles, a generation that will far surpass existing capabilities to explore space, to use space, to live and work in space.” (Text) Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) told meeting: “Our space program is being viewed with increasing skepticism. Future historians will smile at the irony of our situation. Immediately following the fantastic feat of sending men to the surface of the Moon and back in safety, our national resolve in expanding this effort faced a mounting wave of domestic criticism. The irony of homo sapiens for the first time standing upright on his planet and not availing himself of his full ability to explore and experiment in the universe. The irony of not moving forward as aggressively as possible from a new beginning almost as fundamental as the beginning of life itself.” (SBD, 10/23/70, 23) Work of dot Transportation Systems Center, formerly NASA erc, was described by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe: Center was “already working on harbor advisory radars for the Coast Guard, phased array radars for the faa, crash sensors for the Federal Highway Administration, and alcohol detectors for the National Highway Safety Bureau. In communications we are studying wayside systems for tracked air-cushion vehicles and data links from ground controllers to cockpit displays. Computer systems are being adapted to automated scanning of highway traffic films and simulation of ground and air traffic patterns controllers must learn. The architecture of large, real-time computers for air traffic control systems is also under study.” (Text) JPL engineers Ronald F. Draper and Thomas R. Gavin* said technology for long-lived, unmanned spacecraft for Grand Tour flybys and separate orbiting missions to Jupiter and outer planets was well advanced for 1977 and 1979 missions. Thermoelectric outer planet spacecraft (tops) under development at jpl would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators, with nuclear energy supplying power beyond range where solar panels and batteries were effective. Scientific experiments and spacecraft control problems would be handled by self-test and repair (star) computer with sufficient backup units for 10 to 15 yrs operation, (jpl Release 564) Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director for Biomedical Engineering, announced that final two Apollo missions would land at Descartes, upland valley surrounded by craters, and Marius Hills, near Imbrium Basin. Sites had been selected because material there would furnish new data on age and origin of moon. (AP, W Star, 10/ 20/70, A4) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director, received $5000 aiaa Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for “outstanding management and leadership in directing the planning and operational control of all United States manned space flight missions from the first Mercury suborbital mission through the first Apollo lunar landing.” Dr. Maxime A. Faget, MSC Director of Engineering and Development, received $500 Spacecraft Design award for ‘‘outstanding leadership and technical ability which resulted in the conception and design of this nation’s first manned spacecraft, the Mercury capsule system.” Glynn S. Lunney, Chief of msc Flight Director’s Office, received $500 Lawrence Sperry Award for “outstanding performance as a flight director during the Gemini and Apollo manned space flight missions; for exceptional leadership, professional skill and personal dedication which contributed to the success of this Nation’s first manned lunar mission, and particularly during the flight of Apollo 13.” Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div. of NASA oart, received John Jefferies Award of $500 and certificate for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aerospace medical research.” Von Karman Lecture award of $1000 and travel allowance of $1500 was awarded to Dr. Erik L. Mollo-Christensen, mit meteorologist, (aiaa Release; msc Roundup, 9/25/70, 1) NASA and dot sponsored session on national aeronautical programs, with Charles J. Donlan of NASA omsf as theme chairman. Exhibit was prepared by LaRC, LeRC, and arc. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy, chaired panel discussion on problems facing aeronautics in U.S., including vehicles, airport systems, and airway systems. Historical session, “American Advancement into Space,” was chaired by Royal D. Frey of usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb and Dr. Loyd Swenson of Univ. of Houston. Organized by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, session heard description by Col. John A. MacReady (usaf. Ret.) and Sally MacReady Liston of early experiments to combat known and unknown hazards of first attempts to climb into space, narrative by l/g William E. Kempner (usaf, Ret.) of flight of Explorer I into stratosphere, description by Cdr. George W. Hoover (usn, Ret.) of usn developments leading to space, and story by Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf, Ret.) of XB-70. (Program; NASA Hist Off) On Oct. 24 Tass announced that Zond VIII had circled within 1120 km (696 mi) of moon, studied space, photographed moon, and was returning to earth. Spacecraft splashed down in Indian Ocean Oct. 27 and was recovered by Soviet vessel Tama. Tass said spacecraft brought back “extremely important photographs needed for studies of the geological and morphological qualities of the moon.” Zond VIIIwas eighth spacecraft in Zond series and second spacecraft to land in water; first had been Zond V (Sept. 15-22, 1968). Zond VI(Nov. 10-17, 1968) and Zond VII(Aug. 8-14, 1969) had circled moon and returned to earth with data and photos, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; Gwertzman, NYT, 10/22/70, 1; SBD, 10/28/70, 249; 10/29/ 70, 256; B Sun, 10/28/70, A5; SF, 4/71, 138-9)
Appointment of Apollo 8 commander Frank Borman as Vice President of Eastern Airlines was announced by ea Vice President and Executive Officer Floyd D. Hall. Borman would assume new duties after completing course for executives at Harvard Univ. (ea Release)
NASA announced 1971 flight schedule, highlighted by two manned Apollo lunar landing missions—Apollo 14 Jan. 31 and Apollo 15 July 25—and by two unmanned Mariner Mars launches in May. Other launches tentatively scheduled for 1971 included threfc Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp. nato-b comsat for NATO, imp-1 Interplanetary Monitoring Platform, solrad scientific satellite for USN, ISIS-B cooperative U.S.-Canada scientific satellite, PAET Planetary Atmosphere Experiments Test, OSO-H Orbiting Solar Observatory, SSS-A Small Scientific Satellite, UK-4 cooperative U.S.-U.K. scientific satellite, afcrl-a magnetic storm satellite for afcrl, OAO-C Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, and CAS-A cooperative U.S.-France meteorological satellite. NASA aeronautical program would include extensive testing of supercritical wing, (nasa Release 70-222)
NASA published Apollo 12 Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP-235): Nov. 14-24, 1969, mission had accomplished “wide variety of preplanned tasks and paved the way for planning future missions to smaller, more selected landing areas with the possibility of significant scientific returns.” By changing csm orbital plane twice, crew had demonstrated capability to explore new lunar areas during orbital operations. “Future flights will take advantage of this capability to photograph additional potential landing sites and to make scientific observations of the surface, both visually and photographically.” Apollo 12 success in lunar orbit had allowed increase in planned orbital activities for Apollo 13. Large quantity of lunar soil and rocks from Apollo 12 mission would add to scientific information obtained from Apollo 11 samples. (Text)
Seismic data from impacts of Apollo 12 lm and 3rd stage of Apollo 13 booster (S-IVB), relayed by seismic station installed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts, were described in Science. Team of lunar scientists headed by Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, made report. Unusually long reverberations suggested “that the lunar mare in the region of the Apollo 12 landing site consists of material with very low seismic velocities near the surface with velocity increasing with depth to 5 to 6 kilometers per second [3.1-3.7 mps] (for compression waves) at a depth of 20 kilometers [12.4 mi]. Absorption of seismic waves in this structure is extremely low relative to typical continental crustal materials on earth. It is unlikely that a major boundary similar to the crust-mantle interface on earth exists in the outer 20 kilometers [12.4 mi] of the moon. A combination of dispersion and scattering of surface waves iqiplies the presence of heterogeneity within the outer zone of the mare on a scale of from several hundred meters (or less) to several kilometers. Seismic signals from 160 events of natural origin have been recorded during the first 7 months of operation of the Apollo 12 seismic station. At least 26.. .are small moonquakes. Many.. .are thought to be meteroid impacts.” (Science, 11/6/70, 620-6)
White House announced that President Nixon had asked Apollo 13 astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., to visit Iceland, Switzerland, Greece, Malta, and Ireland as his personal representatives. Mission would include visit to 21st International Astronautical Congress in Constance, Germany, where astronauts would address session in October. They would be accompanied on tour by Mrs. Lovell and Mrs. Haise; Swigert was bachelor. Group would depart Oct. 1 and return Oct. 15. (PD, 9/28/ 70,1258)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat for dod, Nato I military comsat for NATO, and Oscar V radio propagation satellite for U.S. and Australian amateur radio operators. Italian crew, trained by NASA, launched NASA’s Uhuru on NASA launch vehicle. U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was reached on procedure for joint efforts to design compatible rendezvous and docking systems for manned spacecraft. Since European Space Conference had indicated that major participation in U.S. space transportation program would probably mean end to Europa III launcher program funding, esc was assured U.S. would continue to make reimbursable launch services available for European payloads for peaceful purposes. Such participation was understood to mean at least 10% of developmental costs of space transportation system, or about $1 billion. During year NASA held briefings for U.N. Outer Space Committee and invited u.n. and specialized agencies to participate in International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey System in 1971. Discussions were held with Brazil, Canada, and Mexico on agreements to extend cooperation in earth resources area; experimenters from 28 countries signified intention to submit proposals to analyze data acquired by erts. Joint working group meetings were held in India and U.S. on satellite instructional TV experiment for ats-f. nasa and aid began 18-mo experimental project with Korea in application of aerospace technology to Korean economic problems. NASA and Canadian government signed agreement to study application of augmentor-wing concept to v/stol aircraft. Agreement was concluded with U.K. to test-fly NASA’s XH-51 rigid-rotor helicopter in U.K. and to share data. Agreements for new projects were reached with Netherlands, U.K., and Italy. Netherlands agreement called for cooperative development ana launch in 1974 of small astronomical satellite (ans) with one U.S. and two Dutch experiments to investigate stellar uv and x-ray radiation. U.K. agreement was for 1973 launch of uk-R x-ray satellite, fifth in Ariel series. Italian agreement established principles for nasa launch on reimbursable basis of Italian Sirio satellite to study wave propagation and electron flows in magnetosphere. nasa accented experiment from French National Laboratory for Space Astronomy to study stellar uv emissions from Skylab and accepted instrument developed by French National Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics for investigating solar chromosphere structure from osO-i, scheduled for 1973 launch. Assistance was accepted from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Observatory in planning activities of radio science team for 1975 Project Viking Mars probe. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, India, Spain, and Sweden, and negotiations were held with France for cooperative upper-atmosphere sounding rocket launchings at Kour-ou in French Guiana. Lunar material returned by Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 was studied by 54 foreign principal investigators in 16 countries in addition to U.S. scientists. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71)
Society that could afford to spend as much as U.S. did on cokes, cosmetics, tobacco, and liquor could afford its space expenditure, William H. Bayley, NASA Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, said in jpl Lab-Oratory. Between 1959 and 1969 U.S. had devoted $30 billion to space program, $40 billion each for cosmetics and soft drinks, almost $80 billion each for cosmetics and soft drinks, almost $80 billion for tobacco, and some $110 billion for alcoholic beverages—about four times cost of space program. Annual space expenditure had been about one half of 1% of gnp, and about 1 /20th of defense expenditure. Most expensive space program had been Apollo at $24 billion, 93% of which was spent for goods and services provided by private industry. To date, “no money at all has been spent on the Moon or planets; it has all been spent right here on earth.” (jplLab-Oratory, 4/70,4-19)
Lunar roving vehicle training model, 1-G trainer, was delivered by Boeing Co. to msfc representatives at Santa Barbara, Calif., marking major milestone in manned lrv program. Two-man trainer was 3.2 m (10 ft 7 in) long and 1.8 m (6 ft) wide with 2.3-m (7.5-ft) wheelbase. It looked like flight version scheduled for use on Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions, but weighed twice as much and was equipped with both automobile-type and wire mesh tires. Extra weight came from additional strength in frame, wheels, drive motors, and suspension system, which permitted it to carry 362.9 kg (800 lbs), including two men, equipment, and samples. Battery-operated trainer was driven with an aircraft-like stick hand controller and could stop, turn, move forward, and reverse at variable speeds. Top speed was 14.5 km per hr (9 mph) on smooth surface. Trainer would be shipped to MSC in about one week. (NASA Release 70-201)
Apollo 12 moon rock was guarded by three men as firemen fought fire at Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev. Lunar sample lent by NASA for display at physics symposium in hotel was kept in place during fire for security reasons, (upi, WPost, 4/12/70, A3)
As U.S. and U.S.S.R. opened strategic arms limitation talks (salt) in Vienna, thoughts of delegates and local citizens were on Apollo 13. Washington Post later said mission was “a symbol of the space age that reflects the arms control problem at these talks. The rocket that put men into space also is the device that can rain death for millions by one superpower upon the other.” (Roberts, W Post, 4/16/70, A10)
NASA announced award of $3 300 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. Aerospace Systems Div. for engineering support of Apollo Lunar Exploration program. Contract covered engineering evaluation, flight readiness reviews, and mission evaluations Jan. 1 through Dec. 31. (NASA Release 70-25)
Science editorial by Dr. Preston E. Cloud, Jr., geologist of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, scored cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19: “The moon is the only other planet we can hope to study in sufficient detail for close comparison with our own. We have just begun that study. It is as if we were trying to understand North America by examining Plymouth Rock.” Billions had been spent to get within reach of primary scientific goals on moon. “Only a small fraction of the investment already made would see the job to a fruitful conclusion. To stop short for reasons within our control would, in retrospect, be seen as one of history’s most irresponsible follies. Nothing less than the early institution of a comprehensive automated program to get similar information and sample return could begin to ameliorate such a failure.” (Science, 9/18/70,1159)
Appointment of Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman as Senior Vice President-Operations Group was announced by Eastern Airlines Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Floyd D. Hall. (EA Release)
Apollo csms would be modified to enhance potential use in emergency mode, NASA announced. Modifications included addition of 400-amp-hour battery in SM as alternative power source, provision of storage space for additional 9 kg (20 lbs) of potable water, and addition of third oxygen tank for SM. (NASA Release 70-144)
NASA announced it had issued rfps to potential experimenters for scientific investigations based on data acquired during erts missions A and B, scheduled for 1972 and 1973 launch. Missions would be first in U.S. space program devoted exclusively to study of earth’s environmental resources from space. They were designed to improve methods for managing resources, erts a and B sensors would obtain image data in visible and infrared spectrum using spectral ranges previously studied by instrumented aircraft and verified by Apollo ^experiment in March 1969. Proposals were due April 15, 1971. (NASA Release 70-117)
L/C Joe Klass and Maj. Joseph Gervais, both former usaf officers, said in New York that 10-yr investigation indicated Aviatrix Amelia Earhart, who had disappeared over Pacific in 1937, was alive and living in U.S. They believed woman called Mrs. Guy Bolam, who claimed to have flown with Earhart, was Earhart herself and that Earhart and navigator Fred Noonan had been intercepted in 1937 mission for U.S. Government by aircraft from Japanese carrier, held captive throughout World War II in Imperial Palace in Tokyo, and released when Emperor Hirohito bartered her life for his exemption from trial as war criminal. Col. Klass had written book Amelia Earhart Lives: A Trip Through Intrigue To Find America’s First Lady of Mystery, published by McGraw-Hill. Mrs. Bolam later held press conference to issue denial, calling book “poorly documented hoax” and “utter nonsense.” (AP, W Post, 11/10/70, D2: AP, WStar, 11/11/70, A2) November 10-22:	U.S.S.R. launched Luna XVII unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 7:44 pm local time (9:44 am EST).Tass said purpose of mission was to explore moon and near-moon space and check new systems and reported all systems were functioning normally. During flight to moon 36 communications sessions were held with spacecraft and data on parameters and systems were transmitted. Midcourse maneuvers were conducted Nov. 12 and 14 and on Nov. 15 Luna XVIIentered lunar orbit with 85-km (53-mi) altitude, 1-hr 56-min period, and 141° inclination. Luna XVII softlanded in moon’s Sea of Rains Nov . 17 at 8:47 am Baykonurtime (10:47 pm ESTNov. 16). Spacecraft released Lunokhod I, self-propelled vehicle placed on moon to conduct scientific investigations. According to drawing and models shown on Moscow TV, Lunokhod I looked like large silver pot-bellied tub about the size of small automobile with ei^ht spoked wheels apparently powered by solar energy and batteries. Tass said Lunokhod I carried flags and pennants with Soviet coat of arms and Lenin’s bas relief and was equipped with scientific apparatus, instruments and control systems, and radio and TV devices. Lunokhod I left Luna XVII descent stage at 11:28 am Baykonurtime (1:28 am EST) Nov. 17 by special gangway and traveled 20 m (66 ft) from spacecraft to begin experiments. Tass said vehicle’s movement could be controlled automatically or by ground controllers following televised information on position and character of surrounding lunar surface. Between Nov. 17 and Nov. 22, 10 radio and TV sessions were held and large amount of data was transmitted. Chemical composition of surface layer of lunar soil was analyzed with x-ray spectrometer and mechanical properties of lunar soil and transportability of vehicle were investigated. In addition, Tass said, “an instrument was used which has a punch for soil intrusion, and a system of sensors for measuring forces acting on the wheels.” Panoramic pictures of lunar landscape were taken, in which tracks made by Lunokhod I, details of lunar surface, and parts of vehicle were clearly visible. Tass said TV cameras, “designed for surveying and evaluating the route traveled, provided the necessary information for travel in the conditions of uneven, broken terrain. At some points. . .the incline reached 14 deg. Along the path, Lunokhod encountered. . .deep craters the detours to which were ensured byithe operators (on Earth).” On Nov. 22, after five days on lunar surface, Lunokhod I was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Tass said vehicle had competed “a complex of tests.. .and a wide program of tests of its mobility” and had traveled 197 m (646 ft). Vehicle was moved to an “assigned position” where it would remain stationary during lunar night and solar panels were closed. Luna XVII was first unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and deploy automatic lunar explorer. Last mission in series, unmanned Luna XVI(Sept. 12-24), had landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (Sov Rpt, 12/4/70; GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; SBD, 11/20/70,81-2; Clarity, NYT, 11/18/70,1)	'
Apollo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in Houston that he was concerned that cutbacks in space program, with ensuing layoffs, might lead to poor workmanship at KSC, “I think we would be naive if we didn’t assume that people are unhappy.” (IY Post, 7/12/ 70, A5)
Four ground test models of Apollo Telescope Mount manned solar observatory were under construction at msfc Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory, msfc announced. Flight versions—prime spacecraft and backup—would follow, msfc engineers were modifying laboratory, previously used for Saturn V assembly and early Skylab mockup work, for atm fabrication role. Changes included installation of clean room where air would wash downward over unit under construction, installation of airlock 14 m (45 ft) high for moving hardware to and from building without contaminating air, and installation of second clean room and automatic checkout equipment in Quality and Reliability Assurance Laboratory area. (msfc Release 70-87)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Fred W. Haise, Jr., held press conference at msc. Lovell announced final code names for lm and cm had been selected according to theme of mythology, lm would be called “Aquarius” after mythical Egyptian water carrier who brought fertility and knowledge to Nile Valley. Code name originally selected for CM— “Auriga,” for constellation Auriga—had been dropped in favor of “Odyssey,” epic Greek poem about long adventures and wanderings of Odysseus in Greek mythology. Lovell said Apollo 13 crew had “already had quite an odyssey just getting trained” for mission. Landing of Aquarius on moon would be different from previous landings, Lovell said. Key to landing was Cone Crater on Fra Mau-ro. LM was “being targeted for a spot that we don’t want to land at,” uprange about 1/2 km from desired site; “we’re not sure of the actual height of this ridge [of Cone Crater]. . .so we’re targeting uprange to make sure we get over it.” Reason for going to Fra Mauro was “its peculiar geologic formations there and.. .a place called the Mare Imbrium. . .a large circular basin that was formed early in the moon’s history.. .by a large impact. In the formation of this impact it made hummocky ridges, radiating outward from the center of the impact down into. . .Fra Mauro. ... Now, by going to Fra Mauro, we hope to. . .bring back some of the basin type material that was thrown out by this catastrophe.” (Transcript; upi, C Trib, 3/15/70)
Impact of space requirements on U.S. computer industry was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, at ARCS (Achievement Rewards for College Scientists) Foundation Annual Scholarship Awards Banquet in Houston, Tex.: “In Project Mercury, ground-based computers were only required to determine quickly and accurately booster cut-off conditions. In Apollo, however, computers are used throughout the mission in real time, to calculate the trajectory to the moon and back, to compare three separate solutions for the lunar descent, to record and analyze thousands of bits of telemetered spacecraft information, to compare these to predicted values to detect trouble, and . .. to monitor the well-being of the crew. For Mercury, the computer program contained 40 000 computer words; for Apollo, a 1 500 000-word program was needed, while at the same time, the speed of the computers has increased sevenfold.” U.S. computer industry was doing $8 billion worth of business annually, paid highest average wages of any U.S. industry, and was “one of the most rapidly growing.” In 1960, U.S. exported $48 million worth of computers; in 1969, $728 million dollars worth. “U.S. computer exports have increased by over 1400 percent in the first decade of the space age. This impressive record was built on excellence of performance through continuing technological superiority. In a large measure it was the stimulus of NASA’s requirements that brought about these technological advances in the computer industry.” (Text) May 3; With exception of Mission Control, msc buildings normally open to public had remained open during Apollo 13 crisis, New York Times commented. Visitors could watch—from overhead catwalk in Building 5'—scientists and astronauts devising techniques for Apollo 13's return to earth. (Gordon, NYT, 5/3/70,7)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations, described medical phenomena encountered by Apollo 12 astronauts in keynote address at Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine seminar in San Antonio, Tex. Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean had observed brilliant flashes of light on closing eyes in darkened portions of spacecraft. They were believed to be caused by charged particles or rays from sun or from space. Astronauts also experienced sensitivity to lunar dust, body changes including face fullness, reddened eyes, and flushed faces during early part of flight, and increase in skin bacteria beyond amount normal on earth. Dr. Berry blamed body changes on pooling of fluids in head from lack of gravity. Behavior of bacteria might make doctors consider altering normal skin surface bacteria content by special baths for astronauts before flight. Dr. Berry also said that woman might share in planetary exploration but tests were needed to ensure “she doesn’t create more problems than she solves. I think it would definitely be more comfortable if we took women along.” (Huntsville Times, 2/10/70; Huntsville News, 2/10/70)
New York City Mayor John V. Lindsay addressed more than 300 mayors at National League of Cities Conference in Atlanta, Ga.: “The human potential of technology is boundless. We have only scratched the surface. For the sake of our cities and for the sake of the men and women in out aerospace, industry, we must learn more.” Mayor Lindsay said aiaa and city of New York would sponsor first annual Urban Technology Conference in May 1971. Conference would focus on application of space techniques and talent to urban crisis. “From it we hope to learn how to convert the creativity that put a man on the Moon into an ally in the struggle to help men live in our cities.” (A&A, 1/71,9)
Families of Apollo 13 astronauts monitored flight communications on NASA squawk boxes and watched TV in their homes. Mrs. Marilyn Lovell and Mrs. Mary Haise kept older children home from school. Parents of unmarried Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., remained at home in Denver, Colo. (AP, NYT, 4/15/70,29)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, received 1970 “World Citizen” Award of Civitan International at organization’s 50th annual convention in Atlanta, Ga. Citation was for “accomplishments as leading pioneer scientist and engineer” in space program “which has already resulted in successful flights to the moon and untold scientific advances for the benefit of mankind.” Only previous recipients of award were Sir Winston Churchill and President Dwight D. Eisenhower. (Thompson, Atlanta Constitution, 7/1/70)
Timing of Apollo 13 could upstage U.S.S.R. ’s plans for “biggest ideological event in Soviet history, the Lenin centennial,” New York Times reported. Mission had been launched on 1970 Leninist Subbotnik—day when loyal citizens donated full day’s work to their country. Second day of Apollo 13 mission was Cosmonauts Day, anniversary of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin’s triumph as first man to orbit earth. Apollo 13 astronauts were scheduled to return to earth the day before the Lenin anniversary, “almost exactly at the hour that Secretary General Leonid I. Brezhnev is scheduled to crown his career by delivering the major address commemorating the founder of the Soviet system.” (Schwartz, NYT, 4/13/70)
Papers of Robert H. Goddard, edited by Esther C. Goddard and G. Edward Pendray, were reviewed in New York Times Book Review by I. Bernard Cohen: “Goddard was not universally appreciated during his lifetime; few dreamers are. He was often ridiculed as ‘the moon man.’ Today his name is commemorated in laboratories and professorships, but his greatest lasting memorial does not carry his name. It is the background of theoretical principles, engineering devices and practical experience, in the decades between World War I and II, that are embodied in every rocket that flies today.... These splendid volumes, handsomely printed and well illustrated, should go a long way to making known the personality of this shaper of our times.” (NYT Book Review, 8/2/70)
Editorial comment as damaged Apollo 13 attempted safe return to New York Times: “An emergency in a space craft on the voyage between earth and moon was bound to occur sometime. The enormous hazards of the long journey through the most hostile of environments, the ever present possibility of failure by one or more of the millions of components contained in an Apollo vehicle, the ubiquitous threat of human error, all these combine in lunar flights to make them the most dangerous expeditions human beings have ever undertaken. In retrospect, the remarkable fact is not that such ominous peril has arisen in the now-aborted trip of Apollo 13, but that the actually hazardous trips to the moon and back by Apollos 8, 10, 11, and 12 were accomplished in safety.” (NYT, 4/15/70) Washington Post: “Lindbergh gave up a continent, as the astronauts gave up a planet, because he had measured the risks and found them reasonable, for all the possibility of disaster lurking around the corner—it does so every day for men and nations. So if we are going to apply the glories, we must confront the dangers along the way. All we can do now, as that unlikely looking craft limps back from the moon, is to hope that the men who ride in it and the men in Houston who guide it can find what Lindbergh found. ‘Somewhere in an unknown recess of my mind,’ he wrote T’ve discovered that my ability rises and falls with the essential problems that confront me. What I can do depends largely on what I have to do to stay alive and on course.’ ” (WPost, 4/15/70) Baltimore Sun: “The safety record of the Apollo program has, except for one hideous ground accident, been a perfect one. Perhaps we have too easily assumed that therefore all expeditions would begin and end without serious and unforseen breakdown, without the torments of suspense when the line between splendid accomplishment and bitter tragedy is drawn very fine. The truth is, of course, that exploration, especially in a realm new to man, can never be free of deadly hazards. But the astronauts and the men associated with them in their ventures have always known it.” It was clear astronauts were equal to emergency, “but they remain at the mercy of machinery which in some still unexplained way has failed them. The rest of us can only wait from desperate hour to hour, trusting that superlative skill, universal hope and fervent prayers will prevail over cruel chance.” (B Sun, 4/15/70)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, oart, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology on role of nuclear rockets in future space transportation. Potential for reuse of nuclear stage provided additional prospects for spaceflight economy. Nuclear rocket would be in-space link between earth-to-orbit transportation system and operations at moon and in distant earth orbits. NASA budget request for $38 million for program in FY 1971, however, could “be viewed as maintaining progress in only the most important longest-lead-time development activities in nerva.” Progress made in “early, critical years, will permit later development activities. . .to proceed smoothly.” Effort was essential to meet major milestones: first ground test of series of nerva flight reactors in 1973 and first ground test of series of nerva flight engines in 1974. (Testimony)
U.S. observed national day of prayer in gratitude for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts. In New York 150 persons attended sunset service at Temple Emanuel. Invocation of gratitude was added to Sunday mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral, expressing hope that space exploration would contribute to peace and welfare of mankind. Greek Orthodox Primate of North and South America, Archbishop Iakovos, delivered special message for faith’s Palm Sunday observances. He said he believed “God permitted the agony of these last four days” to aid men in “overcoming the temporal with the spiritual, the temporary with the eternal.” Church and interfaith councils in St. Petersburg, Fla., made combined appeal for prayer in area churches and kept chapels open during day. In Marietta, Ohio, Jaycees completed petition containing 50 000 signatures, opposing efforts to ban prayers in broadcasts from space. Petition was later presented to space officials in Washington, D.C. Gov. Nelson D. Rockefeller proclaimed “day of prayer and thanksgiving” in New York State. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said crisis refuted claims that space exploration dealt fatal blow to religion. “The manner in which great numbers of Americans attended special prayer services. . . has been inspirational.” J. F. Meredith, treasurer of Central State Conference of the Seventh Day Adventists, said in Kansas City, “We feel that this points up the fact that despite all of man’s knowledge and ingenuity there is still a supreme being in control of things, and that we have to trust him.” (NYT, 4/20/70,28; 4/19/70, 54)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell visited Noerdlingen Crater near Tuebingen, West Germany, during field trip to familiarize themselves with kinds of rock they expected to find on moon. (AP, WPost, 8/12/70, A7) August 12: Development by MSFC scientists John W. Kaufman, Dennis W. Camp, and Robert E. Turner of “maxometer” that could record Seak hurricane velocities of more than 320 km per hr (200 mph), was escribed in Marshall Star. One version of maxometer was antispark severe-environment sensor that could withstand extreme temEeratures of Saturn rocket engine exhausts and acquire peak ex-aust-gas-flow speeds during launch. Other version was ambient environment sensor for recording peak wind speeds in thunderstorms, squall line activity, tornadoes, and hurricanes. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. had turned concept into dynamic pressure disc-spring device to measure 555-km-per-hr (345-mph) speeds to study air flow from launch of Saturn vehicles, essa had installed maxometer at National Hurricane Center at Miami and at Booth-ville, La., to gather hurricane data. (Marshall Star, 8/12/70, 1)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at Univ. of Colorado press conference in Denver that Apollo 14 could have been pushed through for 1970 launch. “But we’re still doing the undone, the untried, every time we venture into space—and we’re not prisoners of a time program.” NASA had decided to take extra month with less strain on all concerned. “There is much to be changed because of the lessons learned from Apollo 13.” (Lindberg, DPost, 7/16/70)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics ordered favorably reported H.R. 15695, FY 1971 NASA authorization with amendments that added $297.8 million to President Nixon’s budget request of $3,333 billion. New authorization total of $3,631 billion included addition of $144.9 million to Apollo budget request, for total Apollo allocation of $1.1 billion, and $155 million for space flight operations, making total of $670.2 million in that category. (H Rpt 91-929; CR, 3/12/70, D225; W Post, 3/13/70, A10)
NASA Hq. press briefing cited background events leading to scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. Moscow meeting on compatible space docking procedures and hardware [see Oct. 12]. Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said government-to-government discussions with U.S.S.R. had begun in 1962 “when some substantive possibilities were explored and. . .first agreements were reached.” These had included coordinated meteorological satellite projects, joint mapping of earth’s magnetic field in space for joint use of Echo satellites, and joint approach to publication of U.S. and U.S.S.R. achievements,in space medicine and biology. There had been “continuing overtures” since 1962, which “moved to a more accelerated pace beginning in.. .April 1970, when Dr. Paine took a personal interest in the problem and addressed a number of letters. . .to academician Keldysh.. .President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union.” Compatible docking procedures had been discussed for first time by Dr. Paine and Soviet academician Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov in New York in April 1970. Subject had been discussed on subsequent Moscow visits by Dr. Philip Handler, NAS President; Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman. First formal proposal for exploration of subject had been made by Dr. Paine in letter to Keldysh July 31, 1970. Frutkin said U.S.S.R. had chosen compatible docking for discussion out of “long list of initiatives from the U.S. side.” Space rescue and joint experiments had not been discussed. Release of news of impending U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussions’ [at future iaf space rescue committee meeting] from iaf conference in Constance, Germany, Oct. 8 had been coincidence; NASA overtures had been direct, not through iaf. (Transcript)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.—in Lucerne, Switzerland, on European goodwill tour—visited Swiss Transport Museum and Longines Planetarium. They were shown representation of view of earth from Mars. (nasa Hist Off)
New Haven Register editorial commented on intention of Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to end active participation in space after commanding Apollo 13 mission: “The space agency can ill afford to let go of Jim Lovell, whose 24 days in space give him a world’s record. When he concludes the Apollo 13 mission he will be, without doubt, the best qualified man in the agency. A top administrative post should be found for him.” (New Haven Register, 2/9/ 70)
Aircraft hijacking was discussed by David Hoffman in Washington Post: “That hijacking entails much more today than the Havana detour, a sidetrip costing passengers frayed nerves and the airline $3000, has begun to sink home in official Washington. It has now become an instrument of international policy, a play within a play about the cold war. Quite apart from whether a treaty might help, there exists no treaty. That testifies to the concern of governments, this one included.” {W Post, 9/9/70, A15) At meeting on future of Apollo, scientists proposed crater Tycho near moon’s south pole and Descartes, hilly region near Ocean of Storms, as sites for two of remaining four Apollo program lunar landings. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said, “If you had only two missions left to make, you’d send one of them to Tycho.” Tycho offered samples from area of one of last collisions of large meteor with lunar surface, samples from moon’s original southern hills, and samples from deep within moon that had come to surface after impact that had created Tycho. Flight path to and from Tycho would enable astronauts to photograph and examine almost half visible face of moon from lunar orbit. Astronauts could leave scientific instruments less than 1609 km (1000 mi) from moon’s south pole, to give earth-bound scientists listening post on lunar region that would otherwise go unexplored. Surveyor VII photos had shown Tycho landing to be strewn with many varieties of rocks. Difficulty with Tycho landing was that Apollo crew might have to use so much fuel getting to it that they would not have enough to return if they encountered difficulty on approach, Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., said. Donald K. Slayton, msc Chief of Flight Crew Operations, said NASA was studying possibility of Tycho landing: “Our position so far is that Tycho is a bad place. ... But, if we can figure the reasonable way to do it.. .and decide it’s a reasonable place to go, then Tycho becomes a candidate for landing.” Descartes, second site favored by scientists, contained relatively young volcanic material and also crust on surface away from volcanic highlands that might be as old as moon itself. It was thought to be one of two Apollo sites where tnoonquakes might be occurring; other was hills of Fra Mauro, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Alfred E. Ringwood of Australian National Univ. told seminar he had concluded from study of Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples that moon once had heat source 160-480 km (100-300 mi) beneath surface that was emitting 1500 K (2200°F) temperatures. Heat had emanated from abundance of radioactive minerals in moon’s depths, he proposed, and partially melted moon’s inner rock, which then flowed to lunar surface through pores or forced its way upward as it expanded where pores did not exist. Upswelling rock, Dr. Ringwood said, caused lunar features visible on moon’s face. He speculated that moon had lost most of its radioactivity and heat 2 billion yrs earlier. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, ARC scientist, said he had found “little bumps” of magnetism along lunar surface when studying signals from instruments left on moon. Bumps suggested that radioactive heat was coming to surface and causing parts of moon to behave as if they had magnetic field. Moon was “strong and rigid to depth of 200 mi [322 km],” Dr. Sonnett said, “but I believe that all you need is a porosity of about 10 per cent in that crust to have a warmer and more plastic material leak to the top.” Dr. Rolf Meisner of Univ. of Hawaii said analysis of data from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer led him to believe that moonquakes could not be caused by breaks in moon’s crust but were caused by warm gases escaping from beneath lunar surface in response to earth’s increased gravitational pull. He had recorded 14 moon-quakes, all of which seemed to come from about 240 km (150 mi) east-southeast of seismometer in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 was to land in February 1971. Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, argued that lunar maria contained dust and not lava. Lack of electrical activity of surface material and the way Apollo moonquake detectors had reacted to tremors and impacts could mean there was deep deposit of powder. Acoustical signal from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer was “compatible with a deep layer of a very homogenous nature in which the speed of sound is uniform.” (O’Toole, WPost, 9/12/70, A3; 9/13/70, A27; Hill, H Chron, 9/13/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, opened testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA FY 1971 authorization: “Apollo 11 and 12 demonstrated that we can fly across a quarter of a million miles [400 000 km] of space, land with precision, carry out research and exploration, and return safely to earth. We met our commitments for the decade of the sixties. Now we must chart a new course for the next decade in space. The Congress again shares with the Administration the responsibility for continuing progress and leadership in space and aeronautics. At the same time, NASA is going through a difficult period of redirection, and austere budget goals must be met. This is therefore a time of great challenge. But I firmly believe that with your support we can continue to forge ahead in space exploration, in science, in applications, and in aerospace technology. The program which we will lay before you, although austere, provides for balanced progress toward the challenging goals for the 1970’s and the decades to follow.” NASA budget as it came from President included “major reduction in space program,” to achieve balanced U.S. budget in “time of inflation.” By reducing operating base, making selective cut-backs, and deferring new starts NASA had developed program permitting progress toward SpaceTask Group’s Option II goals, but at reduced pace, [see Jan. 13 and Feb. 2], Dr. Paine noted it was significant that, “in a sharply reduced total budget, we have been able to increase our space applications efforts. Our aeronautics effort will also continue to be strengthened.” He urged Committee to keep in mind that proposed program “could not be conducted in the face of further cuts.” NASA had no plans to fly astronauts in space between last Apollo flight in 1974 and the time space shuttle would be operative in late 1970s. “Any significant reduction in our FY 1971 request will further extend this gap in American manned space flight, and reduce other important programs.” (Testimony)
Thomas O’Toole reported in Washington Post that NASA was considering canceling three of six remaining Apollo lunar landing missions so it could use Saturn V boosters to orbit Skylab space station. Although firm decision had not yet been made, NASA had “undertaken a top priority study to see if it might be feasible to cancel . . .the landings to divert funds into. . .an ‘intermediate’ space station that could be launched in 1976.” (W Post, 7/9/70, A12)
Post-Apollo 13 poll showed U.S. public was opposed by 64% to 30% to major space funding over next decade, Louis Harris reported in Chicago Tribune. Of 1520 persons polled, 55% said they were very worried about fate of Apollo 13 astronauts following mission abort, 24% were somewhat worried, 20% were not very worried, and 1% were not sure. Total of 71% expected fatal accident would occur on future mission, 18% thought it would not occur, and 11% were unsure. (CTrib, 6/25/70, F12)
Cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19 had eliminated six more astronauts from chance at moon trip, NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said in MSC interview. Of 49 astronauts on flight status, 39 had not yet flown in space. Many would not have opportunity for at least five years because of NASA budget cutbacks. Five astronauts had resigned since Apollo 11 lunar landing and further resignations were “very possible.” Slayton said he would not deter astronauts from resigning. “The facts of life are, we don’t need them.” (upi, NYT, 9/10/70, 54)
President Nixon appointed Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman his Special Representative on Prisoners of War. Borman would immediately undertake special mission to seek help of third parties in countries around world in “securing the humane treatment and earliest possible release of all Americans held by the enemy forces in Southeast Asia.” Borman would be on leave of absence from his executive position with Eastern Air Lines. (PD, 8/10/70, 1031)
NASA released photo of emblem selected by Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Fred W. Haise, Jr., for Apollo 13 mission. Emblem, designed by Lumen Martin Winter of New York, depicted three horses pulling sun chariot from earth to moon, with Latin phrase “Ex luna scientia” (From the moon, knowledge), (nasapao; B News, 1/25/70)
MSC announced NR had been awarded $4785 130 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo cm and SM contract. Agreement formally incorporated 26 changes previously authorized by NASA for modification to ground support equipment, for test and checkout of CSM, modification of flight and ground test hardware, and additional test-and-effect-analysis changes and brought total value of contract to $3.5 billion. (MSC Release 70-73)
First measurements of spectral reflectivity (0.30 to 1.10/x) of several asteroids using double-beam photometer on 152-cm (60-in) telescope of Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, Chile, and 152cm and 254-cm (100-in) telescopes of Mount Wilson Observatory, were described in Science by mit astronomers Thomas B. McCord and Torrence V. Johnson and astronomer John B. Adams of Caribbean Research Institute College of the Virgin Islands. Asteroid Vesta’s reflection spectrum contained strong absorption band centered near 0.9ju, and weaker absorption feature between 0.5 and 0.6fi. Reflectivity decreased strongly in uv. Reflection spectrum for Pallas and probably for Ceres asteroids did not contain 0.9fi band. Vesta showed “strongest and best defined” absorption bands yet seen in reflection spectrum for solid surface of object in solar system. Comparisons with measurements of meteorites and Apollo 11 samples indicated that Vesta surface had composition similar to that of certain basaltic achondrites. (Science, 6/19/70, 1445-7)
U.S.S.R. announced it had found Apollo experimental capsule (used for training and experiment) and would turn it over to uscg cutter Southwind at port of Murmansk. Cutter was on oceanographic expedition in area. U.S. Embassy sources in Moscow had said Soviet government had informed Embassy three weeks before that capsule had been found in Bay of Biscay, off France, by Murmansk fishermen. (NYT, 9/5/70, 5; NASA OMSF Pio)
Few people “really seem to care” that $375-million Apollo 13 mission “may never get off the ground tomorrow” because astronauts had been exposed to measles, Wall Street Journal said. Mission was inspiring “little excitement at ksc or elsewhere across the land.” Perhaps 100 000 tourists were on hand for event, “but that’s a small crowd compared with the million or so that came here for the first moon shot. . . .” There would be 700 newsmen, “far below the 2000 who covered the first shot.” (Tanner, WSJ, 4/10/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, during U.S.S.R. visit, told Soviet Academy of Sciences that he favored increased space cooperation and that development of space stations and shuttles was “most important” method of practical space usage. “I have found in my discussions with my Soviet cosmonaut colleagues that their objectives in space are very much the same as ours.” Armstrong said he would be glad to be member of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space crew. He felt Soyuz IX experiments in earth measurements would be useful to U.S. space program. In answer to question, Armstrong said he would ask “if I could take my family along” in volunteering for three-year Martian mission. (Clarity, NYT,, 6/4/70, 27)
Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin editorial commented on Apollo 13: “The ease with which Mr. Swigert fitted into the prime crew lineup would suggest that the real risks in the Apollo 13 mission are still the risks the public never sees or comprehends. These involve mechanical and electronic components beyond lay understanding. They are immediately interchangeable on Earth, but they lack the adaptability of Captain Lovell and his companions at the point of no return.” (P Bull, 4/12/70)
Use of range and Doppler tracking data to determine earth-moon mass ratio and mass of Mars was described in Science by jpl astronomers John D. Anderson, Leonard Efron, and S. Kuen Wong. Accurate navigation of Mariner VI and VII to Mars had required use of twoway, phase-coherent range and Doppler tracking data from nasa-jPLDeep Space Network. Coverage of both Mariners from launch to encounter with Mars, closest approach to Mars, and beyond had provided new information on ratio of mass of earth to that of moon; Mars gravity field, particularly planet’s mass; and ephemerides of Mars and earth. Data complemented Doppler data from Mariner IV with exception of inconsistency of about 0.0004% in values for mass of moon determined from lunar trajectories. Determinations of mass of Mars by Mariner IV and V/ were in agreement. (Science, 1/16/70, 277-9)
Max Lerner described reactions to Apollo 13 accident in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “What was I doing, glued to the TV screen like a zombie with the blood drained out me .. .? What was wrong with me—and with millions of others? ... we had all played the game of apathy up to that moment. . . confident that Apollo 13 was just one more sure-thing deployment of what man already proved he can do. The flight reports had to compete for newspaper space and, in some newspapers, were slipping into the inside pages.” After news of oxygen tank explosion “astronauts were no longer either three invincible heroes or three stooges for ‘the Establishment,’ but simply three human beings caught in space a quarter-million miles from home .... Through the plight of our proxies ... we caught a glimpse of how perilous man’s whole enterprise is, how tragic, in fact, his whole existence is in this shaky cosmos that runs by laws until you hit the unexplainable.” Apollo 13 was “a tiny, mobile version of the earth, with a power failure and the shortage of water and a danger of polluted air and the erratic fortunes of communicating and the image of three men having to read their instruments with a flashlight in the darkness of the cabin.” (P Bull, 4/20/70)
Explorer I. first U.S. satellite (launched Jan. 31. 1958), reentered the atmosphere over the South Pacific after completing 58 408 revolutions and traveling 2.67 billion kilometers (1.66 billion miles) during its 13-year lifetime. To celebrate the launch. Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Jet Propulsion Laboratory Feb. 17. 1958. Examining the spacecraft model with him (left to right above) were Dr. Clark B. Millikan. Director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Cal Tech: Dr. Lee A. Du Bridge, President of CalTech: Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPl; Dr. Jack E. Froehlich. Explorer Project Director at JPL; V, C. Larsen, Jr., Laboratory Administrator at ipl: and Robert J. Parks, Chief of JPl. Guidance Control Division. ty Associate Administrator for Planning, Dr, Wernher von Braun held press conference on NASA planning procedures: Skylab program would consist of four flights. First would be an unmanned flight boosted by two-stage Saturn V—only first and second stage, with third stage replaced by orbital workshop, now called Skylab. “It will be this country’s first orbital space station. Attached to this Skylab is an airlock module, and a multiple docking adapter, to which arriving command and service modules can dock for crew exchange. And ajso attached to it is the ATM.. .a manned solar observatory that will be serviced by the people living in the Skylab. One day after this Skylab has been launched into orbit and has deployed its solar panels, both on the ATM and the Skylab itself, it will be visited by a Saturn IB-launched command and service module, bringing the first crew complement of three. The command module will dock to the multiple docking adapter, the crew will slip through the docking adapter and the airlock, into the workshop. . . . And the men will stay up there for 28 days.” Crew would then “crawl back into their command module, detach.. .use the service module to deboost themselves, and the command module will reenter the ocean and make a normal Apollo landing. “About three months after the first flight, another flight will go up, and this time the crew stay.. .will be extended to 56 days. ... And finally, there will be a third revisit, again of 56 days, after which the third crew will descend. The Skylab will then go into storage and can potentially be reactivated any time thereafter if more revisits are planned.” Even without budget restraints, it would be “something like 1977 before we could have a [space] shuttle flying.” NASA was “in continuous touch with the Air Force” in space shuttle and space station field. “The armed forces. . .have the duty to look into everything that may have a defense aspect; and so it is entirely proper that they want to understand the ramifications of space.” (Transcript)
Pravda published year-end review of U.S.S.R. space activities by A. Dmitriyev. Soviet leadership was swinging full circle back to belief that Soviet approach was distinctly superior to that of U.S. Automatic spacecraft were cheaper than manned spacecraft but Soviet efforts were encompassing across-the-board capabilities—manned as well as unmanned. Main directions were systematic research in near-earth space using automatic vehicles and manned craft, moon and circumlunar space as testing ground for Soviet cosmonautics, and research of distant planets, primarily Venus, with aid of automatic devices. Recent Soviet accomplishments had paved way for significant breakthroughs in all of these directions. (AF Mag, 6/71, 54-9)
NR Space Div. had earned incentive award fees of $1006 080 and $643 200 under contracts for Apollo csm and Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II), NASA announced. Awards, determined by NASA Performance Evaluation Board, covered management performance during 1969. (NASA Release 70-52)
NASA announced selection of RCA Corp. Astro-Electronics Div. to receive $ 1.62-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for ground-command TV system for last four Apollo lunar exploration missions. System, which would permit color cameras to be operated either manually by astronauts on moon or remotely from earth, would be used with portable lunar communications relay unit (LCRU) being developed under separate RCA contract. (NASA Release 70-131)
Seismic signals obtained from seismograph carried by Apollo 12 crew at epicentral distance of 76 km (47.2 mi) from lm impact differed from any seen on earth, CornellUniv.radiophysi-cists Dr. Thomas Gold and Dn Steven Soter reported in Science. Signal caused by Apollo 12 lm was interpreted in terms of propagation between source and receiver through layer of powder in which sound velocity increased with depth. Increase, due to compaction, extended over several kilometers and led to concentration of seismic waves toward surface. Computer simulations using ray acoustics and based on assumption of randomly undulating lunar surface approximated the observed signal. Seismic amplitudes were enhanced in this medium over solid rock, so that observed signal required less power to be transmitted than previously estimated. (Science, 9/11/70,1071-5)	t
Lunar samples returned by U.S.S.R.’s Luna XVI (launched Sept. 12) contained less titanium and zirconium oxide and more ferric oxide than Apollo 11 samples, Soviet Academy of Sciences Vice President Aleksander Vinogradov was quoted as saying. Luna and Apollo samples “have an equally high content of space originated inert gases” but in overall composition the Luna XVI samples more closely resembed those from Apollo 12. Luna XVI material was fragmented basaltic type containing 70 chemical elements; granularity of soil increased with depth. Spherical, glazed formations of congealed droplets similar to those found by Apollo crews were present. Specific heat of lunar soil did not depend on density, Vinogradov said, and, “on the average, corresponds to terrestrial rocks, while heat conductivity is characterized by extremely low values, considerably below those of the best heat-insulating materials on Earth.... It may be assumed that the general course of differentiation of the substance of the Earth and of the Moon and probably of other planets of the terrestrial type proceeded by similar routes, although reached different stages of development.” (SBD, 11/3/70,8-9)
Advertisement offering “genuine” moon rock fragments at $1 per carat had been denounced as fraud by West German police in Frankfurt. Check with U.S. authorities had revealed fragments could not possibly have come from Apollo 11 samples, AP reported. (WPost, 1/16/70, A12)
Apollo 12 astronauts, on 40-day tour, arrived in Lima, Peru, from Caracas, Venezuela. They were greeted by about 5000 persons. (AP, WPost, 2/19/70, C7)
nbc estimated Apollo 13 splashdown TV audience at more than 40 million viewing portions of coverage from Houston Control or pickups from sea off American Samoa. Since millions abroad Watched event, “global total that joined in the final moment of relief probably can never be measured,” Jack Gould said in New York Times. ABC, CBS and NBC had “acquitted themselves most handsomely” during day “that added emotion to emotion before the climax that left a viewer almost drained of the powers of response.” Apollo Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Charles Conrad, Jr., and Eugene A. Cernan had assisted network commentators in reporting technical aspects of mission. “For the first time on TV, the viewer could see for himself the fruits of the imaginative training program of NASA.” Washington Post said networks “deserved the criticism they got for slow reaction to the unexpected danger. . .on Monday night” but “deserve praise today for the crisp, professional reporting and for some unusual restraint.” (NYT, 4/18/70; Laurent, WPost, 4/18/70, A12)
Progress report on plans for National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., was published in Astronautics and Aeronautics. During hearings on H.R. 6125, signed by President Johnson in July 1966, Smithsonian Institution had been enjoined from asking Congress for construction funding until after settlement of Vietnam War. Assistant Secretary for Science Sidney R. Galler was requesting FY 1971 funds of $2 million to reappraise architectural plans for museum and “listening for a ‘signal from Congress’ ” before asking for construction funds. In interim, small air and space display was housed in Smithsonian’s Arts and Industries Building and in small, temporary Air and Space Building. “The bulk of the 200 plus airframes and the 300-400 engines is stored at the Silver Hill (Maryland) Navy facility. About 80% of the stored collection is either in sheds or crates.” Museum plans were reviewed periodically to reflect latest in design. Until 747 aircraft and Apollo spacecraft, Smithsonian could house aerospace history displays. “The total Smithsonian annual budget runs about $30 million. The Air and Space portion amounted to $538 000 in 1969 or about 2% of the total. . . . S. Paul Johnston retired in September as Director of the National Air and Space Museum. Galler is still looking for a replacement.” (A&A, 2/70, 16-7)
Testimony on Apollo 13 mission was given before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator; Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director; and Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was unable to attend. Dr. Paine said: “The Apollo 13 mission was a failure. We did not succeed in America’s third lunar landing attempt and we were therefore unable to explore the moon’s Fra Mauro formation. This hilly region remains a high priority objective in our lunar program. . .. We cannot yet say which of the remaining Apollo missions will be sent there. Although the Apollo 13 mission failed, we regard the recovery actions that followed.. .as a gratifying success which will contribute greatly to the nation’s space flight competence.” There was no reason “why this setback should be—or should be made to be—the occasion for a major change in the course of the nation’s space program. We have clearly demonstrated the basic soundness of the Apollo system and of our operational procedures. ... From a technical standpoint, there is no question but that we are prepared to move forward in the 1970’s with the space program we have outlined to you....” Dr. Paine said President Nixon “fully shares this view.” (Testimony) Dr. Petrone testified: “This long arduous voyage continuously presented the challenge to balance the spacecraft systems required to perform necessary functions against the availability of consumables, of water, electrical power, oxygen, and the lithium hydroxide to remove the carbon dioxide. The options available to flight and ground crews in every case permitted acceptable courses of action to be selected. During this emergency situation, the remaining systems performed in an outstanding manner meeting the unusual demands placed upon them. At the same time, the flight and ground crews demonstrated exceptional confidence in meeting these sets of unusual circumstances.” Mission ended with “set of consumables which were within about two percent of what we had predicted back at 63 hours or about seven hours after the problem occurred,” Lunney told Committee. “If the consumable posture. . .had worsened or if we had absorbed another failure. . .we would have had to resort to scheduling communication times with the crew.” Although probably within 12 hours to 24 of running out of most critical consumable, water, “had we proceeded into.. .duty cycling the communications gear onboard, we probably could have stretched that period.” Astronaut Lovell described crew’s feelings during crisis: “We soon realized that our only hope of survival was to go into Aquarius, power up its systems and use the systems and the consumables on board. . .for a return home. And it was here that we realized that it was now a case of survival.” Spacecraft was on trajectory that “would have entered us in a sort of permanent orbit, some . 230. . .thousand miles [370 000 km] in apogee, and maybe a thousand [1600 km] or so in perigee. ... Again, the ground came through, and gave us. . .the free trajectory burn, which was required to get us back to earth. My main concern at this point was to get this spacecraft back within the earth’s atmosphere.” (Transcript)
Moon watchers in California and Oregon had reported splotches on moon’s surface during its closest approach to earth in August, Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said in telephone interview with Washington Evening Star. Reports were in response to Dr. Latham’s Aug. 10 alert to astronomers. Observations, coupled with recent series of simultaneous moonquakes, “may indicate the moon is not as cold and dead as we thought.” Dr. Latham said current sightings had not yet been verified, but he and colleagues at MSC and at Lamont Doherty Geological Observatory at Columbia Univ. had detected 160 moonquakes, 27 at time of moon’s closest approach to earth, in analysis of seven months’ data. Quakes had been mild, “about 1.4 on the Richter Scale.” (Lannan, W Star, 9/1/70, A4)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1971 budget to Congress said: “Man has ventured to the moon and returned—an awesome achievement. In determining the proper pace for future space activities, we must carefully weigh the potential benefits of: scientific research by unmanned spacecraft; continued exploration of the solar system, including manned exploration of the planets; and the application of space and aeronautics technology to the direct benefit of mankind. “I have reviewed many exciting alternatives for the future. Consistent with other national priorities, we shall seek to extend our capabilities in space—both manned and unmanned. I intend to do this within total space outlays 12% smaller than in 1970. In our current efforts, we will continue to stress additional uses of space technology. Our actions will make it possible to begin plans for a manned expedition to Mars.” President said national budget, first for which he bore full responsibility, fulfilled pledge to submit balanced FY 1971 budget. “This anti-inflationary budget begins the necessary process of reordering our national priorities. For the first time in two full decades, the Federal Government will spend more money on human resource programs than on national defense.” About 41% of estimated outlays would be devoted to spending for education and manpower, health, income security, and veterans benefits and services. Pollution control, crime reduction, transportation, and housing programs were “planned to grow substantially in the years ahead.” {PD, 2/9/ 70, 106-19)
Interagency Committee on Back Contamination notified NASA that Apollo 12 lunar samples and Surveyor parts could be released from lrl quarantine to principal investigators, (msc Release 70-7)
SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator carried to moon on board Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) completed one year of operation on lunar surface. SNAP-27 weighed 19.5 kg (43 lbs) and was designed to provide 63.5 w electrical power for one year. Scientists now expected lifetime to be five or six years. (SBD, 11/18/70,68)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent comprehensive medical examination at ksc, including laboratory tests' to determine their immunity to German measles (rubella). Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, said crew was “in good physical condition and good shape to carry out the mission and the lunar surface activities,” but expressed concern that astronauts could develop German measles during mission. They had been exposed to rubella virus when Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., member of backup crew, developed disease April 5. (Wilford, NYT, 4/7/70, 1)
Comment of Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Lunar and Earth Sciences Div., on learning of chemical composition of lunar samples brought from Sea of Fertility by Soviet Luna XVI spacecraft was quoted by New York Times. Dr. Gast had said Soviet analysis of material, reported at Oct. 28 Moscow news conference, indicated same relative abundances of some 11 major elements as found by U.S. scientists in Apollo 12 lunar samples from Ocean of Storms. Both differed significantly from relative abundances found in Sea of Tranquility rocks and soil returned by Apollo 11. Most striking difference in Sea of Fertility and Ocean of Storms material was titanium content. Sea of Tranquility material contained. 10% titanium dioxide; all soil and rocks from Ocean of Storms and Sea of Fertility contained under 5%. Dr. Gast said Sea of Fertility sample provided 50% additional data to that known previously on chemical composition of lunar surface. It was important and remarkable that analyses of Ocean of Storms and Sea of Tranquility data were so similar though sites were more than 1600 km (1000 mi) apart. (Schwartz, NYT, 11/15/70)
President Nixon made brief appearance at banquet for Republican leaders in Washington, D.C., after learning of Apollo 13 astronauts’ safe return. He told group that when he called mission commander James A. Lovell, Jr., after splashdown, Astronaut Lovell had said he was sorry mission had not been completed. “My reply,” President said, “was: ‘Captain, you and your colleagues did complete the mission.’ ” President told group, “After what happened this tumultuous week, let’s not take American wealth and strength for granted. . .where machines failed, we had to turn to man, and man came through.” President said it had been “proudest day of my life and in the life of the country.” Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said “social levelers of the New Left” would seize on Apollo 13 neardisaster to demand space budget be “soaked down into the nearest slum.” It would be “shortsighted tragic blunder” to heed warnings of “fair weather friends” of space program who were “readying the life-boats for a quick exit.” (Hope, W Star, 4/18/70, A2)
