Author Norman Mailer said in San Francisco that Americans were as interested in Apollo 14 as they would be in “border war in Bolivia.” He criticized images of astronauts projected by NASA. They were “tough men—daredevils” but nasa presented them as “priests.” NASA was “asking this country to love saints and Americans are not noted for that.” (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A24)
Two new clean rooms for checkout of Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) in Skylab program were being constructed at KSC. Control of temperature, humidity, and air in rooms would help prevent contamination of delicate lenses and other critical components of ATM experiments. (ksc Release 279-71)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 (launched May 19) and Mars 3 (launched May 28) were continuing to operate satisfactorily en route to Mars, Tass announced. By 6:00 am Moscow time (11:00 pm edt July 26) Mars 2 had completed 43 communications sessions and was 17 580 000 km (10 924 000 mi) from earth; Mars 3 had completed 38 sessions and was 16 400 000 km (10 190 000 mi) from earth. Data from Mars 2 and Mars 3 measurements of corpuscular beams of solar and galactic cosmic radiation had confirmed data from same measurements conducted by Lunokhod 1 lunar rover on moon. (Tass, fbis-Sov-144-3, 7/27/71, LI)
Lagos, Nigeria, Morning Post congratulated Apollo 15 astronauts for successful mission, which they attributed to ingenuity and resourcefulness of NASA. Lunar explorations, Post said, would strengthen faith in and appreciation of God’s work. (FBis-Nigeria-71-153, 8/11/71, W6)
ksc announced award of $99 189, 24-mo contract to Univ. of Florida for research and preparation of narrative history of icsc Apollo launch facilities and operations. Contract included option to extend for six months, (ksc Release 245—71)
Soviet scientist Boris Nepoklonov said in Tass interview that data from Lunokhod 1 (placed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970) would help define age of moon more precisely. Information showed that Sea of Rains was one of oldest lunar formations. Analysis of phototelevision panoramas had shown that large craters over 100 m (328 ft) in diameter had emerged several billion years ago, while small craters up to 10 m (32.8 ft) in diameter were millions of years younger. Study of lunar terrain showed many layers. Outer layer, from 0.2 to 0.5 mm (0.008 to 0.02 in), was loosest and had poor heat conductivity, which resulted in sharp temperature fluctuations on lunar surface within half hour. Denser layer beneath was strong enough to sustain weight of Lunokhod 1. Nepoklonov, scientific leader of Lunokhod 1 control team, said that information received from vehicle would be published in multivolume monograph. First book had already appeared. (fbis-Sov— 71-212-3, 11/3/71, L5-6)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., retired from nasa to become Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif. He had logged 289 hrs 53 min in space during astronaut career. (AP, W Post, 7/2/71, A3)
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory astronomers said in Cambridge that radio signals from Apollo 15 cm Endeavor had passed into radio “dead spot” behind moon on Aug. 3, faded away, and reappeared on receivers of observatory’s 46-m (150-ft) radio antenna two minutes later. Subsequent analyses had confirmed that signals had been transmitted through moon’s body. (AP, NYT, 11/13/71)
NASA announced tentative schedule for 12-day Apollo 15 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft, carrying three-man crew, would be launched from ksc at 9:34 am edt July 26. Apollo 15 lm would land near moon’s Hadley Rifle at about 6:15 pm edt July 30. Two astronauts would spend 67 hrs on moon making three trips across surface on lrv. Spacecraft and crew would splash down in Pacific at 4:46 edt pm Aug. 7. (nasa Release 71-73)
Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 lunar rock groups differed in potassiumuranium abundance systematics, jpl scientists Dr. Fraser P. Fanale and Douglas B. Nash reported in Science. Difference indicated “that relatively little exchange of regolith material has occurred between Mare Tranquillitatis [Sea of Tranquility] and Oceanus Procellarum [Ocean of Storms]. Two suites appear to have been derived from materials of identical potassium and uranium content.” It appeared unlikely “that bulk lunar material has the ratio of potassium to uranium found in chondrites. However, systematic differences in the potassium-uranium ratio between Apollo samples and crustal rocks of the earth do not preclude a common potassium-uranium ratio for bulk earth and lunar material.” (Science, 1/22/71, 282-4)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, announced at msc that Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had become first man to gain weight while in space. Other two crew members had lost weight: Edgar D. Mitchell had lost 0.5 kg (1 lb) and Stuart A. Roosa had lost 4.5 kg (10 lbs). Shepard had gained 0.5 kg (1 lb). NASA physicians were making fluid tests on astronauts to determine reason for weight loss during space flight. (Altman, NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented LM similar to those used for Apollo 11, 12, and 14 lunar landings to Michael Collins, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum and Apollo 11 astronaut. LM would remain on permanent display at museum. (Smithsonian Release 111—71; NASA PAo)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Apollo 14: “With 8400 million of taxpayers’ money behind it and the dubious future of manned spaceflight depending on it, the Apollo 14 mission to the moon ... is grimly earnest business.” If mission was successful there would be “another Apollo shot in midsummer, two more next year.” If it was not, there would be “a whale of a battle in Congress and elsewhere about appropriations and the wisdom of the whole idea.” {P Inq, 1/26/71)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa began preflight semiquarantine at ksc to minimize their exposure to disease or illness that could delay Jan. 31 liftoff toward moon. Astronauts would be restricted to three buildings and contacts would be limited to 160 persons, all of whom had undergone comprehensive medical examinations, (upi, W Star, 1/11/71, A9)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15 lunar landing: “Today, tomorrow and Monday will come the payoff for the years of work by the astronauts and thousands of others who made possible last night’s success. The trek across the moon’s surface these next three days will be the longest both in time and in distance to date, partly because of the availability of the lunar rover to permit moon rides as well as moon walks. The vast variety of geological conditions in the neighborhood of the Falcon’s landing site suggests that these excursions may be extremely fruitful.” (NYT, 7/31/71)
U.S. Postal Service public relations officers had asked Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to accompany cancellation of lunar landing commemorative stamp on moon during Apollo 11 mission with dialogue from two “casual, conversational” scripts, Julian W. Scheer, former nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, said in Washington Post article. “But NASA, figuring the first manned lunar landing was hairy enough without ceremonials, declined politely and, instead, Armstrong and Aldrin quietly canceled the first moon stamp and came home without postal fanfare.” Washington Post editorial commented on article: “While we have not cast the roles and read the script aloud, timer in hand, it is our definite impression that this spontaneous little exchange might have been good for the better part of one orbit of the moon and good also for a veritable barrage of phone calls from a flabbergasted public.” (W Post, 8/17/71, A14)
LeRC announced it was accurately producing and measuring surface contamination to spacecraft by harsh elements in outer space under simulated space vacuum conditions in liquid-helium-cooled space tank linked to computer. Facility could achieve and maintain very high vacuum. LeRC Aerospace Environment Branch also would study effect of exhaust from small reactor control thruster—like those used for Apollo attitude control—on optical properties of nearby surfaces in space, such as Skylab surface. (LeRC Release 71-6)
Role of radioelectronics in space was described in Pravda by Soviet Academician V. Andreyanov: “Radioelectronics might be called the nervous system of cosmonautics. It links our planet by living threads with the spacecraft and apparatuses when they fly to Mars, work on the moon, or study the earth and circumterrestrial space, like the Salyut station. In less than 15 years, research into space and the nearest planets has not only stimulated the development of many fields of science and technology but has also been accompanied by the emergence of new fields of knowledge and technical methods. A ‘spacifica-tion’ of the sciences had been noted. Concepts which were earlier unusual have also appeared in radioelectronics: space radio communications, space telemetry and television, space radionavigation, and radio methods for studying celestial bodies and interplanetary space.” (fbis-Sov-7 1-123, 6/23/71, L5)
Economist editorial discussed lunar science investigations: “The growing importance of all this peering at, prodding, pounding, baking and growing plants upon moon soil is that the results are contradicting most of the moon theories of the past 15 years. It is not often that scientific concepts are set by the ears, and the piquancy this time lies in the way that the bulk of serious scientists originally believed that putting men on the moon was an unnecessary extravagance; instruments and unmanned probes could do the job, they felt, for a fraction of the cost and none of the risk. But, as it turns out, they could not. The instruments that were sent to the moon ahead of the astronauts did not produce the same results that the actual collection of rock samples has done, and it will be interesting to see if the Russians have done any better out of the robot shovelling of Luna 16.” (Economist, 1/9/71)
Synthesis, without using water, of six amino acids that formed building blocks of life by exposing combination of formaldehyde, ammonia, methanol vapor, and formic acid vapor to uv light for 25 days, was reported in Nature by Columbia Univ. scientists Goesta Wollin and David B. Ericson. Because chemicals in combination had been identified in interstellar space, findings suggested life might arise on moon or waterless planet. (Nature, 10/29/71, 615-6)
Findings that linked light flashes experienced by astronauts in periods of otherwise total darkness to high-speed cosmic rays passing through eye retina were reported at nasa and American Nuclear Society Conference in Las Vegas, Nev. Findings were from studies by scientists of Univ. of Washington at Seattle and Univ. of California at Berkeley. Dr. Cornelius A. Tobias and Dr. Thomas F. Budinger of Univ. of California at Berkeley had twice exposed themselves to low doses of cyclotron-accelerated cosmic rays aimed at their eyes in effort to reproduce flashes described by Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Scientists said they saw flashes that differed from visual phenomena associated with x-rays or electrical and magnetic exposures. They concluded that flashes came from ionization and excitation of atoms in retina as it was bombarded by cosmic rays. Evidence indicated flashes were detected by retinal rods, structures in eyes that allowed night vision. Radiations were not believed to be hazardous to astronauts on short flights, but long-duration effects had not yet been evaluated. (Wilford, NYT, 3/4/71, 18)
President Nixon was host to Apollo 15 astronauts and families at White House dinner. (PD, 9/20/71, 1288)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn), Apollo Mission Director, discussed Apollo 14’s docking problems with press at MSC and assured press mission would continue toward moon as planned:	. . first of all we did have a successful docking and every indication is that it was a normal docking.” Engineers “have been making extensive analysis here and we can find nothing wrong with the probe. So far as we’re concerned it’s all operating. We do not fully understand why it did not operate or why the first attempts at docking were not successful. However, we are confident that the drogue ... is good. As to the cause, it could have been a foreign particle. ... we did ask the crew to look diligently for any foreign particles and they didn’t find any. . . . We did ask them to inspect the probe head very carefully ... to see if there were any foreign particles. We found none. If that were the problem, it apparently dislodged and is no longer there and is no longer causing a problem . . . and the probe certainly works now.” (Transcript)
New York Times editorial commented on discovery of water on lunar surface [see Oct. 15]: “The possibility that the water vapor that has now been detected on the moon was originally brought there by Apollo astronauts cannot yet be dismissed. Nevertheless, even before Drs. Freeman and Hills announced their finding it was becoming increasingly clear that the moon is a much more complex body than had been supposed. We are still in the very infancy of the era of moon exploration, and its development for the benefit of the human race.” (NYT, 10/19/71, 40)
Cold-cathode ion gauge left on moon by Apollo 14 astronauts had discovered first hard evidence of gas escaping from lunar surface, Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said at MSC. At same time, seismometer left at Apollo 14 mission landing site had detected moonquake, suggesting quake might have released gas from moon or that sudden venting of gas trapped in cavern beneath lunar surface initiated quake. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/71, Al)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for “most complex and carefully planned scientific expedition in the history of exploration.” (nasa Release 71—242)
Apollo 14 technical problems were discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in interview published by New York Times: “I feel that what we’ve seen on Apollo 14 is about the number of problems one must expect on any given flight with such a complicated piece of hardware. Yet the spacecraft design is such that it is forgiving of failures. And we hope we’ll always be able to work around them and press on with the mission.” (Witkin, NYT, 2/10/71)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins assumed duties as Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. He had served as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs after leaving NASA. (Smithsonian Ann; Smithsonian Pio)
Scientists at msc, after studying Apollo 14 photos and questioning crew, reported Astronauts Mitchell and Shepard had turned back within 25-50 m (80-165 ft) of Cone Crater during second eva period. Crew was apparently misled by slight downhill slope around top of Cone Crater which led them to believe it was not part of crater. Ridge astronauts were struggling to reach appeared to have been southeast of Cone. (AP, B Sun, 2/17/71, Al)
Federal court in Orlando, Fla., had dismissed $5-million damage suit filed by widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, on grounds it was filed after statute of limitations expired, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 5/13/71, A9)
Third attempt to test manned Apollo 15 LM in simulated environment was completed at KSC. Two attempts during previous week had been unsuccessful because technician failed to open oxygen valve and because two oxygen regulators failed. (SBD, 4/7/71, 192)
nasa published Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Report (nasa SP—190). In foreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus), apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had achieved secondary objective, “to gain engineering experience by converting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been 10% less than anticipated. (Text) During 1971: U.S. orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches—including Apollo 14 and 15 csms Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with lms Antares and Falcon and their S—IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1; France, 1; Italy, 2 (1 for U.S. on U.S. booster); and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for USAF on behalf of NATO, 1 for France, and 1 for U.K. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launches of Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equipment transporter, used for first time on Apollo 14 to carry equipment and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astronauts traveled 28 km (17.4 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled, battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover and collected 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about 4 billion yrs old. Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began transmitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehicle malfunctioned at launch. Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory—rescued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command—made first x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had “polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included lntelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F—3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as secondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Oso 7. All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year. In joint NASA—usaf lifting-body program, M2—F3 and X—24A lifting bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3. X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing program and beginning modification for new flight program as X—24B. In aeronautics NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing - made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully demonstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA CH—54B helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798 ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New v/stol Wind Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine successfully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) transport U.S.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957-1971 Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond aircraft, sst program ended, with Congress voting to terminate program. In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astronomical observations in x-ray, uv, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum. DOD’s 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs-2) military comsats, 2 ov—i scientific satellites, and Cannonball 2 and Mmketball. U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights. The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya II, and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew, Summary of Soviet and United States Space Payloads by Mission Category Soviet Union						United States 1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total		1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total Earth orbital science			 5	10	3	9	7	59	12	16	14	4	11	137 Earth orbital engineering								6	1	5	1	10	50 Communications				...... 4	4	2	5	3	23	19	11	6	6	6	83 Navigation/ferret			6	6	16	27	84	3	1		1 .		25 1	1	1	1 .		17 Military observation: Low orbit recoverable			 22	29	32	29	28	202	19	16	12	9	7	198 Low orbit nonrecover 		..... 8	10	12	12	12	67	7	7	11	4	6	77 4 .						10 Synchronous or higher 								2	1	3	5	1	18 Q	2	1	2	1	17 . 9	5	2	4	8	25 . Earth orbit man-related 			 3	4		i	2	20	1 .		1 .			11 Earth orbit manned			1	5	i	3	19 .						14 Lunar man-related			3	1	2 .		8	1	2 ,		1	3	13 Moon-unmanned programs			1	3	3	2	25	8	1 ,				21 Venus 		...... 2 .		2	2 .		17	1 .					2 5	10 .			2 .		1	5 Subtotal 				77	71	91	102	602	87	64	66	39	53	764 Orbital launch platforms			 6	8	6	10	7	59 . From Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Staff Report, Soviet Space Programs, 1971, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., April 1972, p. 5. ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971	During 1971 successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth reentry because of improperly sealed hatch. Mars 2 and Mars 3 dropped instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night. Japan launched two satellites—Tansei and Shinsei. China launched Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and Italy launched San Marco 3. (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Lifting Body Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon, United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72) • NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-developed inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration—in environmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agriculture. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space missions. And balanced program of space and ^aeronautics, despite low funding level, continued to raise U.S. prestige as aerospace pioneer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, however, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in U.S. and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about double U.S. peak expenditure of l°/o of GNP when combined nasa-dod space program was at highest level and four times present level. Dr. James C. Fletcher was nominated new nasa Administrator by President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s third Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970, to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim. Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, nasa in 1971 continued phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14 and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 17 to complete program later in year. Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, delaying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle, nerva nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bioscience funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as in NASA’s. During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared completion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design contracts were extended so that nasa could examine alternative configurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle development. In erts program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitoring of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation, and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned 1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manufacturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation. To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for additional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society. Among NASA projects were nsf contract to investigate use of solar cells to electrify homes and buildings and hud contract to study application of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint nasa-dot study resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&d policy (card). Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of amino acids—building blocks of life—in second meteorite. Discovery strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe. NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion was $27 million more than requested $3,271 billion and $29 million above FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion—halting downward trend but far below 1965 peak of $5,250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72, Al; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70, Senate Doc 92-51)
Special medallion to commemorate 1971 quadricentennial of Johannes Kepler was issued by American Museum-Hayden Planetarium. Kepler —born Dec. 16, 1571—had founded science of optics, was first to ascribe tides to moon, shaped much of comet theory, and came close to theory of gravity. His Somnium, highly technical “dream” of voyage to moon, had been first work of modern science fiction. (American Museum-Hayden Planetarium Release, 8/13/71) Section on History of Aircraft, Rocket, and Space Science and Technology was held Aug. 19. Paper “The Historiography of Rocket Technology and Space Exploration” submitted by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, was summarized at meeting by Dr. Lloyd S. Swensen, Jr., of Univ. of Houston. Paper covered features of evolution of rocket technology pertaining to beginning of space exploration and exploitation and discussed work of international pioneers like Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Robert H. Goddard, and Hermann Oberth, who became interested in space exploration before deducing that liquid-propellant reactive thrust was the best technology. Dr. Swenson, coauthor of book This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, presented his own paper “On the Mixture of Science and Technology in the Apollo 8 Circumlunar and the Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Missions.” Paper examined effect of internal pressures on overall posture and achievements of Apollo project as illustrated by Apollo 10 and 11. Anatoly A. Blagonravov and V. N. Sokolsky of Soviet Academy of Sciences submitted paper on “Main Lines of Research in the Field of the History of Aeronautics and Astronautics.” (Program; NASA Hist Off)
Long-term commitment and definition of policy for storage and curatorial handling of lunar materials had been urged by Cal Tech scientist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, AP reported. A principal investigator of lunar material, Dr. Wasserburg had said lack of planning and handling could deny future generations use of moon rocks now being studied. (P Bull, 8/19/71)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 14 lunar landing: “. . . no one who sat entranced before the picture of yesterday’s historic events can have doubted that Antares has scored a major triumph in the effort to advance lunar exploration. Today Shepard and Mitchell will face new problems and grasp new opportunities as they lope their way toward Cone Crater and its geological riches. These two brave and highly skilled men—along with their partner, astronaut Roosa, in lunar-orbiting Kitty Hawk—are writing another brilliant and memorable chapter in man’s still-infant probing of earth’s nearest neighbor in the vast reaches of space.” (NYT, 2/6/71, 28)
Washington Post editorial criticized nasa agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for byline articles by Apollo 15 astronauts [see July 23] and reprinted excerpt from Sept. 19, 1963, New York Times editorial that had scored earlier NASA agreement with publications. Post said: “. . . we would like to record . . . some reservations about the practice of commercializing the space program by permitting any of its official participants to sell personal accounts of their experiences. Strictly in legal terms, there is not much doubt that such material is subject to copyright protection. But, leaving aside regulations, there is a question of propriety, first raised back in 1963, when the Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine nailed down contracts totaling $1 million for the personal stories of 16 astronauts over a four-year span.” New York Times editorial in 1963 had said sale of astronauts’ stories represented “stain of commercialism on the record of the space program,” and that astronauts “should not be permitted to reap enormous private profits from outside sources on the basis of their participation in a great national effort.” (W Post, 7/29/71, A14)
Appointment of James T. Murphy as Director of faa Office of Air Transportation Security was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Murphy, former fbi special agent, had been serving on acting basis since May 1971. (faa Release 71-153) September 24^-25: Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were honored by usaf Academy at Colorado Springs, Colo., with parade and special civic day. They received usaf Distinguished Service Medals from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 unmanned lunar rover explored 457-m (500-yd) crater on moon, made chemical analysis of soil, photographed area around crater, and “engaged in Cosmo-physical measurements,” Tass announced, (upi, W Star, 3/14/71, A15)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of representatives and alternates to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly. They included Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of msc Astronaut Office, as alternate. {PD, 9/13/71,1257, 1261) C.	Jones presented papers on space vehicle docking mechanisms. (nasa Release 71—169; arc Astrogram, 9/16/71, 1)
NASA announced prime and backup crews for Apollo 16 mission, scheduled - for launch in March 1972. Prime crewmen were John W. Young (commander), Thomas K. Mattingly II (cm pilot), and Charles M. Duke, Jr. (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were Fred W. Haise, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Mission would last about 12 days, with lunar surface stay time of about 67 hrs—including three eva periods totaling about 20 hrs. Site for lunar landing had not yet been selected. (nasa Release 71-31)
Retirement of Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., from NASA and usn, effective Jan. 1, 1972, was announced by nasa. Gordon, pilot of Gemini II (Sept. 12-15, 1966) and cm pilot for Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969), would join John W. Mecom, Jr., organization in New Orleans, La. Retirement would reduce number of astronauts to 46. (nasa Release 71—243)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Miami in Oxford, Ohio. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
Apollo program’s contribution to lunar science was praised in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial: “Apollo has taken lunar exploration out of the hands of tree-full-of-owls theorists and put it into the care of the lunar explorers, who will eventually provide sufficient data to unravel some of the major mysteries of the moon and our universe.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 8/19/71, 7)
President Nixon announced appointments to Citizen’s Advisory Committee on Environmental Quality, including Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman. {PD, 7/19/71, 1056)
Age of Apollo 15 “Genesis rock” was approximately 4.15 billion years, Dr. Liaquat Husain and Dr. John F. Sutter, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientists, announced at press conference. Anorthosite sample brought hack by Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin during July 26-Aug. 7 mission was 150 million yrs older than oldest Apollo 12 rock, Husain said. “This is the oldest lunar rock found on any of the missions so far.” (Fine grains of soil from earlier missions had been found to be nearly 4.5 billion yrs old and one Apollo 12 rock had contained some fragments that had crystallized 4.5	billion yrs ago but rock itself was thought to have solidified 4 billion yrs ago.) Although rock’s age was not the hoped 4.6 billion yrs—estimated age of solar system—it supported theory that moon was once molten mass. Scientists said precise age of rock could range from 3.95 to 4.35 billion yrs. Further tests had been scheduled to narrow margin. Age had been determined by measuring relationship of radioactive potassium and argon in rock samples using rare-gas mass spectrometer and nuclear reactor. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said,
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received 14th annual Sylvanus Thayer Award from U.S. Military Academy Assn, of Graduates in ceremony at West Point, N.Y. Citation read: “For his selfless devotion to this nation’s aviation and space efforts reflecting the ideals symbolized in the West Point motto—Duty, Honor, Country. His outstanding accomplishments, spanning more than two decades of aeronautical history, have made him an acknowledged leader among American space pioneers.” Earlier he received sabre from 1800-member cadet corps and told cadets, “As I stood on the Sea of Tranquility and looked up at the Earth, my impression was of the importance of the small, fragile, remote blue planet.” Asked about future of U.S. space programs, Armstrong told press, “I am certainly optimistic, but we’re doing considerably less than we’d like to. But space is here to stay for all humanity.” (nasa pao; Everly, AP, NY Post, 5/5/71, 17)
KSC launch complex where Apollo 15 spacecraft and Saturn V booster stood ready for liftoff had been struck by lightning 11 times during past six weeks, Washington Post reported. First strike, June 14, had been equivalent to 98 000 amps—almost three times as powerful as average lightning strike and two thirds as strong as biggest lightning strike ever recorded in Florida. Two more strikes had followed within 15 min of each other and a 31 000-amp strike had hit launch pad one day later. On July 20 five separate lightning bolts with total amperage July 26-August 7: ApoJlo 15 carried three astronauts on the fourth successful lunar landing mission, returning them with 77 kilograms {170 pounds) of samples after 66 hours 55 minutes on. the moon’s surface. During prelaunch activities in Firing Room 1 of the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Control Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, Nisi. Administrator {right), spoke utith nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders; i/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), former Apollo Program Director; and Dr. Wernher tton Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning (left to right). of almost 100 000 amps had been recorded. Ninth strike of 22000 amps had occurred June 25, and last—weakest to date at 6600 amps— had occurred July 19, Neither spacecraft nor launch vehicle had been damaged. Apollo 15 was first spacecraft to have even a near miss from lightning strikes while being prepared for launch. [W Post, 7/25/71, A16) July 26—August 7: nasa’b Apollo J5 (AS—510) carried three-man crew on fourth successful lunar landing mission. LM-10 Falcon landed on moon’s Hadley-Apennine region and two astronauts conducted experiments, rode first manned lunar roving vehicle (lrv) on moon, and explored lunar surface. After 66 hrs 55 min on surface, Falcon rejoined orbiting CSM-112 Endeavor and astronauts transfered for safe return to earth with lunar samples, Spacecraft and S-1VB combination entered parking orbit with 171.4-km (106.5-mi) apogee and 169.4-km (105.3-mi) perigee. Translunar injection (tu) was achieved at 2:56 get and csm separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:22 get. Docking of csm with lm at 3:34 get was shown clearly by onboard color TV. S-IVB aps burns were conducted at 5:48 get and 10:00 get to send stage toward moon. Separated S-IVB/iU impacted lunar surface at 79:25 get (4:59 pm edt July 29) at 1° south latitude and 11.9° west longitude, 188 km (117 mi) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site and 355 km (221 mi) northeast of Apollo .12 landing site. Impact was detected by Apollo 14 seismometer 37 sec after impact and by Apollo 12 seismometer 55 sec after impact. . First midcourse correction (MCC-1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Shortly after csm-lm docking, telemetry data indicated electrical short in service propulsion system (sps). Troubleshooting isolated problem and MCC—2 at 28:41 get used sps bank A to analyze apparent intermittent short. Data indicated bank A could be safely operated manually. Modified procedures were developed for using bank B alone for remaining midcourse corrections except lunar orbit and transearth insertions, which would be dual bank burns. Scott and Irwin entered lm at 33:56 get, 50 min earlier than planned, to check out LM communications and other systems. TV pictures of csm and lm interiors were shown between 34:55 and 35:46 get. During checkout crew discovered range/range-rate exterior glass cover had broken, removing helium barrier. Crew began lm housekeeping V/2 hrs earlier than scheduled and vacuumed broken glass. At 61:13 Get, during preparations for water chlorination, water leak developed in cm chlorination septum gland but was stopped by crew, following repair instructions from ground, and water was absorbed with towels. Door of scientific instrument module (sim) was jettisoned at 74:06 get. July 29—August 4: Apollo 15 entered lunar orbit with 314.8-km (195.6-mi) apolune and 107.5-km (66.8-mi) perilune after LOI burn at 78:32 get (4:06 pm edt July 29). “This is really profound . . . it’s fantastic,” Scott said of view from moon. Apennine Mountains looked unreal. “They stand out in tremendous relief. They appear to be smooth or rounded. But they are cratered and in many places rough in texture. We don’t see any jagged peaks. They don’t look like . . . any other mountains we’ve seen on earth.” csm-lm undocking and separation maneuver was initiated during 12th lunar revolution, on far side of moon at 100:14 get, but spacecraft did not undock. Worden entered tunnel to inspect csm—LM umbilical and found plug was loose. After he reconnected plug and adjusted spacecraft attitude, undocking and separation were achieved at 100:39 get—about 25 min later than planned. lm Falcon touched down in moon’s Hadley-Apennine region near Salyut Crater at 104:42 get (6:16 pm edt July 30) about 600 m (656 yds) north-northwest of planned target. “OK Houston,” Scott said after touchdown, “the Falcon is on the plain at Hadley.” He said LM’s engine had stirred up so much dust that landing site had been completely obscured from 15-m (50-ft) altitude to touchdown: “We flew ifr from then on down.”	> Stand-up extravehicular activity (seva) to observe and photograph landing site and surrounding area began after cabin depressurization at 106:43 get. Scott put his head out of upper hatch and described and photographed area for 33 min. Scott said he could describe site July 29-August 4; Apollo IS entered lunar orbit July 29 and the lm Falcon touched down in the moon’s Hadley-Apennine region July SO for three eva periods of exploration. The lunar room# vehicle Rover, deployed during the first EVA July 31, was photographed by Astronaut James B. Irwin near Hadley RiUe (right center above), with the Hadley Delta in the background and St. George Crater partially visible at the upper right edge. Astronaut David R. Scott was working at the Rover. In the photo at right Irwin scooped a trench, with Mount Hadley in the background. A gnomon indicated the local vertical and the sun angle. Meanwhile CM pilot Alfred M. Worden, orbiting Hie moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography. for hours. Area was covered with craters, but strewn with very few large boulders; it was hilly, hut not rocky or rugged. First EVA began July 31 at 9:04 am EDT. Scott climbed down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded his descent, and stepped on lunar surface. Irwin followed and, while Scott removed TV camera from mesa and deployed it on tripod, Irwin collected contingency sample. Crew had difficulty deploying lev Rover; during checkout they found that front steering mechanism was inoperative and that there were no readouts on lev battery No. 2 amp-volt meter. Battery was found to be operating satisfactorily and decision was made to perform EVA-1 without LEV front-wheel steering. Crew mounted LEV and proceeded on EVA-1 traverse at 121:45 CET. Crew described EVA as “exploration at its greatest," and repeatedly used words “fantastic,” “breathtaking,” and “spectacular” to describe features as they rode Lrv at about eight km per hr {five mph). Scott said Rover handled quite well: “It negotiates small craters quite well, although there is a lot of roll. The steering is quite responsive . . . and 1 can maneuver pretty well. . . . There is no accumulation of dirt in the wire wheels.” Stops at stations where crew collected lunar samples and took photos were broadcast on TV with excellent transmission. At end of traverse alsef was deployed. Scott and Irwin reentered LM after 6 hrs 33 min exploring surface, 28 min sooner than planned because Scott used up more oxygen than anticipated.	' After resting inside LM, recharging and repairing portable life support system (plss), and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:15 get (7:49 am Edt Aug. 1). Lrv was powered up, circuit breakers were cycled, and lrv front steering was found to be completely operational. EVA—2 traverse included stops at Spur Crater, Dune Crater, Hadley Plains, and area between Spur and Window craters. Numerous samples and photos were obtained and TV transmission was good. Crew completed heat Sow experiment initiated during EVA—1, collected core sample, and deployed U.S. flag. After stowing sample container and him in LM, astronauts reentered LM at 149:27 GET, after 7 hrs 12 min on surface during EVA-2. Third eva began at 163:18 get (4:52 am edt Aug. 2), 1 hr 45 min later than planned because of cumulative changes in surface activities timeline. Late start and requirement to protect nominal liftoff time required shortening EVA. Alternate EVA plan was devised with traverse west from lm to Hadley Rifle. Astronauts traveled to Scarp Crater, “The Terrace” near Rim Crater, and Rim Crater, collecting samples and photographing lunar surface features. Scott tripped over a rock July 29-August 4: The command and service modules were photographed in lunar orbit from the lunar module, giving a view of the scientific instrument module (sim) bay, housing cameras and sensors to record data from the moon’s surface and atmosphere. and fell, but experienced no difficulty in getting up. Astronauts retrieved drill-core-stern sections and samples near ALSEP, returned to LM, off-loaded LRV and stationed it for TV coverage of lm liftoff, and reentered lm at 168:08 get, after 4 hrs 50 min—bringing total EVA time to 18 hrs 35 min. While lm was on moon Worden, orbiting moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. His observations included discovery of fields of cinder cones made by volcanic eruptions, delineation of landslide or rock glacier on northwest rim of crater on lunar farside, interpretation of ray-excluded 2one around crater P roc ulus as result of fault system, and discovery of layers on interior walls of several craters, suggesting volcanic collapse craters of calderas in maria. Scott and Irwin depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized LM, and lifted off lunar surface with 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples at 171:34' get (1:11 pm edt Aug. 2)—66 hrs 55 min after landing on moon. Liftoff, accompanied by usaf anthem “Off We Go Into The Wild Blue Yonder” taped and broadcast by astronauts from LM, was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully at 173:36 GET, as TV viewers watched. Scott and Irwin transferred from LM to csm with samples, equipment, and film, csm-lm separation and LM jettison were delayed one revolution to verify that CSM and LM hatches were completely sealed, LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 26° 22' north latitude and 15' east longitude at 181:30 get, 93 km (59 mi) west of Apollo 15 alsep site. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, Apollo 14, and Apollo 15 seismometers. Orbit-shaping maneuver was performed during 73rd lunar revolution in preparation for subsatellite launch. Scientific subsatellite was launched at 222:39 get (4:13 pm edt Aug. 4) into lunar orbit with 141.3-km (87.8-mi) apolune and 102.0-km (63.4-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 36-kg (80-lb) satellite 79 cm (31 in) long and 36 cm (14 in) in diameter carried three experiments and was housed in SIM bay with seven other new experiments. Satellite extended three l^-m (5-ft) booms, one with magnetometer to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and two for stabilization. Satellite also carried charged-particle sensors and equipment to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Transearth injection maneuver at 223:49 get put CSM on trajectory for home after 85 hrs 18 min (74 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Endeavour separated from sm at 294:44 get. Drogue and main parachutes deployed but one of three main parachutes partially closed during descent, causing harder landing than expected. CM splashed down in mid-Pacific about 10.1 km (5.5 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. Okinawa at 295:12 get (4:47 pm edt Aug. 7)-—12 days 7 hrs 12 min after liftoff. Astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, were carried by helicopter to biomed area* on recovery ship for post-flight examinations. After being declared in very good shape, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam afb, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. CM was retrieved and placed on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb, and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 15 objectives: to make seleno-logical survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Hadley-Apennine region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased eva operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for intermittent short circuit in Delta V thrust switch A, CSM—LM failure to undock properly, and increase in CM tunnel pressure preceding lm jettison. Flight crew performance was excellent. Accomplishments included first use of Lrv, lunar surface navigation device, direct lunar communications without lm relay, and ground-controlled remotely operated TV camera on moon; largest payload in earth orbit (140 310 kg; 309 330 lbs) and largest payload in lunar orbit (33 803 kg; 74 522 lbs); longest lunar surface stay time, lunar surface eva, distance traversed on lunar surface (28 km; 17.4 mi), and lunar orbit time (74 orbits); first subsatellite launched in lunar orbit; and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth. Apollo 15 was 12th Apollo mission to date, 9th manned Apollo mission, and 4th successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 14 mission had been conducted Jan. 31—Feb. 3. Apollo program was directed by OMSf; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by CSFC under overall direction of otda. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 7/26-8/7/71; W Post, 7/27-8/8/71; gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; nasa Special Release; NASA Release 71-119K; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/71, A1; AP, W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Bemaining “puzzles” of solar system pattern were discussed by Walter Sullivan in New York Times article: General assumption was that sun, planets, and moons had been formed from “swirling, flattened cloud of material.” But: “Why does Mars have two tiny moons, each only a few miles in diameter, yet our moon is a quarter the diameter of the earth? Why do some of the outer moons of Jupiter go the ‘wrong way’—counter clockwise—around that huge planet? Why is the earth’s moon formed of a different mix of elements from that constituting the earth?” Recent information had “illuminated these questions though it had not resolved them.” Earth’s moon was giving off “far more heat than had been predicted on the basis of assumptions of how it was formed.” Mariner 9 photos of the two Mars moons had shown both to be irregular chunks “rather than systematically spherical bodies in the manner normally attributed to moons and planets.” George Washington Univ. scientist J. Martyn Bailey had proposed that all seven of Jupiter’s outer moons were asteroids captured by that planet’s powerful gravity and that Jupiter’s clockwise moons had been captured when planet was farthest from sun, while counter-clockwise moons had been captured when Jupiter was nearest sun. Lunar Science Institute scientists had agreed there had been sufficient sorting and layering on earth’s moon to produce radioactive crust that could account for heat flow. Information on two Martian moons had indicated that Phobos and Deimos looked much like asteroidal fragments but that did not prove that they were captured asteroids. They could have been formed as spherical moons from material left when Mars was being created and later “battered into their irregular shapes.” (NYT, 12/5/71, 4:8)
Soviet President Nikolay Podgorny sent message to President Nixon: “Please accept . . . our congratulations on the successful conclusion of the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 14 and on the safe return of the American astronauts.” Tass said he also asked President Nixon to forward best wishes to “courageous crew.” (Reuters, C Trib, 2/11/71)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, scheduled to become first scientist-astronaut on moon during Apollo 17 mission, addressed 41st annual international meeting of Society of Exploration Geophysicists in Houston, Tex. Dr. Schmitt said lunar exploration “is permanently terminating for this generation and may be for future generations.” Chances for collecting data from moon were “decreasing rapidly.” In response to questions Dr. Schmitt said mankind’s future could depend on scientific understanding of knowledge being gathered during Apollo program. (Atlanta J&C, 11/14/71)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held press conference at msc. Astronauts described plans for Jan. 31 lunar landing mission and said they were eager to fly on what Mitchell called “a more mature spacecraft” in which “residual risks go down.” (Lannan, W Star, 1/11/71, A4)
New York Times editorial praised results of Apollo lunar exploration and noted there was “much more that men have to learn about this puzzling neighbor in space.” It had been reported that NASA might have to cancel Apollo 16 and 17 for budgetary reasons. “Such action would confirm the widespread suspicion that the United States was less interested in the scientific results of lunar exploration than in the prestige of being the first nation to land men on the moon.” Announcement that Soviet flag had been dropped on Mars might, however, “impel the Administration to decide that this is not the time for the United States to end its scientific bridgehead on the moon. It is the promising research prospects from continued lunar study, not Soviet space competition, that give the really valid motivation for continuing the Apollo program to the extent that existing hardware, including the already-manufactured equipment for Apollos 16 and 17, permits.” (NYT, 12/5/71, 4:10)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover was activated following eighth lunar night since vehicle was landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970.	Temperature in instrumentation compartment was 295 K (72°F), pressure was 100 375 newtons per sq m (753 mm mercury), and all systems were functioning satisfactorily. (Tass, fbis-Sov-129-3, 7/6/71, LI)
Election of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins to International Aerospace Hall of Fame was announced by Hall of Fame President Martin R. Engler, Jr. Awards for 1971 would be presented to astronauts in San Diego, Calif., Oct. 23. Astronauts had been nominated “in view of their epic flight and its representation as one of the greatest single scientific achievements in the history of man.” (Letter to nasa Historian)
Safely back on earth after a nine-day journey to explore the surface of the moon, the Apollo 14 astronauts watched a pararescueman close their command module hatch following splashdown in the planned Pacific Ocean landing tone. of spectrum was high. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Data would be compared with data from similar launch jan. 29. (NASA Rpt srl; NASA Release 71-1)
NASA announced availability of two new publications. First, Implantable Biotelemetry Systems (SP—5094), listed biomedical telemetering instruments developed by NASA for monitoring physiological functions in human beings and animals and described devices and techniques for radiotelemetry physiological monitoring. Analysis of Apollo 10 Photography and Visual Observations (SP—232) described Apollo 10 mission and contained miniature halftones of photos taken by Apollo 10 astronauts, which could be obtained for study, (nasa Release 71-30; nasa Hq WB, 7/12/28)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial praised Apollo 15 crew: “Their workmanlike approach to arduous tasks, combined with fascinating descriptive commentary, gave Scott and Irwin good credits for showmanship as well as technical expertise. And the superb orchestration from mission control in Houston with Joseph Allen directing the score with the precision of a maestro on the podium, added an esthetic touch to a performance that should win raves from drama critics as well as space buffs. All concerned with Apollo 15 rate the nation’s applause for an almost flawless performance thus far.” (P Inq, 8/7/7\)
wttg—tv in Washington, D.C., carried one-hour special telecast “Giant Leap for Mankind.” Program reviewed Apollo program and described NASA future plans, (nasa Special Ann, 8/18/71; NASA pao)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight. Freedom 7—Mercury spacecraft launched May 5, 1961—had achieved objective of putting man into suborbital flight when Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., went to 185-km (115-mi) altitude during 15-min flight. Anniversary was observed at KSC with exhibition of Mercury spacecraft and Redstone launch vehicle in main auditorium, motion pictures on Freedom 7 and Apollo 14, and guided tours. Following commemorative ceremony, Shepard visited Freedom 7 Elementary School in Cocoa Beach, Fla., where he told students he had made his last venture into space and would step aside to give younger astronauts a chance, (msc Release 71-28; msc pao; W Star, 5/6/71)
Apollo 14 astronauts completed test of ability to react to inflight emergencies in ksc simulators. During four-hour session, engineers simulated malfunctions that could occur during flight and monitored astronaut reactions. (AP, B Sun, 1/28/71, A10)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, described Apollo 15 crew’s medical status to press at msc. Astronauts James B. Irwin and David R. Scott had suffered brief periods of irregular heart rhythm on moon, probably as a result of extreme fatigue. Irwin also had dizzy spells in space. Arythmic heartbeats and dizziness had not been disclosed to press earlier, Dr. Berry said, because tests were still being conducted and complete information was not known. Until Aug. 13 Irwin was still suffering from effects of weightlessness; he still had mild dizzy spells and, when lying prone, felt as if his bed were tilted downward about 30°. Astronaut Alfred M. Worden’s medical data during transearth coast EVA had been close to predicted, and Worden was adjusting better than Scott and Irwin. None of the three, however, had returned to preflight norms, but there was “no medical danger” as far as crew was concerned. “Things from past space flights were all going in a pattern and now suddenly these guys don’t fit the pattern.” In assessing astronauts’ return to normal it was important to note how Apollo 15 differed from previous manned space flight missions. Important factors were longer time spent on lunar surface, longer lunar orbit stay time, and longer time spent in 100% oxygen atmosphere. Heartbeat irregularities, which had lasted about 10 heartbeats, were usually associated with fatigue, low potassium level, and increased adrenalin flow—all of which were present in astronauts. Because of fatigue levels of which astronauts were often unaware, flight surgeons were considering recommending that first evas on Apollo 16 and Apollo 17 be shortened. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 8/14/71, 1)
President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. . . . But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion . . . the one who was briefing the President . . . turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.” In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge. . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space, but because there is something there, something there that we must explore. It’s there to find. . . . this Nation with all of its capability and with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set for ourselves. “Now, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engineering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407—11)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4067 designating day as National Moon Walk Day, “to commemorate the anniversary of the first moon walk on July 20, 1969, and to accord recognition to the many achievements of the national space program.” He said, “Two years after the first landing . . . other brave men are following in the footsteps of [Astronaut Neil A.] Armstrong and [Astronaut Edwin E.] Aldrin to explore the unknown and advance scientific knowledge for the benefit of all mankind.” (PD, 7/26/71, 1068)
Mstislav V. Keldysh was reelected President of Soviet Academy of Sciences at general assembly meeting in Moscow. Following reelection, Tass said: “The successes of the U.S.S.R. in the exploration of space have been associated with Keldysh’s work. They included the first Sputniks, the flights to the moon and around it, flights to the planets of the solar system, the first manned space flight, the first experimental orbital station, the return of Luna 16 with lunar soil to the earth and the first Soviet moon rover.” (fbis—Sov—71—102, 5/26/71, LI; Shabad, NYT, 5/31/71, 32)
Committee for the Future—group of wealthy private citizens—was seeking to finance return trip to Hadley Rille, Apollo 15 landing site, with surplus Apollo spacecraft, Reuters reported in Baltimore Sun. Group hoped to recover contemplated $400-million investment by selling moon rocks, TV film, and photographic and literary rights, and by charging for scientific experiments conducted. Group had announced proposal to operate mission “Harvest Moon” after final Apollo flight in 1972 because it seemed incredible that man could invest $25 billion and 10 yrs to reach moon and then “stop without . . . looking at the moon’s value to man and his future.” Members of committee had spoken informally with NASA officials, Reuters said. Oflicials had said privately that plan stood little chance of approval. (B Sun, 8/4/71, A6)
NASA continued to receive proposals for using surplus Apollo hardware for “Apollo 18” lunar mission, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, had suggested mission be flown in April 1974 to map moon from polar orbit. During mission, which would cost about $190 million, lm would be converted into “massive scientific experiments bay.” (Av Wk, 11/1/71, 15)
Analysis of discolorations on camera that had landed on moon with Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, was reported in Science by JPL scientist Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe. Camera had been retrieved from lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts Nov. 20, 1969. Discoloration pattern indicated that camera had been whitened by impact of particles blown from lunar surface by exhaust of LM as it landed and also that many particles had moved at very low angles to the horizontal. (Science, 2/28/71, 798-9)
Senate and House met in Joint Session to receive and pay tribute to Apollo 15 astronauts, who reported on mission. Mission commander David R. Scott said of Apollo 15 lunar samples, “As I approached a fragment freshly deposited on the slopes of the Apennine, I realized it had been undisturbed since before life came out of the sea on earth.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden said first thing noticed after launch, “particularly when we got into earth orbit, was that we had a further view—we were further away from earth, and our view was expanding. We did not see any area around Cape Kennedy. What we saw were continents and oceans. . . . After we left earth orbit and foT the remainder of the flight our view was one of the earth.” Astronaut James B. Irwin described Hadley-Apennine campsite as “friendly, beautiful spot, like a valley in the high mountains of the earth; and it was with some reluctance that we left our valley on the moon.” He told Congress: “The future of man’s role in space lies in your hands. We realize very well the grave responsibilities in these days. The decisions you make will determine man’s travels and explorations in space. We think that an investment in space technology is an investment in America. America needs space to grow.” (CR, 9/9/71, H8224-5)
upi compared $400-million cost of Apollo 14 mission (Jan. 31—Feb. 9) with $445-million cost of Apollo 15 mission. Breakdown of Apollo 15 cost was reportedly: csm, $65 million; LM, $50 million; Saturn V booster, $185 million; alsep, $25 million; lrv, $8 million; lunar orbit science laboratory, $17 million; and operations, $95 million. Total estimated cost of entire Apollo lunar exploration program through Apollo 17 was $26.5 billion, (upi, NYT, 7/27/71, 14)
Newspaper editorials praised U.S. exploration. New York Times: “The Apollo program was born a decade ago as an element in Soviet-American rivalry for prestige and political advantage. But the program’s brilliant success has made obsolete the nationalistic considerations that seemed so important in the early 1960’s. Now it is evident that lunar exploration and eventual settlement offer rewards and challenges for all mankind. Do Washington and Moscow have the courage and imagination to begin making that prospect a reality?” (.NYT, 8/8/71) Washington Post: “There seems to be very little doubt that the mission completed yesterday by astronauts Scott, Irwin and Worden has been the most productive in the history of the Apollo program. The yield of scientific data has already been large and much more is sure to come as laboratories around the world analyze the rocks, pictures and other material. . . . The trip has been a bonanza . . . and it may well go down in history as one of the most useful expeditions ever conducted in helping mankind understand the universe in which it lives.” (W Post, 8/8/71)
nasa published Manned Space Program Accident/Incident Summaries. Result of nasa Safety Office survey of accidents and incidents that occurred during Apollo Program development years could be used in nasa training programs. Of some 10 000 case documents reviewed, 508 mishaps had been studied closely. Of these, 47 % had occurred during operational test and checkout. Procedural deficiencies were largest contributor to accidents—46%—and 74% had human error as contributing factor, (nasa Awareness)
NASA announced appointment of John W. King, KSC Chief of Public Information, as msc Public Affairs Officer. Appointment would be effective in late January 1972. King had participated in more than 200 launches; voice of “Jack King” was well known to Apollo launch viewers, (nasa Release 71-250)
Special Apollo Awards Ceremony was held at MSC to recognize individuals and support groups for their contributions to Apollo 13 and Apollo 14 missions. Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, presented NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Walter J. Kapryan, ksc Launch Operations Director; Eugene F. Kranz, Apollo 14 Flight Director; Glynn S. Lunney, Apollo 13 Flight Director; former astronaut James A. McDivitt, Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager; Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and Sigurd A. Sjoberg, Apollo 13 Flight Operations Director. nasa Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to James J. Gavin, Jr., of Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s LM team and Public Service Medal to Donald E. Eyles of mit. nasa Exceptional Service Medals were presented to 23 employees of MSC and ICSC. Group Achievement Awards were presented to DOD Recovery Forces and Manned Spaceflight Support Network, (nasa Special Ann, 2/26/71; nasa Release 71—28)
Apollo 15 Astronauts Alfred M. Worden, David R. Scott, and James B. Irwin rode in motorcade to City Hall in New York, where they received gold medals from Mayor John V. Lindsay. Astronauts presented Mayor Lindsay with flag carried on Apollo 15 mission. Later astronauts were welcomed to U.N. by Secretary General U Thant, to whom they presented replica of plaque they had placed on moon to commemorate astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in performance of duties. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 147-8; Kaufman, NYT, 8/25/71,1)
Magellanic Premium of American Philosophical Society was presented to jpl mathematicians Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren at Society’s Annual General Meeting in Philadelphia. Muller and Sjogren were cited for “their discovery of lunar mascons leading to the first detailed gravimetric map of the moon.” Magellanic gold medal had been presented only 22 times since inception in 1790. Most recent recipient had been Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, in 1966. (jpl Release 604)
Apollo 14 astronauts and families visited both houses of Congress. Astronauts reported to Senate and House on mission. Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., told Senate they had “a totally successful mission, not only from the areas of scientific and technical endeavors achieved, but also in the areas of international prestige and the tremendous posture of this country.” (CR, 3/2/7\, S2306-7)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 14 difficulties in docking CSM with LM [see Jan. 31-Feb. 9]. New York Times said that “as the world waited tensely for the outcome of the struggle to solve the problem, there was a deep sense of disappointment at the possibility that all the effort, training and planning that went into this mission have been imperiled.” (NYT, 2/1/71, 30) Washington Evening Star editorial called Apollo 14 “pressure mission.” It had “already qualified for several entries in the record book. It is the first Apollo mission to be crewed entirely by men who have never before flown in earth orbit and commanded by a veteran whose total previous time in space was 15 minutes. The mission is led by the oldest man to go into space, the first American to ride a rocket, the only astronaut to return to active duty after a medically enforced period of idleness. It is the first Apollo shot to be delayed because of weather. It is the first to run into a major problem on its first day out. It is a mission that, in the opinion of many in the top ranks of the space agency, will decide the future of manned space flight.” (W Star, 2/1/71) _	_
lrv qualification test unit, replica of flight lrvs, was delivered to msfc by Boeing Co., prime lrv contractor. Second flight model lrv, scheduled for use on January 1972 Apollo 16 mission, would be turned over to NASA May 12 and stored at Boeing’s Kent, Washington, Space Center until after Apollo 15 mission in July 1971. (msfc Release 71-80)
Rep. Leonor K. Sullivan (D-Mo.), Chairman of Consumer Affairs Subcommittee of House Banking and Currency Committee, sent to ftc material on Franklin Mint, private corporation that produced silver medallions carried on Apollo 14 mission Jan. 31—Feb. 9. She suggested ftc investigate promotional use by Franklin of medallions, which had been melted down into ‘minimoons’—coins advertised as containing silver that had been to the moon. Washington Daily News said Rep. Sullivan’s action had been prompted by order issued by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of Astronaut Office, that no more Franklin Mint medals be carried on NASA missions. Shepard had noted, News said, that Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 Franklin medallions in CM (which never left lunar orbit), had distributed 150 to friends and relatives on mission’s completion, and had returned 50 to Franklin with understanding they would be made into coins for members of Franklin Mint Collectors Society, but not used to promote sales. (Thomasson, Scripps-Howard, W News, 9/2/71, 24)
Lunar landing trainer crashed and exploded at Ellington AFB, Tex. NASA pilot Stuart M. Present parachuted to safety. Trainer was one of two 81.9-million craft used by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in training. Preliminary investigation indicated cause of crash was loss of electrical power. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., later said accident should not affect Apollo 14 mission since lltv electrical system was “totally different from the one in the lunar module.” (msc Release 71-05)
Columbia Journalism Review editorial criticized New York Times for Aug. 15 publication of “soap-opera style exclusive interviews with the families of Apollo 15 astronauts obtained through the newspaper’s purchase of their personal stories.” Times had “condemned this kind of exploitation, by other publishers, only eight years ago.” (Columbia JournRev, 11/12/71, 6)
No viable organism and no evidence of fossil material had been found in Apollo 14 lunar samples, Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination Team reported in Science. Major findings had been: only 2 of 33 rocks had basaltic textures; samples differed from earlier lunar rocks and from their closest meteorite and terrestrial analogs in chemical content; chemical composition of soil resembled that of rocks; rocks displayed characteristic surface features and shock effects similar to those of Apollo 11 and 12 samples; concentration of solar-wind-implanted material in soil was large, as in Apollo 11 and 12 material, but solar wind contents of rocks ranged from that of soil “to essentially zero”; carbon content of Apollo 14 rocks was within range of that for Apollo 11 and 12 rocks; four fragmental rocks showed surface exposure time about an order of magnitude less than typical exposure times of Apollo 11 and 12 rocks; broader range of soil mechanics properties had been found at Apollo 14 site than at Apollo 11 or 12 sites and Surveyor landing sites; and no evidence of biological material had been found in Apollo 14 samples to date. (Science, 8/20/71, 681-93)
U.S. and Soviet scientists met in Moscow to recommend joint projects and exchanges in near-earth space research, investigations of moon and planets, development of space meteorology, and space applications related to natural environment. Recommendations of three working groups representing NASA, and Soviet Academy of Sciences would be forwarded to Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh and to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for consideration. U.S. participants were led by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Deputy Associate Administrator (Science) Leonard Jaffe; and noaa’s Director of National Environmental Satellite Services David S. Johnson. U.S.S.R. participants were headed by Dr. Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy; and Deputy Chief L. A. Aleksandrov, Deputy Chief for Technology, Main Administration of Hydrometeorology Services, U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, (nasa Release 71-147; NASA Int Aff)
nasa issued memorandum change to solicit proposals for participation in analysis of space flight data from photography and auxiliary records acquired on Apollo lunar exploration missions. Apollo 15, 16, and 17 would carry three orbital scientific instruments designed to provide photos and supporting data, panoramic camera, mapping camera system, and laser altimeter. Proposals also were solicited for analysis of lunar photography from Apolio 14 and for photos of astronomical objects from Apollo missions 14 through 17. (nasa Memo Change 36)
nsf published statistics that showed Federal R&D funding was on upward trend. Figures were taken from soon to be published report Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Vol. XX. Estimated 9% increase in overall Federal funding for r&d from 1970 to 1972 indicated upward trend after decline that began in 1968. Total of $15.3 billion in actual obligations for 1970 established low for recent years. Although 1971 Federal r&d total was expected to be same—$15.4 billion—total $16.7 billion requested in President Nixon’s 1972 budget marked new high. nasa had risen from 5% share of Federal r&d in 1960 to high of 34% in 1965 but was expected to fall back to 19% in 1972. Final phase-out of Apollo and reduced nerva engine development were expected to be nearly offset by increase in other NASA programs so that 1972 would be almost a leveling off. (nsf Highlights, 9/7/71)
USN plans to maintain offensive capability without exorbitant investment were described by Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt, Jr., Chief of Naval Operations, in speech before Cleveland, Ohio, chapter of American Ordnance Assn.: “We intend to develop small, high speed platforms. These will include escorts having a hard punch but which do not individually constitute a high percentage of our total capability. These will probably be . .. hydrofoils, air cushion platforms and surface effect ships. We have placed a very high priority on the surface effect ship on the premise that this offers the potential for destroyer-size ships to conduct anti-submarine warfare on top of the water at speeds 2 or 3 times greater than the fastest submarines.” With addition of v/stol aircraft, “one can envision a fleet of highly mobile craft which would be a potent striking force when concentrated, or a number of unique and flexible weapons systems when operating as individual units. By supplementing this force with small high speed craft as missilelaunching platforms we will add a new dimension to our present powerful aircraft carriers, frigates, destroyers, and guided missile ships.” (Text) January 28: nasa launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from terls carrying Indian experiments to study ionosphere. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list) nasa announced award to Lockheed Electronics Co. of $800 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for scientific and technical support services for mtf Earth Resources Laboratory. Contract covered one year with provision for two one-year extensions. Company would support laboratory in research on application of remote-sensing data to Mississippi-Louisiana-Gulf area. Data would be obtained from aircraft, erts, Skylab, Gemini, and Apollo experiments, (nasa Release 71-13)
Apollo 15 Astronauts James B. Irwin, Alfred M. Worden, and David R. Scott addressed National Press Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., before flying to New York for official welcome by city and appearance at U.N. Scott called for greater cooperation in space and said he looked forward to flight with Soviet cosmonaut. “I know six cosmonauts personally, and I would be glad to fly with any one of them any day. And I hope we get that chance.” Scott said core sample 3 m (8^ ft) long he had brought from moon contained 55 separate layers of soil that illustrated last 2.4 billion yrs of lunar history. Layers, discovered through x-ray examination, would show changes occurring over billions of years in sun’s radiation as it hit lunar surface. Later, in telephone interview with Washington Post, lrl scientist Dr. John F. Lindsay said layers ranged in thickness from 12.7 mm (1/2 in) to 127 mm (5 in) with each stratum probably representing different meteorite impact on lunar surface. While no analysis of core could be made until it was opened by geologists in January, Dr. Lindsay said x-rays had indicated that Scott had not drilled through solid rock, (upi, NYT, 8/24/71, 25; Auerbach, W Post, 8/24/71, A3)
NASA leaders were “realistic enough to sense that their case for the [space] shuttle must be built on more than chauvinistic appeal to national prestige, which sold the Apollo in the early 1970s,” Jonathan Spivak said in Wall Street Journal. They were “working hard to trim the shuttle’s prospective costs, demonstrate its economic payoff and convince the scientific community that it offers attractive new opportunities for research.” But NASA’s “primary problem” was “convincing the public and the politicians that it still makes sense to go into space at all. The moon is no longer a glamorous goal; Mars is too far distant and expensive, and orbiting space stations to date have made few influential converts.” (WSJ, 6/30/71, 10) During June: Skylab was described in article by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “By far the largest manned spacecraft we have ever built, Skylab will be the forerunner of permanent stations in space. In orbit 435 km [270 mi] above Earth, the Skylab cluster will be 36 meters [118 ft] long and will weigh 82 238 kilograms [181304 lbs]. One of its major components will be a workshop with 362 cubic meters [474 cu yds] of work area. Other parts will include a Multiple Docking Adapter, Airlock Module, Apollo Command and Service Module, and an Apollo Telescope Mount, the last of these a full-fledged solar observatory capable of observing, monitoring, and recording phenomena on the Sun’s surface that cannot be seen from Earth.” Skylab would carry from earth orbit “about 50 scientific, medical, applications, and solar-astronomy experiments. Twenty of these will be in the life sciences, to determine how man performs and adjusts under conditions of prolonged space flight. The study of materials and manufacturing will be another area of interest. By means of an electron-beam generating device and an electric furnace, metals will be melted, molded, and welded, and other metallurgy and crystal tests performed in a work chamber exposed to zero-gravity and the vacuum of space.” (A&A, 6/71, 20-1)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had released market analysis that showed it could sell at least 400 new L-1011 TriStar jet airbuses—about 60% more than needed for firm to break even, Dow Jones reported in Washington Evening Star. (W Star, 7/8/71, B9) Judy 9: nasa began distribution to 24 U.S. scientists of lunar soil samples returned by Soviet Luna 16 spacecraft and exchanged by U.S.S.R. for Apollo 11 and 12 samples June 10. About 50% of total three grams (one tenth ounce) of material would be distributed to principal U.S. experimenters in stages. First lot was about 600 mg (9 grains), or about 20% of total sample. Dr. Paul Gast, chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., had said Soviet scientists had implied samples from Sea of Fertility differed from U.S. lunar samples because regolith was thinner and closer to underlying strata than soil of other lunar mare areas. Dr. Gast said Soviet samples contained wider grains than did U.S. samples, (nasa Release 71—128)
NASA released two publications for sale by Superintendent of Documents, gpo. Apollo 14 Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP—272), prepared by msc, described Apollo 14: mission and summarized scientific results. On the Moon With Apollo 15, guidebook to Hadley Rifle and Apen-nine Mountains, had been prepared by Dr. Gene M. Simmons, msc Chief Scientist. Publication would aid in following progress of Apollo 15 mission by giving timeline for mission, describing and illustrating lunar surface scientific experiments, and defining terms. (Texts)
Langley Visitor Information Center was dedicated in formal ceremonies at LaRC. Dr. James C. Fletcher attended, in first official visit of new NASA Administrator to any NASA center. Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) said in dedication speech: “Space flight has opened up new vistas of flight and of the mind to understand the universe and our place in it. Our technology has become the world’s best and has brought us prosperity in a highly competitive environment.” Dr. Fletcher said center would give public broad understanding of what was happening in aerospace technology. Science was “part of our everyday life.” Technological society would continue “for the next 100 or perhaps 1,000 years.” Center displayed model aircraft, model spacecraft, lunar sample, and suit used by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., while training for Apollo 14 mission. (Langley Researcher, 5/28/71, 1; 6/11/71, 1: Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on selection of scientistastronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt for Apollo 17 crew: “The argument for the scientist-astronaut has come. So far as we are concerned, it always made sense. Therefore, any congratulations to [nasa] for finally putting one of the flying geologists to work might be accompanied by a raise of eyebrows over the obvious tokenism of the assignment and a reproachful question as to why they waited so long to put a scientist into the richest geological treasure house that man has yet discovered.” (W Star, 8/19/71)
Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to a joint session oj Congress urging that the United States “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” The goat was achieved when Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, on the Apollo 11 mission, became the first man to set a foot on the lunar surface, at 10:56 pm edt, July 20, 1969. mary aim of passive seismic experiment was to discover where moon-quakes occurred. “So far we have identified 11 zones in which moon-quakes occur, hut one of these is particularly active, accounting for about 80 percent of the energy we record.” Source might be “an isolated pocket of magma under pressure at depths between 30 and 400 miles [50 and 600 km],” Third seismometer, to be placed on moon by Apollo 15, was expected to provide data as to whether all 11 zones corresponded to same source mechanism; i.e., small magma reservoirs. Active zone fell on line that bisected Apodo 12 and 14 seismometer stations, “so that makes 15 an exceedingly vital station to us. If we just get one perigee passage and a couple of these moonquakes before station 12 or 14 ceases to function, we’ll have taken quite a step forward.” Apollo 15 would be at edge of prominent mascon basins, Serenatatis and Imbrium. “We expect ... to impact an S-IVB smack in the middle of one of them, probably Serenatatis. So this will he the first time we get seismic waves propagating through one of these mascon features, and, hopefully, we will be able to say something about how its structures differ from the other mare we have been able to record seismic waves through.” Edward M. Davin, Program Scientist, Lunar Surface Experiments, said Apollo 12 magnetometer had been “very successfully recording a surprising magnetic field. . . . we now have a general model of the moon based upon three layers ... a crust, an inner layer, and a core.” Apollo 15 lunar surface magnetometer could determine “if there is any asymmetry in the magnetic field” and provide additional information on electrical conductivity that indicated thermal distribution of lunar interior. jpl scientist Dr. Conway W. Snyder said solar wind spectrometer experiment would he “measuring the weather in space. The solar wind which is a plasma—this is an ionized gas—is quite analogous to weather on earth. ... it is the phenomenon that determines what magnetic fields are in space, affects cosmic rays, and generally is the fundamental entity in space once you stop considering the planets themselves.” With addition of second spectrometer on moon “we hope to be able to start making some definite interpretations of the very complicated kind of plasma effects that go on the moon.” Suprathermal ion detector experiment was described by Rice Univ. scientist Dr. Kent Hills. Apollo 12 and 14 ion detectors had revealed ion clouds that were not lunar-oriented hut had been formed elsewhere “from an expanding neutral gas cloud.” With Apollo 15 experiment, third station north of other two would give “extended distance with which to investigate these things and ... a different direction.” Cold cathode gauge experiment would indicate amount of gas on moon, Dr. Francis S. Johnson of Univ. of Texas at Dallas said. Ion detector already on moon had detected gas clouds in which concentration sometimes increased 100 times. With second gauge “we hope that there will be the prospect of seeing the same event on two gauges, and then we will be able to tell quite a lot more about where these gas sources would be and also learn something about how they propagate across the lunar surface.” Heat flow experiment, with 3-m (10-ft) drill, was to measure amount of heat coming from interior of moon, Columbia Univ. astronomer Dr. Marcus E. Langseth said. Measurement would be made by monitoring heat budget in near-surface material (lunar regolith) over one year with thermometers on probes about 2 m (6 ft) below lunar surface. Measurements could be useful in resolving contradictory data from magnetometer experiments on Apollo 12 and 14. Experiments outside Apollo 15 alsep package—laser ranging retro-flector, lunar field geology, and lunar soil mechanics—were discussed by Wesleyan Univ. astronomer Dr. James E. Faller; Donald A. Beattie, Program Manager, Lunar Surface Experiments; and Dr. James K. Mitchell of Univ. of California at Berkeley. Laser array would provide third leg of triangle formed by laser retroflectors on Apollos 12 and 14, improve ranging reliability from current stations, and “provide for greater efficiencies in telescope use time.” Geology experiment objectives were to sample Apennine Mountain front, study Hadley Rifle, examine mare, sample volcanic complex to north of landing site, and study cluster of craters southeast of landing site. Soil mechanics experiment would measure density, strength, compressibility and adhesive and cohesive characteristics of material on lunar surface. “The thing that is going to be of considerable interest is the lunar roving vehicle because if we can calibrate this vehicle ... a knowledge of vehicle tracks and power consumptions should provide . . . continuous record of the soil conditions as the crew moved from point to point.” (Transcript)	'
Director Lee R. Scherer of jiasa’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office received Soviet lunar samples from Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences in exchange for Apollo 11 and 12 samples. Participating in the ceremony at the Academy in Moscow were (left to right) Dr. Paid W. Cast, Chief of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Division; Scherer; Prof. Vinogradov; interpreter Igor Pochitalin; and Soviet Academician Boris Petrov. services at Central Systems Engineering Office, and $10 million to Sperry Rand Corp. for services at Astrionics Laboratory. (NASA Release 71-102) June 10; U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged lunar samples in Moscow ceremony to mark expansion of cooperation in space. Lee R, Scherer, Director of Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, presented three grains (0.10 oz) of Apollo 11 and three grams of Apollo 12 lunar material to Academician Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and received three grams of Soviet Luna 16 samples in return. Scherer said, “Although the quantity of material is small, its significance is very great.” U.S. Embassy in Moscow released statement saying exchange provided opportunity for scientists of both countries to benefit from study of material from lunar areas to which they would not otherwise have access. “The exchange of lunar samples exemplifies the desire of nasa, as stated in the agreement of January 21, to expand cooperation in space research and exploration. The U.S. Government looks forward to the broadening and deepening of this cooperation.” (nasa Release 71-103; Shabad, NYTS 6/11/71, 10)
Completion of tests to determine cause of Apollo 15 parachute failure was announced by NASA. Possible causes were fuel dump, which expelled six pounds of monomethyl hydrazine (mmh) from CM reaction control system, and flaws in links connecting suspension lines to risers. Officials doubted exact cause could be determined. Dump through hot engine could cause tongues of flame that might reach parachute lines. Flaws were detected in links on one recovered chute, but the failed chute had not been recovered. Corrective action would be taken on both possible causes for Apollo 16. Dump would be eliminated and material for links changed. (NASA Release 71—188)
Marine* 9, launched, from the Eastern Test Range on a 398-million-fdlometer (247-million-mile) direct-ascent trajectory, headed toward the planet Mars. Encountering Mars Nov. 13, the spacecraft would be the first to orbit a planet other than earth. Mariner 9—weighing 1000 kilograms (2200 pounds) and spanning almost 7 meters {22% feet) with its solar panels extended—would orbit Mars 90 days to study the atmosphere and surface in detail and map 70 percent of the surface. during 1971 opportunity; Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) launch attempt May 8 had failed because of malfunction in Centaur stage of booster. Scheduled for arrival at Mars on Nov. 14, Mariner 9 would make detailed study of Martian surface and atmosphere and map 7G^o of surface during planned 90-day orbit of planet. Launch vehicle performance and spacecraft injection were nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed four solar panels at 6:40 pm, and locked sensors on sun at 7:16 pm, soon after leaving earth’s shadow. About four hours into flight Canopus sensor was energized and spacecraft rolled 55° and locked onto star Achernar. Canopus acquisition was achieved at 10:26 pm and spacecraft would remain in sun-Canopus orientation for mission except during maneuvers. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. Mariner 9 weighed 1000 kg (2200 lb) at launch and carried six scientific experiments: infrared radiometer to measure surface temperature; uv spectrometer to investigate composition and structure of atmosphere; infrared interferometer spectrometer to measure surface and atmospheric radiation; S-band occultation experiment to study pressure and structure of atmosphere; TV cameras to transmit low-and high-resolution photographs of surface; and experiment to investigate Martian gravity field. Orbit of spacecraft was designed to guarantee it would not hit Mars for at least 17 yrs, to avoid contamination of planet before studies on surface were made by landing spacecraft. ossa assigned project responsibility to Jpl, including mission operations and tracking and data acquisition. Launch vehicle was responsibility of Lenc, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Division, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 71—75) May 30-June 6: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa during visit to France attended Paris Air Show; inspected aerospace facilities at Bretigny, Toulouse, and Salon-de-Provence, and attended reception by Mayor of Dijon, (nasa Release 71-84; msc pio)
Apollo 15 astronauts on European tour met with Pope Paul VI in Rome. Pope told them he hoped their voyage to moon would help men appreciate God and live in harmony. (AP, W Post, 11/18/71, H3)
Washington Post editorial commented on plans for new Air and Space Museum: “We are glad that skyrocketing costs have brought the proposed National Air and Space Museum down to earth. The trouble with the design architect Gyo Obata prepared several years ago was not only that it would now cost $70 million to build. It was also far too grandiose, bold and ambitious.” U.S. air and space accomplishments “have a very prominent place in the hearts of the American people . . . they should also have a prominent place in the nation’s capital. But that is not to say that we need or want a monumental aircraft hangar.” Museum Director, Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins, had described new museum as “national center for education about the science and technology of flight and its economic, social, cultural and political meaning.” New model, Post said, “shows a pleasing and interesting structure that is well behaved. ... If it lacks architectural excitement, that is not what we want on the Mall.” Post also published letter from Gilmore D. Clarke, former Chairman of Commission of Fine Arts, protesting construction of Air and Space Museum on Mall, “on a site of restricted size whereon the structure cannot be enlarged in the course of years as the science of aviation and outer space technology advances. Whatever is built will, within a decade or two, prove to be too small,” (W Post, 11/23/71, A18, A19)
National Endowment for Humanities sponsored Thomas Harriot Symposium at Univ. of Delaware, honoring Elizabethan mathematician, astronomer, geographer, navigator, and philosopher sent to New World in 1585 by his patron, Sir Walter Raleigh. Harriot had written first English account of wealth of America, A Briefe and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia. After 350 yrs of obscurity, Harriot was being revived by scholars who were mentioning his name with Kepler and Galileo, New York Times reported. Harriot had independently begun telescopic observation of heavens in July of 1609, at about time Galileo did in Italy, and had drawn what was believed to be earliest map of moon in which vast seas and craters were recognizable. He had observed and counted sun spots through telescope using London fog as filter and had calculated period of solar rotation and traced moons of Jupiter. In 1601 he had discovered law governing refraction of light. (Reinhold, NYT, 4/8/71, 39)
Apollo 15 lunar surface experiments—passive seismic, lunar surface magnetometer, solar wind spectrometer, suprathermal ion detector, cold cathode gauge, and heat flow—were described by experimenters during nasa Hq. press briefing on Apollo 15 science objectives. Mission would return up to 68 kg (150 lbs) of lunar samples rather than maximum 44.5 kg (98 lbs) for previous Apollo missions; man-hours spent on moon would increase from 18 to 40; and area covered could extend to 56 km (35 mi) by use of lrv. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo Program Chief Seismologist, said pri
Gold issues of first annual United Nations Peace Medal, issued to coincide with U.N.’s 26th anniversary, had been presented to Apollo 15 astronauts, AP reported. For collectors, medals would be in silver and bronze. (B Sun, 11/14/71, A3)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated 30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engineers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend—in terms of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed—is magnified by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by training and experience. . . . This not only causes great personal hardship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.” NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid off by group of nasa contractors from June 1968 to September 1970 had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs, 32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and 5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks. Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aerospace. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12% reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50% reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given opportunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated “we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indispensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national security.” In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice between technological advances and social advances. Without technology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any national problem.” Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spending more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and technology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent Soviet policy of steadily increasing r&d investment, would soon match and then surpass U.S. program in size and accomplishment. “For this comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The most difficult comparison to try to make between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, nonparallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611—2) Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with confidence to the final phase. ... In these last missions, we will expand the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [544 kg]. Changes in the command and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15 and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts return to earth.” In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be included. . . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment Package in the second space flight phase of NASA’s earth resources program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] complementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology erts, to be launched in 1972.” FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and promising external materials for thermal protection; test demonstrations of design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic heating, launch aerodynamics, etc.; design of long-leadtime hardware, subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests; dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on dod applications of space transportation system and dod-nasa teamwork on space shuttle: “Present dod satellite communications program consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system. . . . We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications System, Phase II, which can provide many voice channels to selected limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from operational theaters to the United States.” In conjunction with NASA studies, usaf was analyzing defense applications of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept for dod. usaf was providing NASA with data to help ensure that configuration was of maximum utility to dod. nasa and usaf had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a 250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the current shuttle engine design concepts.” In operational testing area, “usaf and NASA recently conducted unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F—Ills and B-52s. . . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I lunar rover had successfully completed 11th lunar day of work on moon since it was landed by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, Tass announced. During 11th lunar day rover had made “a detailed survey of the structure of the moon surface in the area” and “panoramic route survey of the surrounding locality,” traveling 100 m (328 ft) before being powered down for 11th lunar night, (fbis—Sov— 180-3, 9/16/71, LI)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial noted “major surprises” from first four manned lunar explorations: Possibility of existence of water or ice below lunar surface; detection of heat near moon’s core and of seismic activity on moon; greater magnetic field than expected; and fact moon was “mineral storehouse of tremendous magnitude with some elements in combinations rarely or never found on earth.” There was also “sizable accumulation of other scientific data to be refined from the instrumentation still functioning on the moon and the nearly 400 lb [181 kg] of lunar rocks and soil samples. . . . The moon has proved to be a scientific bonanza regardless of what more material benefits may be realized eventually. All of this must be a cause for considerable chagrin and embarrassment to that segment of the scientific community that led the sneering section during the early stages of the Apollo program when flight testing of operational hardware was of necessity its primary concern.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 10/25/71, 7)
Safe splashdown-—with an extra bump. The Apollo 15 command module, completing its 12-day lunar mission, descended to the waves on two of its three parachutes. The third parachute collapsed, increasing impact velocity to 35 km per hr 122 mph), but did not endanger the astronauts or the spacecraft.
George W. Cherry, Director of Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. in NASA oart, received aiaa Mechanics and Control of Flight Award in ceremonies at Hempstead, N.Y. Award was for “pioneering the development of the digital control system for space vehicles and the application of these techniques to the Apollo Command and Service Modules and the Lunar Modules.” (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
nasa Performance Evaluation Board had given NR Space Div. incentive award fees of $234 600 and $307 350 for Apollo csm and Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II), NASA announced. Awards covered management performance under contracts during 1970. (nasa Release 71-97)
Tenth anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in the Vostok 1. In the April 14, 1961, photo Gagarin and US.SJl. Premier Nikita Khrushchev, standing atop the Lenin-SlaUn Mausoleum, responded to a welcome by crowds during a ceremony in Moscotc’s Red Square, (Photo by courtesy of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.) In letter to Pravda, group of Soviet cosmonauts said “it is our opinion that businesslike cooperation of space researchers of different countries, including the U.S.S.R. and the United States, should develop and grow stronger in the interests of peace and friendship among the peoples of our planet.” Soviet Academician Boris N. Petrov said in article reprinted in a number of Soviet journals that “main trend of the next development of cosmonautics and space exploration . . . will probably be as follows: Further investigation of near-Earth space, studying the Earth from space for purposes of space meteorology, geology, agriculture, oceanology, and marine and air navigation. The task of constructing space exploration facilities and the usage of outer space for peaceful purposes is the favorable basis for fruitful international cooperation wherein both big and small countries can effectively participate.” U.S.S.R. had “always directed its efforts into an arena of peace and international cooperation. . . . The time is not behind the mountains when the remarkable idea about construction of long-duration, piloted orbital stations will be implemented.” Soviet Military Review editorial said Soviet space program had demonstrated “the benefiting the whole of mankind and the contribution to worldwide progress. The Gagarin flight, as all subsequent achievements of Soviet space exploration, demonstrated the organizing and guiding role of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and the inexhaustible potentialities of the socialist social system and of the Soviet economy, science, and technology. Consistency and purposefulness are a feature of the Soviet program of exploration in outer space, on the Moon and on the planets of the solar system.” (Yuenger, C Trib, 4/13/71; Shabad, NYT, 4/13/71; upi, W News, 4/12/71; upi, LA Her-Exam, 4/12/71; SBD, 4/12/71, 263)
Dale D. Myers, Nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on nasa FY 1972 authorization bill: “With the Apollo 14 scientific instruments operating properly, we now have begun to develop the networks of instrumentation at different locations on the lunar surface which will allow us to use normal triangulation procedures to establish the details of the moon’s structure. We have two passive seismometers and two suprathermal ion detectors in operation, one each at the Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 sites, about 115 miles [185 km] apart. Last week severed moonquakes were reported . . . when the moon reached its perigee. Our instruments pinpointed the location of these events . . . close to the Fra Mauro crater area. “We also have a laser ranging retroflector at the Apollo 11 Tranquility Base and another at Fra Mauro—750 miles [1200 km] apart. The laser ranging team at the MacDonald Observatory in Texas has reported high-quality returns from the Apollo 14 reflector. As the world’s observatories refine their ability to use these instruments, we hope that they will be able to detect random wobbles of the earth’s rotational axis. If so, this may contribute to the ability to predict major earthquakes.” During past year, design and essentially all phases of development testing had been completed for Skylab and flight hardware was in fabrication. Definition of space shuttle was nearing completion. To develop limited capability to rescue Skylab astronauts from space, NASA had initiated design action on modification kit to give Skylab CM capacity to carry two men up to orbit and five men back to earth. Stranded astronauts could use Skylab cluster as shelter while modification kit was installed and Apollo-Saturn IB launch vehicle assigned to next revisit was made ready for launch. (Transcript)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in speech before National Space Club that Apollo program would end with Apollo 16 and 17 launches in 1972. Later, responding to question concerning possible cancellation of Apollo 17 because of FY 1973 budget restraints, Dr. Fletcher said, “The fate of Apollo 17 is beyond my control at the present time.” nasa was shifting emphasis, Dr. Fletcher said in speech: “When Apollo ends, most of our space activities planned for this decade will be in Earth orbit—and Moon exploration, for a time, will be left completely to the Soviets.” Continuing effort to explore planets also was related to earth studies. “I am sure that much of what we learn will have direct and valuable application to our understanding of Earth and our current concern with environmental protection.” Apollo photos of earth had helped create concern for world’s environment. “I am glad to say that NASA is now well prepared to take a leading role in defining and responding to this concern.” Apollo technology and equipment would be used directly in Skylab and directly or indirectly in space shuttle, Dr. Fletcher said. “Moreover, we gained invaluable experience in Earth orbital operations in the Gemini program and on the way to the Moon and back. We are well prepared for the next logical steps in near-Earth space. I wish very much we could continue lunar exploration . . . but if we have to make hard choices in this decade, then the right choice is to return to Earth orbit and defer lunar exploration.” nasa hoped to keep open option of additional Apollo missions in earth orbit. “This would enable us to carry out additional experiments in our Earth resources program, and would also facilitate our planning for cooperative flights with the Soviet Union.” Worldwide demand for applications satellites could be met only by production of space shuttle. “The key to our ability to help our country and to serve mankind is now the shuttle. The sooner we build it, the better we can serve.” (Text; Av Wk, 11/29/71, 13)
New York Times editorial said scientists were pressing nasa to “take another look at the cancelled Apollo 18 and 19 flights—flights for which much equipment is available. The Soviet contribution to the new picture of the moon is still miniscule, despite the feats of the Luna space vehicles. But it would make good sense for the United States and the Soviet Union to get together and plan joint manned moon flights, perhaps by making Apollo 18 and 19 the first truly international ventures to earth’s companion in the skies.” (NYT, 9/3/71,26)	_ s International Institute for Strategic Studies published The Military Balance 1971-1972. Annual report of London-based independent research group said Communist China had entered nuclear missile race, U.S.S.R. had moved further ahead of U.S. in icbm deployment, and U.S.S.R. was challenging supremacy of U.S. underwater nuclear strike force. (Reuters, B Sun, 9/3/71, 1)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden arrived in London to begin two-week, five-country tour of lectures and meetings with European scientists, (upi, C Trib, 11/8/71)
Training mockups of two Skylab spacecraft components— Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount—arrived at msc aboard NASA barge Orion from msfc. Shipment also included multiple docking adapter exterior shell and portion of airlock module mockup. Trainers and hardware would be used by msc for training prospective Skylab crewmen for missions scheduled to begin in early 1973. (nasa Release 71-187; msc pio)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, met with msc officials during his first official visit to Center. Later, at press conference, he said NASA’s image could not rest on “absolutely fantastic achievement” of first lunar landing by man. NASA needed to convince taxpayers of basic technology that had been developed on way to moon. Each part of nasa program “has to be defended as a separate piece.” (Maloney, H Post, 5/28/71)	'
NASA-inspired Earth Awareness Foundation—nonprofit, educational and advisory body originated by NASA officials and Apollo astronauts— marked first anniversary. Group was chartered to develop community solutions to environmental problems using NASA-developed knowledge to maximum extent practicable. During first year group had established community chapters called “Earth I Care” clubs, mostly on school campuses; started “Summer Scientist” program to study pollution; established newsletter; presented awards for concern with environmental quality; and produced slides and films on environment from nasa photos taken in orbital flight, (msc pao )
DOD signed $25-million contract with Lockheed Space & Missiles Corp. for definition and development phase of new-generation submarine-launched ULMS (underwater long-range missile system) with maximum 10 000-km (6200-mi) range. (Reuters, B Sun, 12/1/71, A12; W Post, 12/1/71, A14)	,	-.. November 30—December 2: Apollo 15 investigator’s symposium was conducted at Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Apollo Photo Science Team members Robert D. Mercer of Dudley Observatory and Lawrence Dunkelman of GSFC described photos of sun and interplanetary dust taken by Apollo 15 cm pilot Astronaut Alfred M. Worden. Photos showed features of solar corona and zodiacal light never before observed. Preliminary examination of photos showed “light levels less than can be seen by the best telescopes on earth.” Analysis of photos would permit direct, comparative measurements of solar phenomena’s relative brightness to obtain information on mechanisms by which energy left sun and on distribution of particles outward from sun. (msc Release 71—97) November 30-December 3: Joint meeting of nasa and European Space Conference (esc) was held in Washington, D.C., to identify candidate areas for possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs. Meeting had been proposed in Sept. 1 letter from Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson to Belgian Science Minister Theo Lefevre, esc Chairman, (nasa Release 71—235, 71—241; nasa pao) During November: arc research into heat shields to protect aircraft passengers in crash fires was described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by ARC and Avco Corp. scientists. Concept of surrounding passenger compartment by fire-retardant shell to protect occupants long enough for fire to burn out or be extinguished had been made possible by Apollo program research into fire-retardant materials polyisocyanurate foam and intumescent paint. “Exposed to heat . . . paint expands to many times its original thickness and insulates the surface underneath it. The thermal-protection mechanisms of these materials operate on the same ablative principles . . . that protect our astronauts during re-entry of the Apollo spacecraft.” (Neel, Parker, et al., A&A, 11/71, 18-26)
Newspapers commented on Apollo 15 mission, while astronauts were exploring lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor editorial praised Apollo 15: “Once again, a superbly synchronized lunar mission has proven man’s capacity to focus the knowledge of hundreds of specialists to achieve a singular goal. Apollo 15 is one more grand historic achievement. It testifies to the benefit that science and technology, properly harnessed, can reap for mankind.” (CSM, 8/2/71) French novelist and TV critic Jean Dutourd commented on Apollo 15 TV coverage in France Soir. It had made him walk away from TV set. “It must be confessed,” he wrote, “that these experiments are an unspeakable bore.” (Reuters, W Post, 8/3/71, All) New York Times editorial defended manned space flight: “After Apollos 16 and 17 next year, there are no known plans of any nation to send any more men to the moon. A vast and complex technology developed at the cost of many billions of dollars over the last decade is being abandoned even as its vast potentialities are being demonstrated. If American resources do not permit manned lunar exploration beyond the end of next year, the United Nations should take over the task, appealing to all governments for funds and soliciting contributions as well from private individuals and private business enterprises. The dusty planet that is the moon could become the planet of human cooperation, a new frontier of hope for all mankind.” {NYT, 8/2/71, 22)
Denver mint held preview showing of nickel alloy Eisenhower dollar which would be released in October. Back of coin depicted Apollo 11 lunar landing, (upi, W Post, 9/2/11)
NASA announced selection of Descartes as lunar landing site for Apollo 16, scheduled for launch in March 1972. Descartes, in central lunar highlands, provided opportunity to sample volcanic-like highlands basin fill and uplands volcanic terrain, (nasa Release 71—106)
Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, Assistant Executive Secretary in NASA Office of Administrator, became Director of Office of Scientific and Technical Information in NASA Office of Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, (nasa Release 71-142) July 22; nasa and afcrl scientists would measure plume from Apollo 15 during launch July 26 in attempt to solve mystery of Apollo 12 lightning strike during Nov. 14, 1969, launch, afsc announced. Measurements were part of Lightning Strikes to In-Flight Missiles program to test conductivity and electrical field breakdown strength on Minute-man and Atlas missiles. Scientists theorized that exhaust plume acted as electrical conductor and might have influenced electrical fields in thunder clouds and provoked lightning stroke. afcrl project scientist John L. Heckscher said usaf tests showed that “the rocket plume acts as a good conductor of electricity—like a wire . , . stretched from the rocket to the ground. And, should the rocket enter a thunder cloud, it would act like a lightning conductor. In the Apollo 15 launch we’re primarily interested in the effective length of the conducting plume. The rocket is 363 feet [110 m] long, and the visible portion of the plume, which contains incandescent carbon particles and other burning matter, is perhaps another 500 ft [152 m] of good conductor. However the trailing invisible portion may also be electrically conductive and that’s what we want to find out.” (afsc Release 180.71)
Electrical power development for space was summarized by aiaa Electric Power Systems Committee in Astronautics & Aeronautics article: “Batteries have continued to be employed beyond Explorer I for either primary power or as an element of power subsystem. Silver-zinc batteries provided 13.5 kilowatt-hours (Kwh) of electrical energy for the Mercury spacecraft, up to 63 Kwh for the early Geminis, and 65 Kwh for the Apollo Lunar Module. Specific energies have advanced to 90 watt-hours per pound (wh/lb) [198 wh per kg] in unmanned Agena vehicles. The continuing flight dependence on batteries was dramatically illustrated by the rescue phase of the Apollo-13 mission, which used the lm batteries for power after the failure of the cryogenic supply of the Service Module fuel cell system. Undoubtedly, batteries will remain a vital independent power source in manned missions and perhaps unmanned missions for many years.” Committee recommended that “competitiveness of the isotope and reactor systems for powers in the tens of kilowatts be encouraged rather than inhibited and that the technology programs for both be kept viable,” felt “that achieving acceptance of a reactor power system for manned Earth-orbiting missions presents a major challenge to the power community in the 1970s,” and criticized lack of resources “to pursue effectively all of the advanced reactor power-system options that have been carried along most of the 1960s.” (A&A, 8/71, 22-30)
Space officials feared budget pressures could prompt either President Nixon or Congress to cancel final two Apollo missions in 1972, Wall Street Journal said. In event of cancellation, NASA would propose to use Apollo equipment for “lengthy orbital flights due to start in 1973” in the Skylab program. (WSJ, 6/11/71,1)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Division of Library of Congress, commented in interview after Sept. 28 launch of unmanned lunar probe Luna 19 that Moscow still had plans to land men on the moon, perhaps about 1973 or 1975. Dr. Sheldon said five previous Soviet Zond circumlunar flights had been capable of carrying men and several other earth orbital flights had simulated manned lunar landing maneuvers. Dr. Sheldon also recalled that Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had said in 1969 that manned missions to moon were not ruled out. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/29/71, A5)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of invention of computer by Dr. J. P. Eckert and Dr. John W. Mauchly of Univ. of Pennsylvania. New York Times editorial Aug. 9 commented on anniversary: “Man’s invasion of space, up to and including Apollo 15’s latest feats, would have been impossible without computers. So would much of the rest of modern science and technology.” (Smith, NYT, 8/4/71, 43: NYT, 8/9/71, 28)
nasa signed $195 400 000 supplemental agreement to Apollo lm contract with Grumman Corp. for changes to increase lunar staytime, activity support, and other features of lm. (NASA Activities, li/15/71, 187)
Dr. Georgy N. Babakin, prominent Soviet space scientist who had designed equipment for unmanned Soviet spacecraft, died at age 56. Izvestia obituary said Dr. Babakin had been recipient of Hero of Socialist Labor, highest Soviet civilian title, and corresponding member of Soviet Academy of Sciences and had made “a great contribution to the development of Soviet space technology and the study of the moon and Venus.” (NYT, 8/5/71, 34)
Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) prototype was flown to msc from MSFC for extensive thermal-vacuum-chamber testing. Tests would continue through early December, (msfc Release 71-146; msfc pio; msc Hist Off)
NASA announced selection of Apollo 17 prime and backup crews. Prime crewmen were Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (cm pilot), and scientist-astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B.	Irwin. Apollo 17 would be launched in December 1972 on 12-day lunar-landing mission with 68-hr lunar surface stay time, (nasa Release 71-149)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had said settlements with U.S. Government on military contracts and other problems had resulted in net loss of $86.3 million in 1970 and $96.6 million in fourth quarter of 1970, Wall Street Journal reported. {WSJ, 3/21/1\, 3) May 27—June 6: Twenty-ninth Paris International Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport. More than one million visitors to world’s largest air show viewed Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport in its first appearance in West; Anglo-French supersonic airliners, Concorde 001 and 002; Soviet Mi-12, world’s largest helicopter; Lockheed C—5A Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft; Lockheed 1011 TriStar; and more than 200 private aircraft in total exhibition of 600 aircraft. U.S. Pavilion exhibited Apollo moon rocks. Canadian Pavilion contained mockup of integrated stol system envisaging 10-min air hops between suburban shopping areas and city centers. (B Sun, 5/26/71, 5/31/71; Hess, NYT, 5/26/71)
Portable magnetometer carried during Apollo 14 eva had detected unexpected bulge in moon’s magnetic profile, arc announced. Data indicated lunar magnetic field at point 297 m (325 yds) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site was about 100 gammas—three times higher than measurements at Apollo 12 site. Another reading, 457 m (500 yds) away near edge of Cone crater, measured about 40 gammas. (arc Release, 71-4)
NASA released Jan. 28 briefing on FY 1972 budget request, in which Dr. George M. Low, NASA Acting Administrator, said: “For the past several years we have reported ... a further decrease in budget authority. This year we can report a clear halt in this trend: the budget authority for FY 1972 is at the same level as the funds appropriated for FY 1971. The exact figure for FY 1972 is $3,271 billion. NASA would complete Apollo program with four previously planned missions but would delay Apollo 17 five months to ensure that mission carried experiments originally scheduled for canceled Apollo 18 and 19. Skylab missions would be delayed about four months, to follow as soon as practical after last Apollo flight. Plans for unmanned planetary exploration included two Mars orbiters in 1971, Jupiter flybys in 1972 and 1973, launch in 1973 for Venus-Mercury flyby in 1974, and two Viking launches in 1975 to land on Mars in 1976. Dr. Low said NASA had asked for $190 million for space shuttle in FY 1972. “We have included in our budget $100 million. This reduction means essentially that we will move out with the engine development exactly as we had planned; that we are still in a position to make a decision after we have completed the studies on the air frame development, whether to continue with additional design or whether to proceed with the development of the air frames.” Near-earth science programs included Orbiting Solar Observatories in 1971, 1973, 1974, and 1975 and last orbiting Astronomical Observatory in 1972. Space applications program would progress as planned, including two erts, two Nimbus experimental weather satellites, two Synchronous Weather Satellites, and two advanced communications experiments with ATS—F and ATS—G. New FY 1972 projects would include start of work on High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and program for exploration of outer planets. “To do this we will develop a versatile new spacecraft, and we will plan Grand Tour missions to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto in 1976-1977; and to Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune, in 1979.” NASA also would study mission to orbit Jupiter as alternative to first Grand Tour. Major new initiative in aeronautics in FY 1972 would be development of experimental stol aircraft. Downward trend in aerospace industry employment on NASA programs would be halted during FY 1972. “Although aerospace jobs will continue to decline in FY 1971, we expect employment to start increasing by the middle of FY 1972, with the end-of-year level being about equal to that at the beginning of the year.” NASA would reduce civil service work force by 1500 positions by end of FY 1972, bringing total decrease to 6800 since July 1967. Work on NERVA nuclear rocket engine would be limited to “essentially long-lead time items,” preserving ability “to move forward . . . when the need arises,” without large expenditures in FY 1972. Program included “no plans at this time for a manned Mars landing mission.” (Transcript)
Wapakoneta, Ohio, birthplace of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, celebrated second anniversary of first moon walk by Armstrong with display of flags and model of lm on concrete blocks on street comer. For third anniversary, in 1972, Armstrong expected to return to home town for dedication of $l-million Armstrong Museum being constructed at edge of town. Daniel R. Porter, Director of Ohio Historical Society, had said museum would feature Ohio’s contributions to aerospace age from early balloon ascents through achievements of Wright brothers, who had lived in Ohio, to space exploits of Ohioan Astronaut John H. Glenn. Exhibits would include experimental aircraft flown by Armstrong as test pilot, gallery of flight artifacts, “nasa Room” containing space travel exhibits, and “infinity cube,” mirrored room with lighting to give effect of projection into infinity. (Wilford, NYT, 7/21/71, 22)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, energized by solar cells after surviving second lunar night on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed third exploration operation, moving about 128 m (140 yds) during 4%-hr period. Vehicle had been inoperative since beginning of lunar night Dec. 23, 1970, and had been opened to receive solar energy Jan. 8. It had been released on surface by Luna 17, which had soft-landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 1/11/71, 28; 1/12/71, 35)
Delegation of congressmen watched Apollo splashdown from onboard recovery ship for first time. Congressmen—prevented from attending previous manned space splashdowns by limited space on ships and expense of flying them from Washington, D.C., to mid-Pacific—were flown to U.S.S. Okinawa from Hawaii by helicopter. Congress was not in session. Watching Apollo 15 splashdown were Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight; Rep. Edward P. Bolane (D-Mass.); Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.); Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Joseph M. McDade (R-Pa.); and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (W Post, 8/8/71, A10)
Senate passed S.J.R. 101, to “authorize and request the President of the United States to issue a proclamation designating July 20, 1971, as ‘National Moon Walk Day.’ ” (CR, 6/21/71, S9476)
More than 20 hrs of live TV coverage from Apollo 15 spacecraft and lunar surface would be carried via orbiting Intelsat comsats, ComSat-Corp announced. Coverage would include liftoff, transposition and docking, intravehicular transfer, landing site approach, lunar surface exploration, first color broadcast of lunar liftoff, rendezvous and docking, film transfer in space, lunar eclipse, press conference from space, and splashdown. (ComSatCorp Release 71-39)
European interest in U.S. space program had “with notable exceptions” dwindled since Apollo IPs first lunar landing and “trouble-fraught” Apollo 13, New York Times said. Despite extensive press and TV coverage, Europeans had taken Apollo 14 for granted. “In some countries local events overshadowed man’s third visit to the moon,” but in West Germany opinion poll had shown that 64% favored continuation of manned space flights. Frankfurter Rundschau editorial had said, “What Shepard and Mitchell carried off couldn’t have been done by a Lunokhod.” Polish newspapers had given equal prominence to Lunokhod 1 and Apollo 14, but stressed technological feat of unmanned vehicle. Soviet press had highlighted Apollo 14 difficulties to suggest superiority of unmanned vehicles. Soviet man in street “seemed bored with space exploration, although some Russians went out of their way to ask Westerners about the United States moonshot.” Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet youth daily, had praised astronauts’ “indisputable bravery.” In U.K. Apollo 14 had been overshadowed by unrest in Northern Ireland and collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. Live TV coverage of Apollo 14 had been less than of previous Apollo missions. Earthquake and civil disorders had crowded Apollo 14 from front page of Italian newspapers, and Feb. 7 power blackout in New York had received as much space as launch. Italian radio and TV coverage had been thorough but audiences seemed smaller than for previous Apollos. Pope Paul VI had praised Apollo 14 as advance for all mankind. In France interest had waned as mission progressed. Newspapers and TV offered comprehensive coverage but “excitement of two years ago” had vanished. Spaniards, too, were losing interest in space exploration and public interest had declined in Hungary and Yugoslavia. Communist student, leader in Zagreb had said, “If the Americans and Russians would cooperate in space instead of carrying their rivalries to the moon, maybe there could be some scientific progress on earth and maybe the smaller nations could be helped to contribute their knowledge instead of being shut out of science by the expense.” (NYT, 2/10/71, 24)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held 25-min press conference, televised from spacecraft during transearth coast. Mitchell called mission “quite a success” in spite of failure to reach Cone crater during second EVA: “I think the majority of the type rocks we would find at the rim were in the boulder field that we were working, although it was a disappointment, just as a matter of challenge, not to get up there. I think we accomplished the scientific objectives that we went for.” Shepard explained major problem was “the undulating terrain where you simply couldn’t see more than 100 to 150 yards [90 to 140 meters] away from you. Consequently, you were never quite sure what landmark would appear when you topped the next ridge. We were very surprised when we . . . approached the ridge which we thought to be the rim of Cone Crater, to find there was another one behind it. And that was the beginning of the real problem. As far as we were concerned, our only problem was the amount of time allotted for the excursion. To us it was just a matter of working against the clock. I don’t believe that we were disoriented or lost any time. I think if we had wanted to reach the top of the crater and did nothing else, that we could have done that within the time period allotted. But I think the method to which we reverted ... of collecting rocks from a point not quite near the top of the crater provided a lot more geologically and gave us a better cross-section of the rocks in the area . . . than had we gone to the crater and back and not collected as many rocks.” (NYT, 2/9/71, 26)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on hud, Space, and Science during hearings on NASA FY 1972 appropriations bill. He urged that “strong program in space and aeronautics is essential to our longterm national well-being. Our capabilities as a Nation to deal with domestic problems of high priority—poverty, cities, the environment . . . and indeed, our pursuit of happiness and cultural advance—ultimately depend on whether we can maintain a strong economy with continually increasing productivity. Increasing productivity, in turn, depends primarily on technological advance, which, in turn, results primarily from the large scale focussed technological efforts like our major space programs.” In addition were both long-term and near-term direct benefits, many already realized. “When 50,000 lives were saved as a result of satellite advance warning at the time of hurricane Camille, the space program probably paid for itself.. . . “I believe that the space program is a value in itself to the nation and to the whole world. With our everyday preoccupation, necessarily, with the many serious and often depressing problems we face . . . there is, I believe, a human hunger for positive elevating goals to work for at the same time as we do what needs to be done in all these other difficult areas. I believe the strong attraction that the landing of the first man on the moon had on people everywhere, and much of the underlying basis of support in the country for the space program, stems from the fact that the space program provides such goals. The space program gives us goals seemingly beyond human capability, goals which transcend earthly boundaries.” Space shuttle had tremendous impact for future because it not only reduced cost by being reusable itself, but it also gave options of reusing payloads. “You do not have to throw them away once you put them up there. . . . There are many more application satellites we can use with this kind of an arrangement, because we will be able to reuse them.” Skylab, “first and only NASA experimental space station,” due to fly in 1973, would be “larger but 2 years later than the Soviet Salyut now in orbit.” U.S.S.R. probably would be able to “do things in space, laboratories, 2 years earlier than we ... to know what the earth is like, to know what the clouds are like, to understand more about the earth’s resources. . . . Another aspect, which I am uncertain about, is what they plan to do in a military way. . . . they will have the potential of doing military things on this same vehicle. We do not plan to do this on the Skylab. We also must consider the scientific value of Salyut, which I think is important, but not as important to us as the applications and the military aspects of it.” Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified that “models” of anticipated further reduction of 1500 civil service positions in fall “indicate that we have reached a point in which really good people of considerable experience will be going out the door. Certain parts of our operations will be closed. This means that we have come to a place where reductions in force are eating into our capability to do the job.” (Transcript)
Extrasensory perception tests aboard Apollo 14, launched Jan. 31, were described by Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell during press conference at Foundation for Research on the Nature of Man at Durham, N.C. In unauthorized experiment, Mitchell had tried to send messages to four “receivers” on earth while en route to moon. He had carried cards bearing ESP test symbols and concentrated on random order of cards while receivers on earth wrote down order in which they believed he was	“transmitting.” While	plan	had called for “transmission” once daily	for six	days, Mitchell	had	been able to	perform experiment for only four days. Two of his receivers had reported “receptions” for all six days, one for one day only, and another for two days. Mitchell said preponderance of wrong answers was significant because it was	“so far	below chance	that	the odds are	approximately 3000 to one	against	it being a chance	result.” If it	was not chance, Mitchell said, results indicated “extrasensory exchange.” Mitchell declined to identify his receivers, but Olof Johnsson of Chicago had said he was one psychic who had participated. (AP, NYT, 6/22/71, 22; upi, W Star, 6/22/71, Al)
msc announced signing of $11577 561 supplemental agreement with Grumman Aerospace Corp. for changes in Apollo LM contract. Agreement brought total value of contract since January 1963 to $1 617 510 000 (msc Release 71—18)
Newspapers published preliminary summary of Apollo I5’s scientific and technical achievements. Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post: “The voyage of Apollo 15 did far more than extend man’s reach into the heavens. It showed dramatically that man belongs in space. At the end of their three days on the moon and six in lunar orbit, the astronauts . . . had gathered more scientific information about the moon than all the manned and unmanned spacecraft that had flown before them.” Cameras and instruments in SIM had made first extensive observations from lunar orbit. One of first findings was confirmation that moon was not perfectly round and was dimpled. Evidence from seismometer was backed up by bistatic radar in which spacecraft signals were used to penetrate lunar surface to core. Seismometer’s reception of LM’s impact on moon indicated that even small explosion or impact could be recorded at extreme range and verified earlier hypothesis that meteorite impacts were being recorded daily from all over lunar surface. Addition of Apollo 15 station to existing seismic net completed triangular array of instruments for determining focal points of moonquakes. Data from cold cathode gauges at Apollo landing sites and mass spectrometer in orbiting Endeavour confirmed presence of thin lunar atmosphere. Spectrometer picked up pockets of neon and argon and scooped up carbon dioxide that had apparently burst from fissure near where sun was lighting lunar surface at daybreak. Other data obtained by Endeavour’s instruments indicated lunar highlands were rich in aluminum and deficient in magnesium. Waterless basins were rich in magnesium and deficient in aluminum. Most highland regions contained three times as much aluminum as lowlands, and one mountainous region had five times as much aluminum as typical lunar basin. Magnetometer on subsatellite launched into lunar orbit discovered moon had electromagnetic boundary layer. Camera system recorded data for comprehensive map of areas never before flown over, with details and resolution previously impossible. Report by Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin of terracing along sides of Hadley Rille identical to terracing noted on sides of two tallest mountains in Apennine group—Hadley Delta and Mt. Hadley— suggested mountains and Hadley Rille had been thrust up from moon by internal pressures that built up inside moon when object the size of state of Rhode Island struck moon and created Sea of Rains 4 billion yrs ago. Scientists had previously thought Hadley Rille to be younger than mountains and independent of their formation. Samples might hold clues to sun’s history and its effects on earth climate, past and future. Walter Sullivan said in New York Times: “Sun-determined changes in the earth’s climate have controlled man’s history, from the ice ages that plagued the cave men to the desiccation that buried Middle Eastern civilizations, not under invading armies but invading sands. By understanding the role of the sun in these past events, man may be able to assess the effect our parent star will have in determining climates of the future.” (W Star, 8/8/71, A10; W Post, 8/8/71, Bl; NYT, 8/8/71)
Cornell Univ. and EDP Technology, Inc., announced that contract for sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell to edp had been allowed to expire by mutual consent. (Van Gelder, NYT, 7/14/71, 58) July 14: Apollo 15 completed final practice countdown at ksc in preparation for launch to moon July 26. (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/71, 16)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, told press at msc that preliminary examination of Apollo 15 crew had revealed astronauts were in good health, but were not returning to normal as rapidly as expected. Examination had also revealed that Astronaut David R. Scott had ruptured blood vessels . under four fingernails—apparently during first eva on moon. Ruptures had resulted from increased pressure on fingers from spacesuit as Scott moved his arms to conduct experiments. Although Scott had mentioned some discomfort to his hands after EVA—1, officials had assumed discomfort was typical hand cramp experienced by previous astronauts. Dr. Berry said Scott’s injury was not serious enough to warrant space-suit modifications: “It’s just one of those things that you’ve got to put up . . . with, and we keep trying to make suits better all the time, and I think this current suit is probably as far along the line to being comfortable and providing mobility as any suit we’ve ever had. . . .” (Transcript)
President Nixon honored Apollo 15 astronauts in address on economic program before Joint Session of Congress: “Later today, in this great chamber, the Congress will pay tribute to three splendid Americans back from the moon. Theirs was a magnificent achievement, a stunning testament to their personal skill and courage, and also to what American technology can achieve. “Let us find the means to ensure that in this decade of challenge, the remarkable technology that took these Americans to the moon can also be applied to reaching our goals here on earth.” (PD, 9/13/71, 1250-6)
Milwaukee Journal editorial on Apollo 14 commented: “The real return on Apollo lies in the future—beyond the more difficult missions of flights 15, 16 and 17. It is in Skylab, reusable space shuttles and sophisticated space stations to come. It is in the complex monitoring of the earth and its resources from space. It is in the co-operation and internationalization of space programs that appear to be developing—hopefully to replace competition. Here is the payoff. To this Apollo 14 and its crew have made their extraordinary contribution.” (MJ, 2/10/71)
Chicago Tribune editorial commented on Apollo 15 crew: “Out of all they saw, collected and recorded by camera they hope to make a significant contribution to science and the understanding of the universe, and they hope from this to apply what they learned to the betterment of life on earth. If there is one regret, it is, as Scott said, that after the vista from this peak of experience, what comparable mountain remains to be searched?” (C Trib, 8/14/71)
Lack of Government policy for engineering was scored by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech telephoned to meeting of Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers in Boston, Mass. Sen. Kennedy cited communications engineer who had led team that designed antenna for Apollo 15 lrv. Engineer had received special commendation from nasa for his leadership. “He also received a layoff notice from his firm shortly before he watched his antenna in action on the surface of the moon.” Engineers possessed great potential to contribute to Nation’s needs. “Engineers who can produce patents for their former employers can provide ideas which will benefit society. Engineers who can transmit data from the moon can help meet the data processing needs of our technological economy. And engineers who could have taught at our leading universities must have some lessons to offer of benefit to us all.” (CR, 11/10/71, S18003—4; Off of Sen Kennedy)
The white anorthosite “Genesis rocU' collected on the moon by Apollo 15 astronauts was about 4.1 S billion years old, scientists announced. In the photo the sample, oldest lunar rock collected so jar, was in the nonslerile processing line oj the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at the Manned Spacecraft Center. “This is unquestionably one of the most important rocks ever returned from any lunar mission. It has a recording in its minerals of many series of events in lunar history-events of high temperature and high pressure.” (Auerbach, W Post, 9/18/71, A3; AP, B Sun, 9/18/71, A10; NYT, 9/18/71, 25) *	MSC announced start of series of cold weather environment tests on performance of Skylab CM postlanding and recovery systems in Climatic Laboratory at Eglin AFB, Fla. Objectives were to determine performance characteristics and limitations of Skylab cm in cold weather, determine cm test crew response to cold and to interior environmental conditions of CM, and determine extent of ice buildup on CM exterior and effect of ice on systems performance. Tests, conducted in chamber with 274 K (33°F) water temperature and 269 K (25°F) air temperature, were necessary because spacecraft would pass over areas colder than previously experienced and, in event of emergency landing, cm and crew limitations had to be known, (msc Release 71-70)
Univ. of Toronto had announced discovery by astronomer Dr. Sidney Van Den Bergh of three galaxies composed of thousands of stars, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 11/12/71, A36) First photos were obscured by dust storm but before end of month Mariner 9 had shown that Mars bulged at equator, was “rougher gravitationally” than expected, and probably had wide variety of rock compositions; instruments had detected small amounts of water vapor at south pole and warmer air pockets above pole [see Nov. 16-23]. Spacecraft also made man’s first close photo of potato-shaped Martian moon Deimos [see Nov. 26—27] and photos of moon Phobos [see Nov. 29-30]. First Mariner photos from orbit were broadcast live by national TV network, but detail was limited by dust storms that had raged on surface since September. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, jpl project scientist, said “We’re hopeful that as the storm dies down we can get some good pictures of the dust settling to the surface. This is an unprecedented chance to watch changes in the Martian weather.” He said that if cameras worked properly pictures would be 1000 times better than any earthbound telescopes had taken. On Nov. 14 spacecraft transmitted three sequences of TV pictures. Of more than 60 photos returned, only seven revealed surface features. Dust storm continued and atmospheric experts could see no sign of abatement. Dust obscuring planet was apparently very fine sand which high winds pushed to height of as much as 16 km (10 mi) above surface. On fourth orbit spacecraft successfully completed orbit trim maneuver at 9:44 pm est Nov. 15. Maneuver changed orbital period of spacecraft to make it synchronous with Mars viewing period of Deep Space Station antenna at Goldstone, Calif. New orbital parameters were 1394-km (866.2-mi) periapsis altitude, 11-hr 57-min 12-sec period, and 64.34° inclination. Data from remote-sensing instruments confirmed earlier observations that carbon dioxide was major constituent of Martian atmosphere and also suggested possibility of “hot spots” on planet. Dr. Ellis D. Miner of JPL said sensor detected average temperature rise of 6.7 K (12°F) in area 24 km (15 mi) square below Mars equator. Temperature rise might indicate hole in cloud cover exposing mountain peak or plateau reflecting residual heat or evidence of internal source of heat on Mars, uv spectrometer data indicated dust storm was made up of fairly coarse-grained, sandlike particles, (nasa Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, ll/14r-16/71; O’Toole, W Post, ll/14r-15/71; W Star, 11/16/71, A4)
Newspapers reviewed Of a Fire on the Moon by Norman Mailer. In New York Times Book Review Morris Dickstein said book aimed at confrontation with “brave new world of science and technology.” Mailer found himself “frustrated at every turn. The event seems packaged, distant, unapproachable. . . .” Mailer gave “rather depressed personal account of his attempt ... to make an approach to the mission, especially to the astronauts and their machines.” Mailer felt “betrayed by the gap between his romantic expectations and the gray hut immense realities. Seeking to understand, he turns the book into an account of the other America, the Wasp hinterland.” In end Dickstein concluded, “This is not perhaps the book on the impact of technology that we needed, but it is important nonetheless, and offers much to ponder and prey on.” (NYT Book Review, 1/10/71, 1, 42-45) In Washington Sunday Star, Day Thorpe said: “Mailer wasn’t a passenger on Apollo 11, but in his motel rooms in Houston and Canaveral, and in his home in Provincetown ... he has put together a long and excellent book about the flight, the story not only of what the adventure meant to the three astronauts who lived it but, no less interesting, what it meant to Mailer himself. The bureaucrats Mailer encountered first in hermetic Houston and then in hermetic Canaveral were unlike all other bureaucrats. They were infallibly courteous, considerate and helpful, and they invariably told the truth.” Mailer showed Apollo 11 astronauts as “three human beings, as similar as necessary for their mission, but as unlike one another as experimental prototypes should be.” (W Star, 1/10/71, D 6)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, had been selected to receive 1971 James Watt International Medal from Institution of Mechanical Engineers in Lpndon, MSC Roundup announced. Dr. Gilruth had been nominated by American Society of Mechanical Engineers and was cited for his “distinguished services to Aeronautical and Space Research and for . . . engineering leadership which inspired and directed the Manned Space Flights and successful landings on the Moon.” (msc Roundup, 3/26/71, 1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, described planned Skylab mission medical research in address before Utah State Medical Assn.: . . we will be looking far beyond the requirements of the immediate mission; we will be seeking answers to questions with a strong impact on the future of manned space flight during the remainder of this century.” Major questions as yet unanswered after Gemini and Apollo flights were the causes of moderate loss of weight by astronauts early in flight, moderate cardiovascular deconditioning, moderate loss of exercise capacity, and minimal loss of bone density. Medical results from Gemini and Apollo missions had shown that “1. There were no major surprises. 2. As of now, we see no reason why man cannot live and work effectively in space for a long period of time. 3. Man seems to adapt to space flight more easily than he does to Earth’s environment after returning from space.” (Text)
MSC scientists reported instruments left on moon by Apollo astronauts had apparently survived sudden drop in temperature during lunar eclipse. Instruments registered no unusual seismic events or radiation fluxes during eclipse. Temperature at Apollo 12 site dropped from 348.9 K (168.3°F) to 170.4 K (-153°F), a 178.5 K (321.3°F) change. Temperature at Apollo 14 site dropped from 341 K (154.1°F) to 170.4 K (—153°F). {NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
U.S. Supreme Court refused to grant hearing to atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair on appeal of suit charging nasa had knowingly used taxpayers’ money for religious activities by permitting astronauts to conduct Bible readings and prayer services while orbiting moon. (Reuters, B Sun, 3/9/71, A3)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Administrator for Planning, told press in Bremen, Germany, that he expected to visit 50-man U.S. research station on moon within 10 yrs, at end of 1970s or beginning of 1980s. He said, “I’ll have to stay there at least eight or 10 days.” (AP, NYT, 9/7/71, 18)
Office of Management and Budget had released $98.1 million in FY 1972 funds voted for science education and institutional support, while impounding $30 million, Aviation Week & Space Technology noted. “The 25% holdback of funding at the basic science level is considered by some in Congress as highly destructive because it will tend to reduce the number of future scientists.” It was viewed as “direct contradiction of the pro-science policy they have been led to anticipate.” (Av Wk, 9/20/71, 15) Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott told opening session that analysis of 2.7-m (9-ft) Apollo 15 lunar core sample had disclosed 58 distinct layers that represented 58 “chapters in the history of the sun.” Number of “pages in each chapter” awaited further analysis. Later Scott said in interview that Dr. Liaquat Husain, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientist who had analyzed Apollo 15 “Genesis” rock, was concerned that alteration of rock by shock when it impacted with site at which it was found might have partly invalidated determination of rock’s age at 4.15 billion yrs. arc engineer John C. Arvesen described development of method for monitoring biological productivity from air by detecting signs of chlorophyll. Monitoring device, when tested over California lakes and offshore areas, had produced results that conformed closely to readings obtained by arduous direct sampling of waters. Ultimate goal was to develop satellite-borne system that could monitor global productivity of oceans. Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said newly completed studies of medical data from Apollo 14 had shown radiation exposure to crew that was more than twice that of previous Apollo missions. Primary reason for higher exposure was passage of Apollo 14 spacecraft close to Van Allen radiation belts. Dr. Berry said radiation dose was “of no hazard or biological significance.” Soviet scientists said later that cosmonauts carried special antiradiation drug on all space flights but had never used it. Dr. Berry said Apollo 14 Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had lost 27% of fluid within his body cells during mission. His total body water had dropped 18% and red cells in his bloodstream had decreased 9%. Losses had been far less for other Apollo 14 astronauts and no such dramatic losses had been recorded for Apollo 15 astronauts, indicating that individual responses to space varied widely. Heavy loss of “exchangeable” potassium had been noted in astronauts during extended missions. On Apollo 15, loss had been as great as 15%. Potassium was deemed exchangeable because it could move readily in and out of tissues and thus could be purged from body. E. G. Johnson, Equipment and Facilities Branch Chief in NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office, described program for development of teleoperator systems in which remote-controlled devices could perform tasks in situations dangerous to health or safety of humans. In space, teleoperator could enter high radiation environment of space station’s nuclear power plant to change fuel elements or make repairs. Johnson said optical or radioastronomy observatory on moon’s far side could be run for 40 to 50 yrs using computer-controlled teleoperators whose control could be assumed from earth when necessary. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium was held during iaf congress. Sessions discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries in regard to earth resources research. iaa Fifth History of Astronautics Symposium on Sept. 23 was chaired by JPL Historian R. Cargill Hall. Soviet Cochairman V. N. Sokolsky did not attend for unexplained reason. Papers read included “From the History of the Development of Powder Rockets in the U.S.S.R.,” by Soviet Academician Yu A. Pobedonostsev, which traced work on Soviet solid propellants leading to Katyusha rocket in current use; “Comparative Analysis of Projects for Jet Planes Constructed up to the 1940’s,” by V. N, Sokolsky; “Evolution of Spacecraft Attitude Control Concepts before 1951,” by R. E. Robertson of Univ. of California at San Diego; and “Memoir: The Evolution of Aerospace Guidance Technology at M.I.T., 1935-1951,” by Dr. C. Stark Draper. Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium, held during Congress, discussed earth resources technology and scientific research objectives and needs of developing countries. Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award was presented to Professor Luigi Broglio of Univ. of Rome for achievements in experiments with floating platforms to launch satellites into equatorial orbits. Only cosmonaut attending IAF Congress was Boris B. Yegorov, only physician to travel in space (launched in Voskhod 1 Oct. 12, 1964). (iaa Annual Rpt 1971; Sullivan, NYT, 9/21/71, 9/23/71, 9/27/71; Proceedings)
NASA announced it had signed agreement with New York Times Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for one byline article each by Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden after mission and three articles by Scientist-Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt while crew was on lunar surface. Agreement, extending to 30 days after mission’s end, provided for payment by Special Features of 50% of gross proceeds from syndication of articles. It also permitted still photos in Apollo 15 astronauts’ homes and interviews of family members. Agreement did not infringe on NASA policy of free flow of information to all media nor limit NYT coverage of all aspects of space program, (nasa Release 71-138)
Apollo 15 Awards Ceremony was held at msc. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for “accomplishments in the Apollo 15 mission” to Dr. Larry A. Haskin, Univ. of Wisconsin; Dr. Robert 0. Pepin, Univ. of Minnesota; Dr. Leon T. Silver, Cal Tech; Dr. M. Gene Simmons, mit; and Dr. Gordon A. Swann, U.S. Geological Survey. NASA Exceptional Service Medal was presented to 22 msc employees and NASA Public Service Award to representatives of contractors Boeing Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Delco Electronic Div. of General Motors Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. NASA Group Achievement Award was presented to msc Extravehicular Mobility Unit Team, msc Lunar Orbit Experiments Team, msfc and msc Lunar Roving Vehicle Team, msc Lunar Traverse Planning Team, noaa Space Flight Meteorology Group at ksc, and msc Television and Lunar Communications Relay Unit Team. Dr. Fletcher read telegram from President Nixon congratulating Apollo 15 Team which, President said, deserved “highest praise for their vital contributions to man’s scientific knowledge and our nation’s prominence in space.” (nasa Ann, 10/1/71; msc Roundup, 10/8/71, 1)
Conversation between Mary Ann Harbert, U.S. citizen released Dec. 14 after nearly four-year internment by Chinese Communists, and escort Col. Leonard W. Johnson, Jr., Commander of 9th Aeromedical Evacuation Group at Clark afb in Philippines, was reported by AP. Miss Harbert had asked, “Have you put any men on the moon yet?” Col. Johnson had responded with description of U.S. space program that had put eight men on moon. Miss Harbert had said, “I really don’t know, I hadn’t heard about it. Many people in China don’t know that. The last thing we knew about space was that Russia had something circling the moon.” (B Sun, 12/15/71, A9)
Apollo 14 backup pilot Eugene A. Cernan narrowly escaped death when helicopter in which he was practicing lunar landing maneuvers crashed and burned in Indian River near ksc. After leaping from helicopter and swimming toward shore Cernan was rescued and taken to Patrick afb for treatment of minor cuts and bruises and singed eyelids and eyebrows, (upi, W Post, 1/24/71, A5)
nasa plans to develop first space rescue capability during 1972 Skylab program were described by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, before aas meeting in Washington, D.C.: Studies indicated nasa could have rescue spacecraft standing by on launch pad 20 days before scheduled Skylab launch in spring 1973. Rescue technique would be facilitated by equipping Apollo spacecraft with two extra seats beneath three regular crew seats. In space emergency, modified spacecraft would be launched with two-man crew rather than three. It would rendezvous with distressed Skylab vehicle to recover three-man Skylab team. Rescue vehicle would have improved hydraulic telescoping landing legs to absorb impact on land if water landing was not practical. (AP, Huntsville Times, 3/11/71)
William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary and Apollo 8 Astronaut, and Astronauts John L. Swigert, Jr., William R. Pogue, and Jack R. Lousma met with President Nixon at White House to report on their visits to 17 college campuses from October to December 1970. At White House press conference later, Anders said meetings with students had been “very positive.” Students had been “very curious about the Space Program.” (PD, 3/15/71, 475; Transcript)
Training models of Sky lab’s Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount arrived at the Manned Spacecraft Center from fabrication at the Marshall Space Flight Center. They would be used for training crewmen for the 1973 mission, planned to include three separate crews of three astronauts each—the first crew to stay for 28 days and the next two for 56 days each. The overhead view above shows crew quarters in the 1-g trainer model of the Workshop. At the top is the general control and working area with several experiments. At the right is the wardroom, where crewmen would prepare and eat food and spend leisure time. At the lower center is the waste management compartment, or “space bathroom.” At the left is the sleep compartment. perigee, 116.6-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/71; fbis-Sov-199-3, 10/14/71, LI; SF, 4/72, 132)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover began sixth lunar day on moon’s Sea of Rains, traveling 301 m (988 ft) across lunaT surface and completing two communications sessions with ground. Vehicle had landed on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 4/9/71, 205)
S-IC-511 1st stage for Saturn V launch vehicle that would launch Apollo 16 toward moon in 1972 was shipped by barge from Michoud Assembly Facility, to arrive at Kse Sept. 17. (msfc Release 71-152)
GSA had said it would take bids on towers and equipment from two Saturn launch complexes at icsc, AP reported. Equipment from Complexes 34 and 37, to be sold in one lot, included cranes, boom hoists, 298 km (185 mi) of copper and steel cable, and five towers weighing total of more than 8.2 million kg (9000 tons). NASA had said complexes, which cost $147 million to build, were obsolete. Complex 34 was scene of Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire that took the lives of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chaffee, and Edward H. White II. It was also launch site of Apollo 7 (Oct. 11-22, 1968), first manned mission in Apollo program. Complex 37 had been used for pre-Apollo unmanned missions. NYT, 12/24/71, C7; icsc Hist Off)
Apollo 15 lm Falcon’s liftoff from moon was described by Tom Wicker in New York Times: “The first televised liftoff of a manned spacecraft from the moon had none of the beauty and power of those moments when a huge Saturn rocket rises majestically into space from Cape Kennedy. The quick pop that sent off the Falcon in a shower of sparks looked more like something held over from the Fourth of July, and the part of the landing craft left on the moon was all too suggestive of an auto graveyard.” Two years after first moon-walk, “Americans do not . . . seem nearly so interested as they were in these prodigious feats of modem man. Even in living color and with that great American love object—an auto, of sorts—to liven up the scene, the latest moon show seemed to need something. Unfortunately the lem liftoff didn’t turn out to be it.” (NYT, 8/3/71, 27)
On second anniversary of its emplacement on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, atomic battery designed to power Apollo 12 experiments for one year was still generating at more than 70 w. Battery had been designed to produce 63.5-w power. Apollo 12 instruments were still reporting data. Identical batteries, fueled by radioactive plutonium 238 and taken to moon by Apollo 14 and 15, were generating more than 70 w. Apollo 16 and 17 would land similar batteries on moon during 1972 missions, aec reported, (upi, W Post, 11/20/71, A3)
Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Gold Medal for Aero-dromics was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), samso Commander and former NASA Apollo Program Director, at ceremonies commemorating Smithsonian’s 125th anniversary. Medal, presented periodically for “meritorious investigations in connection with the sciences of aeronautics and astronautics,” was established in memory of Dr. Samuel P. Langley, aviation pioneer. Among recipients had been Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1964 and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in 1967. (Smithsonian Release SI-131-71) Gold Space Medal, Federation’s highest award for space achievement, was presented to Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., for “his courageous achievements and leadership as the Commander of Apollo 13.” In recognition of achievements of entire Apollo 13 crew, Astronauts Lovell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., received iaf’s V.	M. Komarov Diploma for 1970. Diploma had been created in memory of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov, killed during Soyuz 1 mission April 24, 1967. Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov were awarded Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for 1970 for achievements as crew of Soyuz 9, June 2—19,1970. Gold Air Medal, highest iaf award for aeronautics, was presented to Capt. Henry T. (Dick) Merrill for contributions to aviation over 50 yrs. Capt. Merrill, civilian pilot, had flown Atlantic in 1935 and 1937. Concorde technical team of bac and Aerospaciale employees received group diploma for “valuable example set by . . . effective collaboration developed since 1962 between the engineers of British Aircraft Corp., Aerospaciale, Rolls-Royce and Snecma, operating as a single industrial team.” During conference lrv was presented to Swiss Transport Museum. (Letter to NASA Administrator, 6/10/71; letter to NASA Historian, 9/29/71; W News, 9/30/71, 42; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 9; bac pio; NAA PIO )
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments planned for ninth lunar day on moon’s Sea of Rains and was preparing for lunar night, Tass announced. Experiments included stereoscopic photography of crater bed and slopes, chemical analysis of rock, studies of crater 190 m (208 yds) in diameter, and measurements of cosmic radiation. Vehicle had traveled 10.2 km (6.3 mi) over lunar surface since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (fbis-Sov—138-3, 7/20/71, LI)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, directed four-hour physical examination of Apollo 14 astronauts and declared them “certified and ready to fly.” Countdown for launch began on schedule at 9:00 am EST in preparation for liftoff toward moon at 3:23 pm est Jan. 31. (AP, B Sun, 1/26/71, A5)
Article by Paul Dickson in The Progressive discussed “Empire of Think Tanks.” r&d in U.S. had become “vast, powerful, and well financed empire . . . replete with its own priorities, powers, and pecking order. Atop this empire is a diverse group of institutions called think tanks, which as agents of applied research and policy study have a fateful impact on the nation. The most famous of these ... is the RAND Corporation ... a prime mover in military research.” r&d was “particularly critical element in the battle over national priorities because it not only reflects our current priorities but largely determines what will be technologically feasible in the future.” Lunar landings had shown “how much is possible if a great deal of thought, resources, and dedication are channeled into any stated goal. The vast majority of Project Apollo money had been pumped into space R&D during the decade prior to the first landing. There is, however, a catch in invoking the Apollo/NASA example, because such a new knowledge as is developed in such a program must be applied and directed in order to get anywhere. If not conscientiously applied, well-performed research can lead to a range of ends from a simple nonuse to a more insidious ruse—a way of dodging action under the guise of studying the problem.” Independent think tanks needed to be scrutinized along with Federally sponsored ones. “Many of them receive the bulk of their funds from the Government, and, though not officially ‘sponsored’ like rand, they bring up the same questions of power, unchecked and unanswerable, evoked by the officially sponsored outfits.” (CR, 11/3/71, S1752-5)
Preparations for Apollo 15 mission were proceeding on schedule with liftoff planned for July 26, Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Apollo Mission Director, told press in Washington, D.C. Astronauts would be able to remain on lunar surface for long EVA periods because of new spacesuit that would give astronauts greater mobility and facilitate experiments. New suit had neck and waist convolutes to permit bending at neck and waist, improved zipper for pressure control, improved thermal garment, more abrasive material protection, and increased water and oxygen supply. Suits also had pocket for fruit bar so astronauts could take bites during mission. (Transcript)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial described plight of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in “aerospace depression”: Total employment was off almost a third from high of 43 500 in mid-1967 and layoffs were continuing though at declining rate. “The loss of these 14,100 jobs is equivalent to a loss of income for all the families in a city of 35,000 persons. . . .” In one 30-day period, 1600 McDonnell Douglas workers had been laid off. “That is equal to 20 per cent of the workforce from a city the size of Berkeley, where the corporation has its headquarters.” Hope for McDonnell Douglas “rests in large measure with the company’s plans to produce the F—15 fighter-bomber. Already Congress is looking at this program with a wary eye, and . . . there are indications that production may be slowed as part of an increasingly cautious congressional approach to military spending.” (St Louis P—D, 6/21/71) Delegates discussed possibility of joint test flights to test requirements being developed for docking systems. Experiments “might be conducted between spacecraft of the Apollo and Salyut station types and between spacecraft of the Soyuz and Skylab programs,” NASA statement said. Soviet visitors were escorted on tour of msc by Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and John W. Young. Several “flew” computerized simulators used to train Apollo astronauts to dock cm and lm for lunar landing, (nasa Release 71—111; Transcript)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa completed final dress rehearsal for scheduled Jan. 31 launch toward moon. Countdown began at 9:23 am est, with simulated liftoff on time at 3:23 pm est. (P Inq, 1/20/71, 3)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were greeted by crowd of 3500 persons during brief stopover in Hawaii en route to Ellington afb, Tex. On arrival in Texas astronauts were cheered by 2500 persons who waved banners and flags while band played “Fly Me to the Moon.” Astronauts were first to return from moon without being required to undergo quarantine. (Stevens, NYT, 8/9/71,1; AP, C Trib, 8/10/71)
NASA released Apollo 11 Mission Report (nasa SP-238), summarizing events and results of July 16-24, 1969, Apollo 11 manned lunar landing mission. Report was for sale by National Technical Information Service in Springfield, Va. (Text)
Analysis of low-frequency sound from Apollo 14 spacecraft passing 188 km (117 mi) over Bermuda, obtained from infrasonic sensors in Bermuda, was presented in Science by Columbia Univ. geologists. Signals^ reminiscent of N-waves from sonic booms, were horizontally coherent, had nearly identical appearances and frequencies, and had supersonic trace velocities across tripartite sensor arrays. They had identical arrival times after spacecraft launch from ICSC and were only coherent signals recorded over many hours. Observations “seem to establish that the recorded sound comes from the rockets at high elevation” but values of surface pressure appeared explainable by combination of “kinetic theory approach to shock formation in rarefied atmospheres with established gas-dynamics shock theory.” (Cotten, Donn, Science, 2/12/71, 565-7)1
MSFC announced it had modified existing contract with Martin Marietta Corp. for work in Skylab Program to incorporate earth resources experiment package (erep) into flight version of multiple docking adapter, device to permit Apollo spacecraft to dock with Skylab cluster. Total cost of modification was $6 070 500. erep would contain photographic experiments to study earth from orbit, (msfc Release 71-111)
National Capital Planning Commission approved plans for Smithsonian Institution’s new $40-million National Air and Space Museum after hearing testimony from Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 astronaut. During 90-min debate, Commission member Paul Thiry described museum building, designed by architect Gyo Obata, as “industrial type” from “elevator-air conditioner school of architecture” lacking “classic proportions.” Collins said museum would possess “flavor of air and space.” Commission stipulated that building’s roof remain clear of mechanical equipment and that use of granite and marble be considered for construction. Final approval of plans would be considered following Nov. 17 meeting of Fine Arts Commission. (Combes, W Post, 11/5/71, A14)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden held press conference at MSC, during which they showed films and described mission. Irwin and Scott praised performance of LRV Rover and said it had exceeded their expectations. Showing film taken from Rover during traverse, Irwin said he hoped simulated ride didn’t make viewers seasick. Ride on LRV, he said, “is kind of a combination of a small rowboat in a rough sea and a bucking bronco.” Scott said only change he would recommend for Rover was “some manner of strapping yourself in the vehicle other than just pure seat belts.” He also said moon should be explored to far greater extent than was currently planned, with “a whole base of scientists” and “a Rover that can carry 6 to 10 men. I think we can . . . establish bases on the moon similar to those in the Antarctic and explore it and discover a vast amount of data that we don’t even know we have up there.” Core sample drilling, Scott said, was “one of the best things we ever did on the moon. It was very difficult, very time consuming and at times it was rather perplexing . . . because we did not expect the regolith or the surface material to be quite as well integrated or packed as it was. There was nothing wrong with the equipment, it was just that we encountered the unknown. And we had to compensate for that and . . . that’s why man goes to the moon. His subjective mind can evaluate the situation and come up with a fix far better than a machine. The machine would have stopped. It would have never gotten the drill.” Scott said in closing, “We went to the moon as trained observers . . . to gather data, not only with our instruments on board, but with our minds, and I’d like to quote a statement from Plutarch . . . : ‘The mind is not a vessel to be filled, but a fire to be lighted.’ ” Astronauts later revealed they had left plaque and tiny silver figure of a fallen man on moon as memorial to 14 astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in pursuit of space exploration. Plaque, bearing names of eight astronauts and six cosmonauts, had been left in small crater about 6 m (20 ft) north of rille. (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 8/13/71, Al)
nasa announced it had begun distribution of more than 2200 samples and polished thin sections of Apollo 15 lunar material to U.S. and foreign scientists. Total weight of largest and most varied sample collection was about three kilograms (six and a half pounds). Material would be analyzed by 700 investigators in U.S., Virgin Islands, 15 foreign countries, and ESRO. (nasa Release 71-223)
Apollo 7 Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham announced his resignation from NASA, effective on or about Aug. 1, to become Vice President of Operations for Century Development Corp., developers of Greenway Plaza in Houston, Tex. (nasa Release 71—110)
Age and composition efEects on alteration of lunar optical properties were described in Science. Evidence from Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 samples and telescopic spectral reflectivity measurements indicated that lunar seas “are similar in mineralogy on a regional scale and that the highlands are consistent with ah anorthositic-gabbro composition. Bright craters and rays in both regions expose materials that are relatively crystalline compared with their backgrounds, which are richer in dark glass. With age, bright craters and rays in the maria darken in place by meteorite impact-induced vitrification and mixing with the surrounding material. Highland bright craters and rays may, however, darken primarily through regional contamination by iron and titanium rich mare material.” (Adams, McCord, Science, 2/12/71, 567-71)
Preliminary results of Apollo 15 scientific experiments were reported by principal experimenters at MSC press briefing. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham reported that three-station seismometer network completed on moon by Apollo 15 had detected 39 events, including “most significant event we’ve recorded on the moon.” Event was moonquake 800 km (500 mi) beneath surface—greater depth than for any quake recorded on earth—about 644 km (400 mi) west of crater Tycho. Apollo 15 seismic data also had revealed that swarms of quakes occurred on moon as they did on earth. Most intense swarm recorded “contained 30 events over a period of just 2 and a half days ... at very regular intervals, at about 2 hour spacing, and culminated in the largest moonquake yet recorded.” Dr. Latham, Apollo program’s chief seismic investigator, said data from missions to date had proved “that we can place long life geophysical observatories on the moon and they can exist years, which means that we can expect to maintain a network of stations with larger spacing between missions.” Two heat probes drilled almost two meters (almost six feet) into surface had shown that moon was hot, with heat concentrated deep in interior or in pockets of radioactive mineral 160 km (100 mi) below surface. Temperature of moon increased 0.56 K (1°F) each foot deeper into moon, indicating heat flow from interior was one fifth earth’s heat flow. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Marcus E. Langseth said this evidence showed that abundance of radioactive minerals inside moon was at least comparable to abundance inside earth. It also suggested moon and earth were formed at same time from same elements. Cal Tech scientist Dr. Leon T. Silver and U.S. Geological Survey scientist Dr. Gordon A. Swann said Apollo 15 had discovered green rocks on moon composed of magnificently colored spheres of green glass. Dr. Paul W. Cast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said 75 kg (165 lbs) of Apollo 15 lunar rocks had been logged to date and would be distributed to investigators. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 9/2/71, Al)
nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences had confirmed results of June 21-25 Joint Working Group meetings at msc, nasa announced. Groups had considered technical requirements for compatible systems for space rendezvous and docking, radio and optical reference, communications, life support, crew transfer, and docking assemblies. They had agreed to study experiments to test technical solutions. Experiments might include docking spacecraft of Apollo type with orbital scientific station of Salyut type and docking spacecraft like Soyuz with station like Skylab. Mission models would test suitability of technical requirements and solutions. Next working group meeting was scheduled for late November in Moscow, to complete agreement on technical requirements for compatible systems. Working Groups had been established under Oct. 28, 1970, agreement, (nasa Release 71164)
msc announced contract awards. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $4 364 849 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated procedural changes previously authorized by NASA and brought total value of contract since January 1963 to $1 788 034 399. Boeing Co. was awarded $4.3-million, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for reliability, quality assurance, and flight safety engineering at msc. (msc Releases 71-67, 71-68)
Widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, one of three astronauts killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, filed $10-million suit in Brevard County Circuit Court against North American Rockwell Corp. and subsidiaries North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. Mrs. Betty Grissom charged negligence in fire which killed her husband and Astronauts Roger B. Chaffee and Edward H. White II. Suit asserted spacecraft did not have proper fire extinguisher system, had no emergency egress, and was “defective” because electrical wiring permitted electrical arc to flash in cabin. (AP, W Star, 1/19/71, BIO)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments and was powered down for 11th lunar night on moon. Vehicle had landed on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (fbis—Sov—71—137—3, 8/13/71, LI)
Historical value of Apollo 14 was appraised by Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post article. Mission “may well be remembered as a turning point in the sense that it taught man what his role could be in the exploration of space.” Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 landings had been “feats of technology that showed the world what its richest nation could do when it set its mind to something. Apollo 14 went a giant step further, to a place where man might appreciate what he had done and what he could do in the future on the surface of the moon or another planet.” (W Post, 2/14/71, Cl)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans held press conference at msc. Ph.D. geologist Schmitt defended his selection for mission and declared his readiness to “compete with anybody” in flying Apollo spacecraft. Schmitt, selected over Astronaut Joseph E. Engle, said Engle was “one of the most outstandingly qualified test pilots in the business” and speculated that Engle, transferred to space shuttle program, would “probably . . . contribute for the next 10 or 15 years a ... lot more than maybe even we can contribute by a lunar mission.” Sending a “professional observer” like himself to moon, Schmitt explained, would significantly increase knowledge gained, particularly concerning early history of earth and sun. (Transcript; Reuters, W Post, 8/20/71, A2)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, had safely endured 10th lunar night and was functioning satisfactorily, Tass announced. (fbis—Sov—172-3)
NASA announced decision to discontinue quarantine of astronauts, spacecraft, and lunar samples for remaining three Apollo flights. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said NASA had concluded from analysis of Apollo 11, 12, and 14 quarantine information “that there is no hazard to man, animal, or plants in the lunar material. These results have been reviewed by the Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, and that committee has recommended that further lunar missions need not be subject to quarantine.” (NASA Release
Biostack, West German experiment to study biological effects of cosmic radiation during space flight, would be carried in Apollo 16 CM, NASA announced. Experiment, by Univ. of Frankfurt, would stack four layers of biological systems—spores, seeds of European watercress, bean embryos, and encysted eggs of brine shrimp—between different physical detectors of heavy particle tracks (nuclear emulsions and plastics). Measurements of effect of particles on biologic material could be compared with effect of same particles on detecting layers to provide data on strength and other characteristics of particles. Combined action of heavy cosmic ions and space environment would he evaluated by comparing results with those from balloon-borne Biostacks and with ground-based irradiation experiments. Research on biological effects of heavy nuclei was significant because of possible relationship to biological effects of space flight on man. Experiment was sponsored by German Ministry for Education and Science, (nasa Release 71-230)
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Aug. 25 resignation from NASA of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong: “Offhand, it is regrettable to see any of these accomplished men leave the program they helped make such a smashing success. But Mr. Armstrong will be teaching engineering and it will be no surprise if some of his students wind up in future space exploration. So count his ‘defection’ to education as another spinoff benefit of the space program.” (W News, 8/30/71, 22)
Distribution of about 6.8 kg (15 lbs) of the 42.6 kg (94 lbs) of samples returned from moon’s Fra Mauro area by Apollo 14 astronauts had begun, NASA announced. To date, 187 scientific teams in U.S. and 14 foreign countries had been scheduled to receive samples. Additional proposals for consideration under Apollo 14 through Apollo 17 sample program were under review. More than 700 scientists would analyze samples, believed to include material formed at same time as original lunar crust. Investigating teams in U.S. were at 65 different institutions in 30 states and Virgin Islands. The 56 foreign teams were at 41 institutions, (nasa Release 71-62)
Apollo 12, 14, and 15 seismometers had located source of 80% of moonquakes in area 10 km (6 mi) wide and 650 km (400 mi) below lunar surface in Ocean of Storms, Dr. Gary N. Latham, Apollo program chief seismologist, reported in interview published in Washington Post. (Brett, W Post, 8/20/71, A2)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried gsfc payload to 115.9-km (72-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with all 19 grenades exploded and recorded as planned. Launch was part of series of similar experiments at three sites [see Jan. 7]. (nasa Rpt SRl) arc team of scientists headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett announced that first measurements of moon’s interior indicated moon had basaltlike mantle 338 km (210 mi) deep surrounding “cool core of primordial olivine-like rock.” Measurements suggested moon’s outer layer was melted during first billion years of its 4.5-billion-yr history. Measurements had been made with arc magnetometer placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts and also made by Explorer 35 moon-orbiting satellite launched July 19, 1967. (arc Release 71—2) Cornell Univ. astrophysicist Dr. Thomas Gold said stratifications found in Apollo 12 lunar surface samples were caused by earth in same process that made near side of moon different from far side. Moon passed behind earth with face turned earthward for four days during regular monthly cycle and was bombarded by high-energy electrons in earth’s magnetic field. Dr. Gold said he and coworkers had reproduced lunar surface markings inside vacuum chamber by bombarding finely ground earth material and small amounts of lunar soil with high-energy electrons up to 800 ev. Dr. Gold’s theory of “electrostatic motion” was disputed at meeting by Univ. of California physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey. (Lannan, W Star, 1/12/71, Al) NASA announced plan to continue lunar exploration with unmanned robots after last Apollo manned lunar landing in 1972. Plan would cost minimum $1 billion. Robot vehicles would travel 965 km (600 mi) across lunar surface and return to earth with samples or would rendezvous with other robot spacecraft that could return samples to earth. NASA spokesman said, “We sincerely hope that collaboration with the Russians takes place in space. A common program to explore the moon with instrumented spacecraft remotely controlled from earth might be the best way to help that collaboration take place.” (O’Toole, W Post, 1/14/71, Al)	_	_ Dr. Gerald R. Taylor, msc scientist, described laboratory experiment in which three highly resistant strains of bacteria were killed within 10 hrs of contact with one core sample from a number of centimeters below surface of moon’s Sea of Tranquility. Micro-organisms in protein soup had been exposed to lunar soil. Dr. Narenda Bhandari of Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India, reported that analysis of cosmic ray tracks on moon had provided “conclusive proof” of existence in lunar soil of fossils from chemical elements far heavier than any previously discovered in nature or in laboratory. If verified, discovery would greatly extend periodic table of elements. (Wilford, NYT, 1/14/71, 9) Dr. P. Buford Price of Univ. of California at Berkeley, said during interview that Apollo 12 lunar samples might contain first real evidence of “magnetic monopoles,” basic force units that were to magnetism what electrons were to electricity. If their existence could be confirmed, it would mean rewriting books on magnetism and electrodynamics. Dr. Price’s group of scientists appeared to have found two fossil tracks of nuclear type of particles which, theoretically, could have been made by monopoles in two lunar cysts. (Lannan, W Star, 1/14/71, A3) Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Soviet academician and Director of Vernadsky Institute for Analytical Chemistry in Moscow, told conference U.S.S.R. would continue to explore moon with unmanned spacecraft and would attempt bolder missions in future. He believed U.S.S.R. would exchange lunar samples with U.S. beginning with samples of Sea of Fertility returned by Soviet Luna 16. He said main task for Lunokhod 1, Soviet moonwalker still on moon, was to determine how eight-wheeled vehicle could best move about moon and how it could best be used in future. “We discovered that the moonwalker can move in very large angles and can go down into craters at angles of 20 degrees. The mechanical qualities of this car are very good.” Dr. Vinogradov said Lunokhod 1 carried instrument to analyze soil, but device had not done so thus far. He described Luna l6 samples as bearing no evidence of water or life on moon. Drill used to dig samples had been stopped at 330 mm (13 in) below lunar surface because it hit rock. “We were afraid to send it any deeper.” Dr. Vinogradov described Sea of Fertility as “blackish powder” sprinkled with “cosmic beads.” Luna 16 sample was similar to soil brought back by Apollo 12 from Ocean of Storms and not very different from samples returned by Apollo 11 from Sea of Tranquility. Age of Sea of Fertility had been calculated at 4.6 billion yrs, older than some rocks returned by Apollo missions. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/15/71, Al) Dr. Paul W. Gast, chief of msc Earth and Lunar Sciences Div., reported discovery by msc scientists of “exotic components” in lunar soil believed to be fragments from primitive crust that covered moon 4.5	billion yrs ago. Fragments differed from other Apollo lunar samples and were thought to be pieces of crustal bedrock scattered by impact of meteorites pounding more ancient lunar highlands. Discovery, through chemical analysis, supported theory that moon once had hot, molten surface and that crust had hardened as it began cooling off. Discovery also helped explain why lunar soil was mostly one billion years older than lunar rocks. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory described norite found in chemical analysis of five soil samples. Norite was lighter in color than most Apollo samples and did not appear to be chemically native to landing sites. Most norite represented “nearsurface material in an ancient lunar crust.” Coarser grained relative of norite might have come from “somewhat deeper in the moon— perhaps several miles.” If discovery proved true, samples would go back in age to beginnings of solar system. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg—Cal Tech physicist who had dated Apollo 12 Sample 13, oldest rock yet found, at 4.5 billion yrs (other Apollo 12 rocks were about 3.4 billion yrs old)—said Sample 13’s oldest parts were granite that crystallized early in lunar history and could fie some of original crustal material and some of “magic component” that accounted for difference in ages of lunar rocks and soil. Dr. Wasserburg believed that fact there was always some missing ingredients in lunar soil meant soil contained debris from granites and other materials originating elsewhere on moon. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, reported Apollo 12 seismometer was recording weak but frequent moon-quakes along rilles near landing site. He suggested rilles might be “fault zones,” where slight movements in lunar surface were occurring. (Wilford, NYT, 1/17/71, 4:7; Gast, msc)
Smithsonian Institution’s revived plans for construction of $40-million Air and Space Museum on south side of Mall in Washington, D.C., were described by Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 Astronaut, in interview published by Washington Post. Plans for building, to contain exhibit areas and galleries with displays on history of aviation and science and technology of flight, would be presented to National Capital Planning Commission in November. Collins said only best items in Smithsonian’s collection would be exhibited in new museum, designed by architect Gyo Obata, who had designed previous building that would now cost $70 million to construct. Collins said Smithsonian would ask Congress to appropriate funds for new building in FY 1972. (Scharfen-berg, W Post, 10/28/71, Bl)
NASA announced flight schedule for 1972. Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission would be launched in March and Apollo 17 in December. Pioneer-F would be launched in February on two-year mission to Jupiter, and erts would be launched into polar orbit during the first half of 1972 to obtain earth surface imagery. Other launches would include Intelsat-IV F—4, F-5, and F-6 comsats for ComSat-Corp; heos-a2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite for esro; mts Meteoroid Technology Satellite; TD-1 scientific satellite for esro ; itos-c, -d, and —e Improved Tiros Operational meteorological satellites for noaa; oao-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory; imp-h Interplanetary Monitoring Platform; esro-A scientific satellite for esro; Aeros scientific satellite in cooperation with West Germany; sas-b Small Astronomy Satellite; Telesat-A comsat for Canada; Nimbus-E r&d satellite; and sms-a Synchronous Meteorological Satellite. In addition, NASA schedule would include broad range of aeronautical research and cooperative exploration with other countries. Aircraft noise abatement would be high-priority goal, with development of QUESTOL aircraft, construction of noise-reduction laboratory at LaRC, and mating of acoustically treated nacelle to quieter jet engine. Supercritical wing test aircraft would be fitted with side fairings to increase flight efficiency and wing would be fitted to modified F—111 aircraft for tests in 1973. X-24A lifting body would be modified and redesignated X-24B and would begin flight tests in fall 1972. (nasa Feature Release)	............
NASA’s 13th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Charles J. Donlan, Deputy Associate Administrator (Technical), omsf; Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Associate Administrator, ossa; Bruce T. Lundin, LeRC Director; Bernard Moritz, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Organization and Management; Oran W. Nicks, LaRC Deputy Director; and John W. Townsend, Jr., noaa Associate Administrator. Group Achievement Award was presented to Apollo Recovery Communications ats Satellite Support Team, gsfc; Ionospheric Studies Project Team; Oso 7 Recovery Team, gsfc; Planetary Atnusphere Experiments Test Projects, arc and Hq; and San Marco Project Team. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 42 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 28. (Program; NASA Release 71—218)
U.S.S.R. sent telegram to American Science and Engineering, Inc., designer of Apollo 15 x-ray detector, accepting invitation to cooperate with U.S. in studying x-ray sources during Apollo 15 mission. Soviet scientists would train 2591-mm (102-in) telescope on same region of sky that Apollo 15 crew would explore during return to earth and would compare notes on how strongest x-ray source in sky appeared through telescope and through x-ray detector. (McElheny, W Post, 7/21/71, A10)
Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) which would transport astronauts John W. Young and Charles M. Duke, Jr., on moon during Apollo 16 mission had successfully completed prelaunch checks and been installed on lunar module for flight, KSC announced. Astronauts Young and Duke would make three excursions on LRV in Descartes area of moon during mission, scheduled for March 1972. Final approval of LRV flight readiness was given by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, after installation review. LRV was managed by msfc and was built by Boeing Co. (ksc Release 259-71)
Cuban internal radio newscasts gave detailed account of ApoUo 15 mission. Radio reloj, all-news station in Havana, read reports of astronauts’ activities on moon. (NYT, 8/3/71)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell had tried personal experiment in mental telepathy during flight to moon and back, AP reported. Mitchell, who had life-long interest in psychic phenomena, had concentrated at prearranged times on symbols. Psychic in Chicago had concentrated at same time in attempt to receive signals. Mitchell confirmed that he had conducted experiment, but declined to reveal details. (AP, B Sun, 2/13/71, Al)
Assistant chief designer for U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 moon rover said in Tass interview that all goals of mission had been attained. Lunokhod 1 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17 and had exceeded expected three-month operating time and provided valuable information. Mission had resulted in acquisition of new skills and development of new techniques and control methods. Principles of remote control, reliability, and durability, as well as power supply, might find application on earth. (fbis-Sov—71—223-3, 11/18/71, L2-3)
New York Times editorial on NASA decision to continue Apollo 14 mission: “Space officials know that they have taken on an extra degree of responsibility with the ‘go’ decision, and have opened the way for massive recrimination should their judgment be proved wrong by later developments. Nevertheless there is some reassurance in the fact that the original docking problem—which for a time seemed certain to abort the flight—was successfully overcome by the astronauts thousands of miles from earth. The nation and the world will be watching this flight with renewed hope—and admiration for the brave men embarked upon it.” (NYT, 2/2/71, 34)
Apollo 15 astronauts would wear pressure suits—instead of flight coveralls as originally planned-—during lm jettison, nasa announced. Requirements for crew to wear suits had been reevaluated after deaths of three cosmonauts during reentry from June 6-30 Soyuz 11 mission. (nasa Release 71—134)
Letter by Dr. John M. Logsdon of George Washington Univ., responding to criticism of his book The Decision To Go to the Moon, was published in Science. Book had been reviewed by L. Vaughn Blankenship in Science July 23, Logsdon wrote: “Blankenship reports that I find the Apollo decision ‘a good one1 and ‘evidence of a political system operating at its best,’ I do no such thing. I do suggest . . . that ‘the decision to go to the moon was a representative American action,’ and was the product of a process ‘typical of the way many major decisions are reached.’ ” (Science, 9/17/71, 1079-80)
Apollo missions plus Surveyor, Orbiter, and Soviet missions had permitted first detailed study of formative stages of planetary body, UCLA scientist Dr. George W. Wetherill said in Science article. “Future work will require sampling distinctly different regions of the moon in order to provide data concerning other important lunar events, such as the time of formation of the highland regions and of the mare basins, and of the extent to which lunar volcanism has persisted subsequent to the first third of lunar history. This work will require a sufficient number of Apollo landings, and any further cancellation of Apollo missions will jeopardize this unique opportunity to study the development of a planetary body from its beginning. Such a study is fundamental to our understanding of the earth and other planets.” (Science, 7/30/71, 383-92)
frc and MSC scientists and engineers would begin research in adapting Apollo hardware to “fly-by-wire” electronic control system for future aircraft, nasa announced. System substituted lightweight wires for push-rods and added redundant wire paths at different locations in aircraft, to make overall system less vulnerable to damage. Electronic system could soften bumps, sways, and lurches of aircraft in rough weather and ease pilot’s load, (nasa Release 71-36)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4060 Commemorating World Law Day. He said: “We can see many heartening evidences that law is becoming stronger and more just around the world under the pressures which reason and necessity exert. Within the nations, human rights and ecological wisdom continue to gain stature in the law. Among the nations, security and cooperation—on every front from space to the seabeds—are being enhanced through negotiations, treaties, and conventions. The United Nations is entering its second quarter of a century, and many other international organizations are working effectively through and for world law.” {PD, 6/21/71, 942) June 17—July 2: Fourteenth Plenary Meeting of Committee on Space Research (cospar) was held in Seattle, Wash. International meeting of scientists hosted by NAS included symposia and working groups on 1970 total solar eclipse, astronomical observations from space, use of stratospheric balloons in space research, and lunar lasers. Grumman Aerospace Corp. scientist Dr. Henry C. Courten, professor of astronomy at Dowling College, said mysterious tracks on photographic plates he made during 1966 and 1970 solar eclipses appeared to be of small planet or asteroid belt inside Mercury’s orbit. Cal Tech scientist and lunar expert Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg told cospar meeting four rocks gathered by Apollo 14 astronauts had ages ranging from 3.85 billion to 3.95 billion yrs. Ages were surprising “since it was anticipated that Fra Mauro would yield rocks of greater antiquity.” Discovery suggested that volcanism was active on moon far longer than had been thought and was still forming lunar crust more than 600 million yrs after moon came into being. It also suggested that Sea of Rains had been carved by collision 600 million yrs after moon’s formation, or 100 million to 150 million yrs later than lunar experts had originally believed. Soviet scientists Yuri G. Nefyuduv, L. I. Kakurin, and A. D. Yegorov said Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov “found it difficult to keep the upright posture and had to be assisted while walking” during first three hours after return from June 2-19, 1970, mission. “Next day . . . their walk was still inadequate and erect positions were maintained with great efforts.” When cosmonauts returned to physical activity, few days after flight, effects of prolonged weightlessness had proved temporary. Astronaut John W. Young represented U.S. astronaut corps at ceremony to honor 10th anniversary of first space flight by Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. He asked, “What better tribute to the memory of Yuri Gagarin can we offer than the hope that the growing unity of efforts in space—which this cospar meeting so well exemplifies— may one day extend to all the Earth? (nas Release, 4/21/71; AP, W Post, 6/13/71, A7; O’Toole, W Post, 6/21/71, Al; upi, W Post, 6/28/71, A7; NASA Activities, 7/15/71,107) nas and nrc submitted to cospar United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1970. Report included summaries of observations from spacecraft, sounding rockets, high-altitude balloons, and aircraft made or reported during 1970 and discussed flights planned for 1971. (Text)
President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia and Mrs. Tito visited msc during state visit to U.S. They were shown Apollo 9 CM, Mercury and Gemini spacecraft, and lm test article. The Titos visited Mission Control and saw demonstration of spacesuit and Apollo 15 films. Center presented Tito with framed and autographed photo of earth as seen from moon’s vicinity by Apollo 8 astronauts, (msc pao)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1, first self-propelled lunar vehicle, ceased operations after 321 days on moon, Tass announced Oct. 9. Eightwheeled vehicle stopped transmitting photos and soil analyses to earth when its isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night on moon. Depletion of nuclear heat source had caused temperatures on rover to drop during lunar night. Vehicle had been landed on moon in Sea of Rains by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. Solar-powered Lunokhod 1 had successfully conducted scientific and technical research program with all systems functioning normally. It had traveled distance of 10 540 m (34 680 ft), exploring more than 80 000 sq m (860 000 sq ft) of lunar surface and had produced more than 500 panoramas, 20 000 TV pictures, 25 chemical analyses, and hundreds of probes of physical-mechanical characteristics of lunar soil. Vehicle had been parked on level surface with French-made laser reflector pointing toward earth, to permit continued use of laser for ranging experiments. (fbis-Sov-71—197—3, 10/12/71, LI; 212-3, 11/3/71, L5-6; NYT, 10/10/71, 68; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 17)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar IT. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held news briefing in Washington, D.C. Crew showed film and slides and described mission and preliminary results. To question on future of manned space flight Shepard said: “The relative comparison of the efficiency of the manned versus the unmanned systems, I think we tried over the years to show where we feel that man has his point, has his place in space . . . and with 14, certainly, there were several instances where basic reflexes, basic judgment, and human instincts made it a successful flight where it would not have been successful otherwise. “Obviously, we brought back a lot more rocks than the Lunokhod has brought back. But I don’t think that is the point. I think the point is that we have chosen to exercise part of the expenditures of our money along the areas that we have found to be successful; that is, manned flight. I think we have shown on the 14 . . . that manned space flight can contribute on a scientific basis and contribute efficiently when it comes to assessing the dollar value put on it.” (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. was “clearly a big jump ahead” of U.S. in “post-moon race operations,” Detroit News editorial said. “Credit must be given the Russians for having the shrewdness to go all out for orbital space stations when they realized, as they must have done before Armstrong and Aldrin landed on the moon . . . that they were sure to lose the moon race. We shall have to watch for a few years because the decision has been made to slash the space budget.” (Detroit News, 4/25/71, 4M)
LRL scientists opened first box of lunar samples returned by Apollo 14. Samples included one rock almost pure white with some grey flecks and one with 10 times more potassium, thorium, and uranium than was found in Apollo 11 and 12 samples. Dr. Paul Gast, Director of Planetary and Earth Sciences at msc, said preliminary studies of samples were “not inconsistent” with idea that lunar highlands might represent lunar crust. “If this additional evidence that the (highlands) materials on the moon contain abundant rocks with high potassium and high uranium and high thorium ... it means the highlands are almost as old as the moon itself. What we’re saying is that there is a layer of unknown thickness . . . on the surface of the moon which is of very different composition than the average moon.” (AP, W Star, 2/13/71, Al)
Prague newspaper Rude Pravo commented on Apollo 15: “The scientists eagerly anticipate the results of the work of the astronauts and instruments which were sent on such a long trip. People of goodwill throughout the world who follow these flights will always wait long into the night for the two words from Houston, Baykonur, and eventually from other places on earth: ‘Mission complete.’ ” (FBis-Czecho-slovakia—71—155, 8/11/71, Dl)
Small “quasi-moon” 1.6 to 3.2 km (1 to 2 mi) in diameter was gravitationally linked to earth and moon in three-body team of celestial objects orbiting sun, Dr. Hannes 0. Alfven of Univ. of California at San Diego said in telephone interview with New York Times. Although little asteroid, named Toro, was discovered in 1964, computer calculations showing it was locked with earth and moon had not been reported until September at Nobel Conference in Stockholm, Toro came within 15 million km (9.3 million mi) of earth every eight years. Discovery was first indication that another celestial object was part of earth-moon system. (Rensberger, NYT, 10/8/71, 24)
U.S. technological society was product of past r&d efforts, President. Charles A. Anderson of Stanford Research Institute said in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial. Current assault on U.S. leadership in science and technology was “both external and internal.” Western Europe, Japan, and U.S.S.R. were progressing in areas traditionally controlled by U.S. “In radio astronomy, high energy physics and conventional energy research we have already been surpassed. Internally, a new national distaste for science and technology is undermining the national research and development effort.” {Av Wk, 10/18/71, 7) Dr. John W. Freeman, Jr., of Rice Univ. referred to results of Apollo 12 and 14 suprathermal ion detector experiments that had discovered water vapor on moon [see Oct. 15]. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said neither he nor Dr. Freeman could locate source of tiny moonquakes that released gas from beneath lunar surface, including water vapor seen March 7. Dr. Latham described sudden and large surge from lunar surface detected by seismometer in April during series of moonquake swarms. Though he knew of no volcano on moon, he compared event—largest moonquake yet recorded—to volcanic activity on earth, (msc Release 72-77; Maloney, H Post, 10/19/71; Brett, W Post, 10/21/71, F2)
LRL geologists Dr. William C. Phinney and Dr. Paul W. Gast described anorthosite rock from Apollo 15 sample bag No. 196 to press at msc lunar sample briefing. Dr. Phinney, praising crew’s descriptions of samples, said “as in all cases so far where we’ve looked at what the rocks are, it matches exactly what the astronauts said it was. It’s about fist size, 269 grams—%-lb—anorthosite . . . essentially pure plagioclase.” Grain was quite coarse, 1-cm (0.4-in) grains, “about the coarsest grain size of any lunar rocks that we’ve seen so far.” Its milky-white color suggested “that it has probably undergone a fair amount of stress, maybe a shock type of deformation.” Rock, popularly called “Genesis rock,” was significant because it supported hypothesis that moon had been extensively molten with anorthosite crystallizing from liquid, floating to top, and producing anorthositic crust. Although discovery did not prove hypothesis, Dr. Gast explained, it was “a long step in the direction” of determining moon’s origin. “If results on the dating of this anorthosite and some of the chemistry on it . . . turn out that all point to the fact that it is essentially 4.6 or 4.7 billion years old, which is the time that we think the moon formed, ... it gets to be rather difficult to argue with the hypothesis.” (Transcript)
Izvestia published Apollo 14 story filed by its New York correspondent claiming that cane presented as joke to Alan B. Shepard, Jr., before launch had become “symbolic” of entire mission. Report emphasized mission’s technical difficulties. (AP, W Post, 2/2/71, A6)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
President Nixon sent $229.2-billion FY 1972 budget request to Congress, including total science r&d budget of $16.7 billion. Total request for NASA new obligation^ authority (noa) of $3,271 billion (1.4% of total U.S. budget) was $27 million less than FY 1971 noa of $3,298 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $216.5 million against decline of $486.4 million in FY 1971. Reduction to $3,152 billion placed proposed NASA FY 1972 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,518 billion would go for r&d, $56.3 million for construction, of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $302.2 million, to $612.2 million— reflecting cancellation of Apollo 18 and 19—would be partially offset by increase from $515.2 million in FY 1971 to $672.8 million in FY 1972 for manned space flight operations. Manned space flight operations would include $535.4 million for Skylab, $100.0 million for space shuttle, and $37.4 million for orbited systems and experiments. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,286 billion, down $144.6 million from FY 1971. Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $184.7 million, from $565.7 million in FY 1971 to $740.4 million in FY 1972. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for solar observatory ($19 million in FY 1972), High Energy Astronomical Observatory ($13.4 million), and space telescope study ($500 000). Funding for lunar and planetary exploration would increase $166.6 million, to $311.5 million, with $38.3 million going toward Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, $180.4 million toward Viking project, and $18.8 million toward supporting research and technology advanced studies. Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would decrease from $35.5 million in FY 1971 to $17.6 million. Funding for bioscience program, including Biosatellites, was eliminated from NASA budget for FY 1972. Increase of $15.5 million in space applications programs, to $182.5 million in FY 1972, included $48.5 million for Earth Resources Survey, $13 million for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, and $60.3 million for ATS. Total for advanced research and technology programs decreased from $264.2 million in FY 1971 to $212.8 million, stol technology program would receive $15 million, against $1.9 million in FY 1971. nerva rocket funding would decrease from $32 million in FY 1971 to $9.9 million. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $26 million, to $264 million. dod’s FY 1972 budget of $76 billion for outlays included $1.55-billion space funding, $500 000 less than previous year [see April 2]. Budget also included $370 million for B-l intercontinental bomber, up from $75 million in FY 1971; $39 million for lamps antisubmarine-warfare helicopter, up from $4 million, $145 million for air defense aircraft system (awacs), up from $87 million, $47 million for usaf AX close-support aircraft, up from $28 million, $409 million for Poseidon missile system, and $926 million for Minuteman III program, up from $720 million in FY 1971. aec funding for nerva and space electric power would decrease from $84 million in FY 1971 to $39.7 million. Increase of $437 million in total dot FY 1972 budget of $7.8 billion would go mostly to expanded aviation and urban mass transit spending, dot funding for reduction of aircraft noise and study of environmental effects of SST would increase from $27 million in FY 1971 to $54 million. These funds also would he used for pollution reduction from Coast Guard installations, noa of $235 million was requested for sst prototype program, up from $210 million in FY 1971. (US Budget for FY 1972; bob Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; aiaa release 71—2; CR, 1/29/71, H265; ddr&e Dir Foster Testimony, 4/2/71)
U.S. scientists conceded that U.S.S.R. led U.S. in many areas of basic research and space medicine largely because U.S. had “opted for an engineering approach to manned space flight and deliberately ignored some areas of theoretical research as irrelevant to the moon landing mission,” Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Scientists were worried that political developments in U.S.S.R. could harm free flow of this data. (Av Wk, 10/11/71, 14-5)
Apollo Day” was celebrated in State of Indiana. Gov. Edgar H. Whitcomb attended ceremonies at Spring Mill State Park honoring Indiana-born astronaut, the late Virgil I. Grissom who was killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, (msfc Hist Off)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received Golf Magazine's All-America Award for making first golf shot on moon during Apollo 14 mission (Jan. 31-Feb. 9). (AIT, 4/21/71, 57)	'
First book taken from earth to moon was not microfilmed Bible carried by Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell on Apollo 14 (launched Jan. 31, 1971) as had been reported by upi, Robert H. Goddard Library publication Goddard Biblio Log said. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., had carried miniature copy of Robert Hutchings Goddard—Father of the Space Age on Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969, 45 years after Goddard’s first liquid-fueled rocket flight) but had not been allowed by NASA to leave book on moon. Apollo 11 astronauts had given three-by two-inch book, published by Achille J. St. Onge, to Mrs. Esther Goddard, who had donated it to Goddard Library at Clark Univ. (Goddard Biblio Log, 7/71, 11—2)
Baltimore Sun editorial praised NASA decision to include scientistastronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt in Apollo 17 crew: “Exploration of the moon can be scientifically justified as a great and extremely costly project only by the faith that it will produce evidence on which the world’s whole scientific community can agree regarding the origins and age of the moon, the earth, perhaps the entire solar system.” Even though Apollo program was to end with Dr. Schmitt’s flight, “it may very well take a new turning by reason of his presence.” (B Sun, 8/15/71)
President Nixon, at ceremonies marking dedication of Rathbun Dam in Centerville, Iowa, referred to Apollo 15 astronauts: “At this very hour, if you were watching television you could see that fantastic ride in a golf cart on the moon.” Apollo 15 astronauts “look down on earth. What does it look like? Well, we’ve had descriptions from other astronauts and often they have remarked about the fact that from far out there the earth looks like a very peaceful planet.” (PD, 8/9/71, 112-5)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden visited KSC to thank personnel for their support during Apollo 15 mission, ksc Deputy Director Miles Ross told crowd of about 5000 that with all talent assembled in vab “I think this is the real Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.” (Spaceport News, 10/7/71, 1)	........................
First simulated altitude test of manned Apollo 15 CM in ksc vacuum chamber was postponed after oil was found leaking from light fixture. Problem did not affect spacecraft. (SBD, 4/6/71, 183)
Element variation and possible material source of Apollo 12 crystalline rocks was discussed in Science by Univ. of Tokyo geologists Ikuo Kushiro and Hiroshi Haramura. Chemical analysis of nine rocks had shown five rocks contained normative quartz; others had normative olivine and hypersthene. Rocks showed wide range in ratio of iron to magnesium. Findings led investigators to suggest rocks, with one exception, represented different parts of differentiated magmatic body, in which magmatic differentiation by crystallization and settling of olivine was most effective. Source material of original magma might be peridotite with or without plagioclase or spinel or garnet, depending on depth of magma generation. (Science, 3/26/71, 1235-7)
Apollo 15 anomalies were discussed by Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee during nsc luncheon and Apollo 15 film showing in Washington, D.C.: “I have been queried and have read comments that . . . we had more anomalies than we have seen in previous missions. In fact this is not so.” List of 40 anomalies had been compiled by nasa. “Twenty of these had to do with the experiments and the lrv, most of which were carried for the first time on this mission. This compares with 30 total anomalies on Apollo 14, 44 total anomalies on Apollo 12 and 43 on Apollo 10. Therefore I would conclude that we are not retrogressing in so far as the Apollo hardware performance is concerned.” Lee said lunar stay of 73 hrs was planned for Apollo 16. “The additional 6 hrs will not give us more eva time than we planned on Apollo 15, but will allow more time for eva preps, sleep, eating, etc.” (Text)
Patent No. 3 603 433 was granted to msc technicians William H. Keathley and Clarence J. Wesselski for spacecraft emergency shock absorbers that might also be used in automobile bumpers. Disaster-avoidance device backed up cyclic deformation system in struts of Apollo CM couches. System, installed in spacecraft since Apollo 11 to absorb energy from over-propulsion at launch or unusually hard landing, consisted of tightly fitted washers on rod. Pressure against end washer pushed one after another along line as force decelerated. (Jones, NYT, 9/11/71, 33; Patent Off pio)
Sen. Robert P. Griffin (R-Mich.) introduced for Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) S.R. 101, “to authorize and request the President to issue a proclamation designating July 20, 1971, as ‘National Moon Walk Day.’ ” (CR, 5/18/71, S7165)
Identification of galactic x-ray source GX3 + 1 with known star by British astronomers using lunar occulation—new technique employing coordinated observations from two sounding rockets-—had been reported by U.K. Science Research Council, New York Times said. Observations—from Skylark rockets launched from Woomera, Australia, Sept. 27 and Oct. 24, when GX3 + l’s approximate position was known— had indicated two times during which x-ray source had disappeared behind moon. Data had enabled Royal Greenwich Observatory astronomer L. V. Morrison to pinpoint area in which x-ray source lay by using photographic plate of region that contained star. Attempts to confirm identification would be made in next two months but report conceded possibility that x-ray source could he associated with fainter star not visible on existing plates. (NYT, 12/21/71, 22)
Pope Paul VI told crowd assembled at Castel Gondolfo that he had sent confidential message to Apollo 15 astronauts on their July 26-Aug. 7 lunar mission. Astronauts had replied: “Our journey is for all men and we hope that the talents which God has given us will enable us to satisfy those who so kindly support our undertaking.” (AP, W Star, 8/2/71, A2)
First flight model LRV was formally' delivered to NASA in ceremony at Boeing Co.’s Space Center at Kent, Wash. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msec Director, accepted first of three flight models from Boeing Co. Group Vice President for Aerospace 0. C. Boileau. Model would be shipped to arrive at ksc March 15 for final checks and installation aboard Apollo 15 lm. Delivery would be two weeks before April 1 contract delivery date, (nasa Release 71—38; Boeing Release 3/10/71)
President Nixon accepted resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs effective April 11. Collins would become Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. {PD, 3/1/71, 384)
President Nixon issued statement following successful splashdown of Apollo 15 spacecraft: “Apollo 15 has returned safely to Earth. It brings with it new proof of man’s invincible will to master the moment of his own destiny. It brings new tribute to man’s unquenchable thirst for understanding. It brings the seeds of scientific understanding which may open a new chapter in the history of our planet. We salute Astronauts Scott, Irwin and Worden, who have stood poised on behalf of mankind on the brink of man’s new world.” (PD, 8/16/71, 1154)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin demonstrated LRV Rover for press at KSC. Newsmen were permitted to take turns driving vehicle at maximum 16-km-per-hr (10-mph) speed. Scott told press, “We expect this little buggy to work just fine on the moon. It’s really a very straightforward little vehicle, just like driving your own automobile.” On first lrv excursion, Scott and Irwin would drive about one kilometer (six tenths mile) from Apollo 15 landing site at Hadley Rille to west edge of foothill for Hadley Delta at average speed of eight kilometers per hour (five miles per hour). On second excursion next day, they would drive to location as far as eight kilometers (five miles) from landing site and seek place to climb front and survey valley. “We’ll be looking for bedrock or some unique feature that might have sprung up from the moon with the front,” Irwin told press. “If we see it and the trail upward looks traversable, we might climb as high as 600 ft [180 m] to get to it.” Third and last trip on third day on moon would take astronauts to edge of Hadley Rille and north along ravine to sample crater cluster that appeared to scientists to be volcanic in origin. On return, astronauts would park lrv 90 m (300 ft) east of LM with TV camera pointed directly at lm. Irwin told press if all went well worldwide TV audience would get first live picture of spacecraft rocketing off moon on first leg of return journey to earth. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/5/71)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced retirement of Director of Program Management Lee B. James, effective May 31. James, who would return to academic community, would be replaced in acting capacity by James T. Shepherd, Deputy Director (Technical), Program Management. (msfc Release 71—77) During April: nasa issued Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific and Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1970—1972: Annual Report to The National Science Foundation. In FY 1972 budget, NASA was seeking authorization of $3,271 billion. Effect on programs would be: Funds for basic research would remain at FY 1970 level in FY 1971 and rise in FY 1972, reflecting increased funding for Viking and initiation of outer planets Grand Tour project. In applied research, estimates for FY 1971 reflected 10% increase over 1970 and slight increase in FY 1972, primarily for earth resources surveys and space station. Budget authority for development activities would decline in 1971 and 1972, primarily as result of completion of Apollo program and reduction in nasa—aec nerva program effort, r&d funds were requested in FY 1972 for space shuttle technology and engine development facilities. (Text)
Winners of 11th annual Federal Women’s Award were announced by Patricia R. Hitt, Assistant Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. They included Rita M. Rapp, Subsystems Manager of Apollo Food and Personal Hygiene Items and Head of Tests and Integration Activities for Skylab Food System at msc. Winners, selected from 119 upper-grade Federal career women nominated, would be honored at Feb. 25 dinner in Washington, D.C. (Federal Times, 2/17/71, 3; Dean, W Star, 2/4/71, C3)	_	_
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched NATO’s Natosat 2 military comsat for usaf and NATO, Eole Cooperative Applications Satellite for France, Isis 2 cooperative U.S.-Canada ionospheric satellite, and Ariel 4 ionospheric satellite for U.K. Italian crew trained by NASA launched NASA’s Explorer 45 Small Scientific Satellite and Italy’s San Marco 3 from Italian platform off coast of Kenya. Joint NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings on compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system progressed to discussion of possible joint test missions. Data obtained by NASA’s Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 probes were exchanged under agreement that covered broad range of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space science and applications. Agreement on future exchanges of medical and biological manned space flight data called for meetings between U.S. and Soviet experts at least annually. U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged Apollo 11 and 12 and Soviet Luna 16 lunar samples and Soviet scientists were among 750 experts attending Second Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in Houston. First U.S.-U.S.S.R. Conference on Communications with Extraterrestrial Intelligence was held in Soviet Armenia. Joint meeting of NASA and European Space Conference (esc) identified candidate areas for possible European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space programs, including design and development of space shuttle subsystems. International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey at Univ. of Michigan was cosponsored by NASA, Dept, of State, usn, and aid to inform representatives of 51 countries and international organizations of latest techniques for interpreting earth resources data acquired by aircraft and satellite remote sensing systems. nasa’s C-130 aircraft equipped with remote-sensing devices participated in U.S. survey of Jamaica’s natural resources undertaken at request of U.N. and Jamaican government. NASA signed agreement with West Germany for series of barium-ion-cloud (bic) probe launches, and new sounding rocket agreement was signed with France. Under sounding rocket agreement, 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets would be launched from Kourou Center, French Guiana, in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. By end of year NASA had entered into cooperative agreements with 39 countries, including agreements on lunar samples, tracking and data acquisition, and geodetic satellite program. Scientists of 87 countries besides U.S. were participating in cooperative ground-based programs and personnel exchanges and 62 countries were exchanging scientific and technical information. Since the beginning of 1962, NASA had launched 21 satellites under international agreements, in addition to flying 21 international experiments on NASA satellites. Since the beginning of the sounding rocket program, 683 cooperative rockets had been launched for research, (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Int Aff; “Selected Statistics on Int’l Affairs,” 2/17/72; A&A, 1971)
Federal Reserve System had begun supplying banks with 62 million copper and nickel dollars commemorating President Eisenhower and Apollo 11 lunar landing, AP reported. One side of coin carried reproduction of Apollo 11 astronauts’ emblem—eagle against moon’s surface. (B Sun, 11/3/71, A6)
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
Despite basic differences, lunar samples were not completely different from terrestrial rocks, Northern Illinois Univ. geologist S. S. Goldich wrote in Science. Basalt hornfels from Keweenawan Duluth complex in Minnesota, containing 7% by weight of titanium, were similar in many respects to Apollo 11 lunar samples. Hornfels’ texture, as well as primary textures in lunar rocks, resembled those in Keweenawan rocks. {Science, 3/26/71, 1245-6)
New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial commented on failure of Soviet Luna 18 mission: “The Soviet’s automated designs and performances are not to be belittled, for they represent research and development toward deep-probe capability. But it is interesting that Western space observers think they have grounds for suspecting that the Soviets are in fact working up a manned lunar program. If so, more than prestige and technological display are involved; it must mean agreement that man operates on the moon with the best cost-benefit ratio.” (New Orleans Times Picayune, 9/17/71)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in vtol aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot. (W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover (landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970) was powered up to begin experiments for 10th lunar day. (upi, W Post, 8/4/71, A6)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell for promotion to grade of captain in usn. Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had been promoted by usaf to grade of lieutenant colonel. (PD, 2/22/71, 266)
Future of U.S. space program was subject of articles in America Illustrated, usia publication distributed in U.S.S.R. Jay Holmes described plans for next two decades in space including planetary exploration and Grand Tours of outer space, practical applications of space technology, and international cooperation in space. Technical advancements directly traceable to U.S. space program were described by James J. Haggerty, who forecast additional space benefits in future. Reusable space shuttle and earth-orbiting stations, continued lunar exploration, and manned voyages to Mars were discussed in article on earth, moon, and Mars. (Am III, 2/71)
Apollo 15 astronauts were honored by Chicago with parade, special City Council meeting, and civic luncheon. Mayor Richard J. Daley presented them with honorary citizenship medals. (Wolfe, C Trib, 9/16/71)
Feasibility study at msc had ruled out use of small TV camera on lrv Rover while in motion during Apollo 16 mission, Los Angeles Times reported. Cost would exceed usefulness and pictures might be hazy and induce nausea in viewers because of up-and-down motion of Rover over lunar surface. Necessary adjustments to provide TV from Rover would cost almost $5 million. {LA Times, 9/27/71)
NASA’s 13 scientist-astronauts were “fuming,” Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. They had been selected to be members of Apollo crews landing on moon, primarily as geologists, and members of Sky-lab crews, as physicians, physicists, and chemists. But “no geologist has landed on the moon yet, and only one has a chance of making it,” O’Toole said. Among names of nine prime Skylab crew members and six backups recently circulated at msc, three prime and two backup members were scientists and “this enraged the scientists who were hoping for two-thirds representation on Skylab.” Three meetings had taken place between scientist-astronauts and senior NASA officials— Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Homer E. Newell, Associate Administrator; and Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Scientist-astronauts had asked for more freedom in developing their scientific careers. O’Toole said NASA officials had been said to be sympathetic, “but the gripe about getting their own experiments aboard Skylab fell on deaf ears.” (W Post, 5/17/71, Al)
Selected fire departments across U.S. would be testing new fire-resistant outfits developed by msc for use by NASA rescue crews, NASA announced. Prototype outfit had been displayed at symposium of International Assn, of Fire Fighters. Clothing included thermal underwear, coverall, chaps, two kinds of trousers, two jackets, and two proximity suits that permitted fire fighters to move close to fire or even enter flames. Nonflammable materials in garments had been developed to ensure maximum safety of Apollo crews in oxygen-rich atmosphere. (NASA Release 71—12)
Baltimore Sun editorial praised progress of NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences plans for compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system: “For all the impediments, actual and potential, to genuine collaboration in an almost illimitable project which no single nation can ever claim for its own alone, America and Russia have managed, it seems, to come to terms on some major technical points.” Consultations that produced agreement “indicate the growth of sensible, humane realism in both Washington and Moscow in looking to the future,” (B 5»re, 9/4/71) Mitchell W. Sharp, Canadian External Affairs Minister, said at news conference following opening session that it was time for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to negotiate underground nuclear test ban. Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Conference Chairman and former AEC chairman, said in paper that plutonium 244, heaviest element, could assist in determination of earth’s age. In newspaper interview, Dr. Seaborg said leading nuclear scientists agreed that nuclear-generated power was “clean, safe and necessary,” but that people of world needed to be convinced. He felt that responsibility for ensuring safety in use of nuclear energy should eventually be transferred from aec to some other agency but move would be “premature” at present. Milton Klein, manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems Div., reported on nasa plans to send nuclear-powered space probes to outer planets in next five years, followed by manned missions using atomic engines in the 1980s. First mission using nuclear reactor to provide onboard electricity [Pioneer F Jupiter flyby] would be launched in 1972. U.S.S.R. withdrew from conference program paper it had intended to read entitled: “Development of nuclear power systems for space in the U.S.S.R.” and substituted paper on operation of small Topaz reactor. Washington Post quoted observers as attributing substitution to U.S.S.R. lag in space nuclear power field. One observer had said only other explanation might be that they were embarrassed by failure of Lima 18 “to perform on the moon.” (aec Releases 0-151, 153; Reuters, W Post, 9/10/71, A13; NYT, 9/12/71, 20; Sullivan, NYT, 9/16/71, 14; O’Toole, W Post, 9/16/71, A21)
Use of machines, rather than men, in space after final Apollo mission was advocated by Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold in New York Times Magazine article. For lunar or Martian exploration he suggested “roving vehicle with television eyes and one or two telefactor hands, a modern version of a centaur—half man, half automobile.” Vehicle could travel longer distances on lunar surface than man and. retrieve samples of different terrain. “The remote hands could pick up rocks and examine them under the television eyes, and, if desired, put them in a hopper for eventual transmission back to earth. The vehicle might then rendezvous with another that has earth-return capability and hand over the contents of the hopper to it. While this type of vehicle would allow us to explore almost all regions of the moon, manned missions have been severely limited both in the type of terrain for the landing and the distance that astronauts can travel from their spaceship.” Scientists had favored use of telefactor with sample-return capability but “the very success of the Apollo program had diverted attention from it.” Now that no “really purposeful” manned program was planned, Dr. Gold asked, “would not this be the right time for really learning how to do good remote control?” (NYT Magazine, 8/22/71)
Soviet engineer 0. Sashin described in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya activities of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by Luna 17, Nov. 17, 1970: At time of launch “it was supposed that the whole . . . program could be fulfilled in 3 lunar work days. . . . Over these three days Lunokhod-1 . . . visited a multitude of craters, repeatedly surmounting rock fields. ... In all, during the 3 working days envisaged by the initial program, 42 radio communications sessions were held with Lunokhod-1, during which 8,924 radio commands were issued and fulfilled. . . . the route covered by the apparatus amounted to 3,551 meters [3883 yards], the television cameras transmitted to earth more than 80 high-quality panoramas of the surrounding locality and the scientists obtained vast information about the moon. The fourth working day passed, then a fifth, and a sixth. . . . Each was succeeded by a 2-week lunar night with all its ‘charms’ including an outside temperature which drops to below minus 150 degrees. But the next morning came and Lunokhod-1, roused by a radio command from earth, obediently set about its work. “The work of the self-propelled lunar scout . . . continues. . . . 132 radio communications sessions have been held ... in which 22,792 radio commands have been given. A route 10,226 meters [11 183 yards] . . . over the lunar surface has been covered. The 10th working day on the moon has arrived. And again the indefatigable scout [is] continuing its search.” (fbis-Sov-158-3, 8/16/71, LI—3)
Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 15. Washington Daily News: “The record harvest of rocks and other data brought back by Apollo 15 may turn out to be one of the biggest steps ever toward understanding the solar system, the dominant influence on earthly existence. This has been the most remarkable decade of research and development in history, and the space program has been the core of it.” (W News, 8/9/71) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The pictures taken by Endeavour and the data being supplied by the tiny satellite the astronauts left orbiting the moon are providing the most exact and comprehensive intelligence yet about minerals on the moon.” It was “becoming obvious that what we spend in space we are investing in the future of mankind.” (P Bull, 8/9/71)
U.N. Secretary General U Thant said in message to President Nixon that Apollo 15 was “another brilliant chapter in man’s peaceful exploration of outer space.” (Reuters, NYT, 8/8/71)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski testified on FY 1972 budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics authorization hearings. During 1970 otda supported some 50 ongoing scientific, applications, planetary, and lunar experiment missions as well as some 14 new flight projects launched in year by NASA and DOD. During Apollo 13 mission, with safe return after inflight explosion, MSFN “demonstrated that it is, in fact, the astronauts’ life-line to earth.” Valuable clues to origin of explosion were found in analysis of recorded telemetry data, msfn was still supporting experiments left on moon by Apollo 12 and 14 missions. After FY 1972’s Apollo 15 and 16 missions, network would be continuously monitoring 16 alsep experiments. Satellite network provided tracking and data acquisition for average monthly workload of some 40 earth-orbital satellites, including NASA’s scientific and applications satellites and projects of other Government agencies and foreign countries. dsn supported Mariner 6 and 7 probes in extended mission phase and Apollo 13, as well as four ongoing Pioneer missions (6 through 9). Data acquired by Goldstone antenna on effect of solar gravitation on Mariner spacecraft signals had verified Einstein theory of delay of 200 microseconds in return of signals from gravitational field of sun. Construction continued on second 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and ground was broken for third near Madrid, Spain. (Transcript)
Determination of crystallization ages for six Apollo 14 lunar rocks was described in Science by Dr. Liaquat Husain, Dr. John F. Sutter, and Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientists. Rocks, from Fra Mauro region, had been dated by measuring argon ratios in mass spectrometer. All six rocks gave age of 3.62 to 3.92 billion yrs, same as that of fragmental rocks from Fra Mauro. Scientists had concluded that Imbrium impact-—one of last major events in evolution of pre-mare lunar surface—and crystallization of significant portion of pre-Imbrian basalts were “essentially contemporaneous.” (Science, 9/24/71, 1235-6)
Office of Management and Budget had asked nasa to cut FY 1973 budget request “quite a few million dollars” below $3.3-billion FY 1972 budget according to New York Times’ sources, Times said. Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, had said Apollo 16 and 17 “look firm,” but could “be in trouble” if there was significant cut in NASA funding. Other sources had said NASA had alternate plans that included elimination of one or both Apollo flights and curtailment, cancellation, or delay of other projects. (Wilford, NYT, 11/19/71)
LRV had run into development difficulties that had boosted estimated cost more than 60%, Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. Cost was now estimated at $41 million, $12 million more than $19 million stipulated in October 1969 contract let to Roeing Co. and General Motors Corp. Overrun was due “almost entirely to overtime paid to the two companies to make sure the Rover will be ready to fly with Apollo 15 when it takes off for the moon July 25.” Trouble with electronic controls and independent harmonic drive and other problems had delayed testing of lrv until Dec. 14, 1970, almost three months late. (W Post, 1/30/71, A3)
Apollo 15 completed simulated liftoff at 9:34 am edt in preparation for launch from ksc July 26. Spacecraft was unmanned and fully loaded with propellants. Astronauts would practice countdown in spacecraft without fuel July 14. (SBD, 7/14/71, 56)
Vice President Spiro T, Agnew told workers at Ksc after Apollo 14 launch that days of declining space budget were past and “we’re going forward together not just to the moon but I’m certain that the American program will continue and press forward into the reaches of interplanetary space.” (AP, W Star, 2/11/71, A7)
nasa’s Apollo 15 was 5351st man-made object launched since U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 Oct. 4, 1957, according to Air Defense Command Hq. figures reported by AP. Center was tracking 2454 objects still in orbit. (NYT, 7/27/71, 14)
nasa announced appointment of Lee R. Scherer, Apollo Lunar Exploration Director, as Director of Flight Research Center, nasa’s facility for flight-testing high-performance aeronautical vehicles at Edwards, Calif. Appointment would be effective Oct. 11. Until then De E. Beeler, Deputy Director, would continue as Acting frc Director. Scherer had been Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and Manager of Lunar Orbiter Program from its inception in 1963 through its successful completion in 1967. He had received nasa’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1967 and nasa’s Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal in 1969. (nasa Release 71—176)
President Nixon telephoned congratulations and good wishes to ground and flight crews of Apollo 15 following moon landing. (PD, 8/2/71, 1099)
lm similar to those used on Apollo 11, 12, and 14 was placed on permanent display at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. (W Post, 5/7/71, Bl; Smithsonian pio)
Dedication ceremonies for (Ac historic launch site at Kennedy Space Center marked the 10th anniversary of the first U.S. manned space flight, fiotun on the Freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft. The first American to go into space, Astronaut Alan B, Shepard, }r.—who also was commander of the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission fan. 31—Feb. 9 this year—stood by the plague marking the site at AauncA Complex 5/6 during ceremonies attended by 3000 guests. The site had been restored to its original condition. DOT, and FAA, with assistance from dod, cab, and eight other Federal agencies. Report concluded that aircraft noise abatement deserved highest priority because of widespread concern for environment and because noise abatement program’s success would affect solution to other aviation problems. Study recommended reductions of at least 10 decibels every 10 yrs until aircraft noise was suppressed into community background noise. Continued Federal support at high level of aeronautical K&D was necessary to ensure strong technical base. Continued R&d was essential if current and future problems of civil aviation were to be solved and if civil aviation was to contribute to such future areas as regional development. Study recommended Government evaluate its regulatory role to be certain that policies were not inhibiting innovations by industry and that NASC develop permanent mechanism to review and recommend policies affecting civil aviation that embraced several agencies. Study called for exchange of middle management personnel between aviation-related agencies like NASA, DOT, DOD, and CAB. (NASA Release 71-82; Text; Av Wk, 5/10/71, 20-1)
European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that it would provide live TV coverage of Apollo 14 for 21 countries in Western Europe and North Africa and coverage for TV stations in U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe. Fourteen multilateral broadcasts would be transmitted via Intelsat-III F-6 to earth station at Raisting, West Germany. (NYT, 1/31/71)
Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoly A. Rlagonravov said in broadcast that Soviet lunar vehicle Lunokhod’s safety margin and “perfect design” had “surpassed all expectations.” He said at this stage of space technology man could not have stayed on moon for as long a time as Lunokhod had. In future it would be possible to assign to automatic devices such tasks as studying meteorites, exploring volcanoes, and studying radiation in near-moon space. What was more important “is that we now have an almost ideal means of conveyance on the moon, a means independent of super-rigorous conditions of vacuum and sharp changes of temperature. We can load such a selenomobile with different scientific apparatus.” (AF Mag, 6/71, 59-9)
Four extra manned space flight missions to use four Apollo spacecraft and one Saturn V launch vehicle left after 1973 Skylab mission were proposed by msc officials to nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at nasa Hq. Missions would include one lunar flight and three Saturn IB-launched earth-orbital missions. Houston Chronicle later quoted msc Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., who had presented proposal, as saying msc plan called for one mission of up to nine days in lunar orbit. Astronauts could map 60% of lunar surface and place Nimbus weather satellite in lunar orbit to complete photography of entire moon in one year. (Hill, H Chron, 11/29/71)
New York Times editorial commented on nasa under new Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher: “The task of reversing nasa’s downhill course will not be easy, but there are grounds for believing that this period of doldrums can be overcome. It will help ... if the agency’s efforts in respect to Mariner 9 and Apollo 15 succeed as planned.” Two forces at work suggested “nasa may yet recapture some of the public support and interest which evaporated after its first spectacular Apollo flights to the moon’s surface. One is the capability of satellites to survey the earth with an efficiency never before known. . . . Beyond this there is the promising possibility of use of space research as a means of encouraging international cooperation. . . . over the next decade nasa may make its most important contribution as an instrument for demonstrating that men and women from many nations and many ideologies can work together for the benefit of all the earth.” (NYT, 5/21/71, 23)
introduction he said, “This is a time not for routine reading of sophisticated papers about a future that is itself in question, but for addressing ourselves to the basic issue of where we are headed—if anywhere.” Technical display included space shuttle technology exhibits by NASA and major contenders for shuttle contracts and models of Grumman F—14A fighter aircraft, McDonnell Douglas F—15 fighter, and NR B—I bomber aircraft. On Oct. 25, designated by aiaa as “Aerospace Day,” Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott narrated NASA Apollo 15 film. Panel discussions included “Rocketry in the 1950’s” chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; “stol and vtol—Where Do They Fit In?” chaired by arc Director Hans Mark and transmitted by telephone link up to LeRC employees; and “The Aerospace Professional—What Is His Future?” with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as panel member. Von Karman Lecture, “Trends in the Field of Automatic Control in the Last Two Decades,” was given by Dr. Irmgard Flugge-Lotz of Stanford Univ. Automation had been penetrating nearly every field of engineering. Mathematical theory and large computing equipment allowed development and extension beyond handling of linear and weekly nonlinear systems. Investigation of systems with large transport time lags had been advanced. Major aiaa awards presented included John Jeffries Award to Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director of Medical Research and Operations, for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of Manned Space Flight and aerospace medical research through your leadership in the development of life support systems.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given to Ronald L. Berry, Chief of MSC Planetary Missions Analysis Branch, for “many outstanding achievements in the field of manned space flight, particularly in lunar mission analysis and design development.” Spacecraft Design Award was presented to Anthony J. Iorillo, Manager of Special Projects for Hughes Aircraft Co., for “invention of the Gyrostat stabilized spacecraft which formed the basic stabilization and configuration for the successful Tactical Communications Satellite, Intelsat IV, and a series of other satellites now in design and production.” Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was given to Dr. Hubertus Strughold, Emeritus Professor of Medicine at Brooks afb, Tex. Citation said, “With his prophetic foresight and exceptional talents he established the rational biomedical foundations for manned exploration of space.” DeFlorez Training Award went to Capt. Walter P.	Moran of American Airlines for his “pioneering efforts in the utilization of flight simulation to increase safety and economy of airline flight training and checkout operations. . . .” Aerospace Communications Award was presented posthumously to Siegfried H. Rieger for “his personal contributions over a 10 year period, in analytical work evolving basic concepts, and in the origination and implementation of the Intelsat Program which led to the establishment of the present worldwide communications satellite network.” aiaa History Manuscript Award was presented to Dr. Richard C. Lukas of Tennessee Technological Univ. for “best historical manuscript dealing with the science, technology and impact of aeronautics and astronautics on society.” Award winning manuscript was “Eagles East: The Army Air Force and the Soviet Union.” Among 23 new Fellows honored at Honors Night Banquet Oct. 28 were George H. Hage, Boeing Co. Vice President for Product Development and former NASA Apollo Program Deputy Director; Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, Head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at LaRC; Eugene S. Love, Chief of Space Systems Div. at LaRC; James W. Plummer, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Wilbur L. Pritchard, Comsat Laboratories scientist; and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Douglas Corp. designer. (Program; aiaa Releases; Lewis News, 10/22/71, 1) 1971.	In this connection the sides referred to the important achievements in cooperation in the fields of space exploration, peaceful uses of atomic energy, as well as high energy physics, in particular the installation of a French laser reflector on the moon surface, the commissioning of the French bubble chamber Mirabelle at the Soviet proton accelerator in Serpukhov, the Soviet-French contact on enriching French natural uranium in the Soviet Union.” (fbis-Sov-71-210, 11/1/71, F4)
ksc announced award of $33 157 979 addition to cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with Bendix Corp. for support services for Apollo spacecraft and Skylab programs from Oct. 1, 1971, to Dec. 31, 1972. Addition brought total amount of contract to $210 081 335. (ksc Release 227—71)
Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent congratulations to President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 15 mission, Tass reported. Podgorny had asked President Nixon to convey congratulations and good wishes to “courageous” Apollo 15 astronauts. (fbis-Sov—71— 153, 8/9/71, Gl)
Following Apollo 14 splashdown, President Nixon telephoned Apollo 14 astronauts aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans to express personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. He released statement comparing Apollo 14 with May 5, 1961, Freedom 7 mission flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr.: “The difference between that first flight and this latest is a measure of how far we have progressed in space in the short span of 10 years. But two things have not changed: the courage and determination of the men who fly these missions, and the skill and dedication of the thousands here on earth who make their flights possible.” (PD, 2/15/71, 205)
Christian Science Monitor editorial commented: “Technically, the feats of Apollo 14 . . . are invaluable. The scientific data obtained have opened many new paths to broader knowledge. But far more noteworthy should be the effect which these can have upon man’s view of his place and role in the universal scheme. It is already historical fact that America’s space program has helped focus sharper attention on challenges at home. This is bound, in the long run, to be one of the program’s greatest contributions.” (CSM, 2/9/71)
John R. Schaibley, Executive Assistant to Apollo Program Director, omsf, died in Virginia after extended illness. He had been with NASA since 1959 and had received NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA Ann)
The Russian Space Bluff by Leonid Vladimirov, Soviet engineer-journalist who had defected in 1966, had been published in U.K., AP reported. Book said Soviet space program had begun as series of publicity stunts to persuade West that U.S.S.R. had reached level of advanced technology equal to that of U.S. Vladimirov had said that U.S.S.R. knew “she could not beat America to the moon because she cannot build a moon rocket. Even today the Soviet Union cannot produce any significantly big jet nozzles.” Mid-1960 flights in Voskhod series had been short because spacecraft were overloaded earlier Vostok type with some equipment removed. Last-minute modifications had been engineering disgrace. (AP, W Star, 11/25/71, H7) On Nov. 27 Mariner 9 failed in attempt at closeup photograph of Martian moon Phobos. JPL ground controllers said spacecraft’s camera wasn’t pointed correctly when attempt was made. Orbit of Phobos was not known precisely enough to ensure getting photo. Successful photo of Phobos would have shown greater detail than recent picture of Deimos, Mars’ other moon, since Phobos was twice as large as Deimos and spacecraft passed 1600 km (100 mi) closer. Mariner 9 had photographed Phobos Nov. 13 from 150 000 km (93 000 mi) out. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/27/71, A4; W Star, 11/28/71, A6)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15: “All the evidence suggests that this is the most productive scientific expedition ever carried out in space. Even before the astronauts’ own return, the information they have sent back has already forced reconsideration of some key ideas about the natural history of the moon. In ultimate perspective, however, it may turn out that the dividends from the Falcon’s stay on the moon will be as substantial in the realm of changed human ideas and aspirations as in scientific knowledge. For millions who watched the superb television pictures of the two astronauts working comfortably on the lunar surface, the image that came across was that of a friendly moon, a place where men could walk and ride and work with ease. This is a far cry from the traditional picture of the moon as a hostile, alien environment totally inhospitable to man.” (NYT, 8/3/71)
afsc announced establishment by Aeronautical Systems Div. (asd) of Prototype Program Office at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. Office, headed by Col. Lyle W. Cameron, would manage aeronautical prototype programs for usaf, usaf had identified as candidate aeronautical projects advanced stol transport, very low radar-cross-section (rcs) test vehicle, lightweight fighter aircraft, and quiet aircraft, (afsc Release 240.71) September 28-October 19: Luna 19, U.S.S.R.’s second unmanned lunar probe in less than a month, was launched from Baykonur at 3:00 pm local time (6:00 pm edt). In earth orbit Luna 19 was separated from last stage of booster and set on trajectory toward moon. Tass said mission would conduct scientific investigation of moon and near-lunar space from lunar orbit. During flight to moon 26 communications sessions were held with spacecraft and data on parameters and systems were transmitted. Midcourse corrections were conducted Sept. 29 and Oct. 1, and on Oct. 3 Luna 19 entered lunar orbit with 140-km (87-mi) altitude, 122-min period, and 40° 35' inclination. Tass said Oct. 19 that all systems were operating normally and spacecraft was conducting geophysical research of moon’s gravitational field and taking photographs of lunar surface. Previous mission in series, Lima 18, crashed on moon while attempting softlanding Sept. 11. (fbis-Sov—188-3, 9/28/71, LI; fbis-Sov— 192-3, 10/4/71, LI; fbis-Sov-203-3, 10/20/71, LI; SBD, 9/29/71, 89)	'
Scientists at lrl in Houston began opening bags of rocks returned from moon by Apollo 15 crew. Before and after day-long debriefing Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin assisted geologists in identifying samples. Material included football-size piece of black, glass-like rock; brick-size chunk of volcanic rock pitted with small cavities (vesicular basalt) ; and 9%-kg (21-lb) rock, largest single sample ever returned from moon, from rim of Hadley Rille. Scientists were anxiously waiting to examine crystalline rock in sample bag No. 196, scheduled to be opened Aug. 12, that Scott had described as possible chip of moon’s original crust. (W Post, 8/11/71; AP B Sun, 8/10/71, Al)
NASA, National Weather Service and Environmental Data Service spokesmen, questioned by Washington Post, said their agencies had received complaints from public that Apollo 15 mission had caused heavy rainfall over Washington, D.C., area. They denied that mission was responsible and that rains accompanying Apollo 13 and 14 missions had been anything more than coincidence. (Cohen, W Post, 8/5/71, Bl)
Acid hydrolysis, vacuum crushing, and vacuum pyrolysis experiments to investigate amount, nature, and isotopic composition of carbon in Apollo 12 sample 12023 were described in Science by arc exobiologists Sherwood Chang, Keith A. Kvenvolden, James G. Lawless, and Cyril A. Ponnamperuma and ucla geologist I. R. Kaplan. Results indicated that sample contained indigenous carbide and methane in amounts comparable to those found in Apollo 11 fines. Hydrolyzable carbide in Apollo 12 sample was heavier, isotopically, than any known carbide phase in meteorites. Large difference between isotope values for lunar and meteorite carbide suggested “that the former was either native to the moon or deposited by meteorites and subsequently subjected to isotope fractionation processes on the lunar surface.” If meteorites were not source of lunar carbide, “then we are left with the possibilities that the carbides represent primordial indigenous lunar carbon, however formed, or the product of interaction between solar wind carbon and metals or metal oxides or minerals on the lunar surface.” Evidence existed for presence of carbides in Apollo 11 rocks but amounts were too low for isotopic measurements. “If the carbon was indeed indigenous to the lunar rocks, the observed range of isotopic composition would be more representative of primordial lunar carbon.” (Science, 2/5/71, 474-6)
Senate confirmed nominations of Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as Alternate U.S. Representative to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly and of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, former aec Chairman, and Dr. T. Keith Glennan, former nasa Administrator, as U.S. Representative and Alternate to 15th session of General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at Geneva. (CR, 9/16/71, S14433)
Second flight model of lrv Rover was delivered by Boeing Co. to ksc for Apollo 16. (msfc Release 71-144; ksc pio) .
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden thanked usaf personnel at Patrick AFB, Fla., for their support during Apollo 15 mission and presented base with U.S. flag they had carried to moon. Later, astronauts thanked msfc employees during six-hour visit to Center, (msfc Release 71—164; NY News, 10/1/71, 64; msfc pao)
U.S. and British space experts believed purpose of four Cosmos launches in past 10 mos was to test components for manned lunar landing, New York Times reported. Cosmos 434, launched Aug. 12, was said to have been test of variable-thrust, restartable rocket engine similar to onboard propulsion system in Apollo CSMs. Other launches identified by experts were Cosmos 379, Nov. 24; Cosmos 382, Dec. 2; and Cosmos 398, Feb. 26. Crucial hardware believed to be missing from launches was Saturn V-size booster. Some of these spacecraft had traveled farther in space than previous Soviet flights testing manned spaceflight equipment; at least three, including Cosmos 434, had demonstrated greater ability to maneuver in space than any previous Soviet manned flight. British space expert Geoffrey E. Perry, who had first announced discovery of Soviet launch site at Plesetsk in 1966, had said in telephone interview with Times that “the Russians have never made orbital changes to the degree that they have demonstrated on these Cosmos flights.” He was convinced that “the Soviet Union is testing a large rocket engine similar to the one aboard Apollo. Even some of the velocity changes made by these Cosmos flights almost exactly match the velocity changes of Apollo for such maneuvers as lunar orbital insertion and trans-earth injection.” All four Cosmos were believed to have been launched by Proton, D-type, or SL-4, nonmilitary boosters with about half the thrust of Saturn V. Some were said to have transmitted recordings of human voices as test of radio communications. (Lyons, NYT, 9/6/71, 1)
Texas a&m Univ. scientists had irradiated five grams of lunar soil to determine whether its elements, apparently soluble in water, were absorbed in growing lettuce plants, AP reported. Laboratory plants growing in moon soil mixture had grown better than those in ordinary soil. Dr. Paul Baur, Jr., botanist working at Msc, had said if plants took up activated elements from lunar soil they could be detected on x-ray plates. “This may give us new clues to the fertilizer requirements of plants.” (W Star, 4/25/71, A16)
President Nixon telephoned msc Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton and asked him to send President’s congratulations to Apollo 14 astronauts and ground crew. Later President issued statement: “Apollo 14’s successful landing on the moon was a thrilling event for humanity. I congratulate the astronauts and also the thousands of other dedicated people who helped make this awesome achievement possible.” (PD, 2/8/71, 173)
Resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set foot on moon, was announced by NASA. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, would join Univ. of Cincinnati as its first professor of aerospace engineering Oct. 1. He would continue to serve NASA as consultant. Armstrong had joined NASA in 1955 and had served as aeronautics research pilot for naca and NASA. He had piloted X-15, X-l, F-100, F-101, F-102, F-104, F-5D, and B-47 aircraft and, as B-29 “drop” aircraft pilot, had participated in more than 100 rocket aircraft flights. Armstrong had been selected by NASA as astronaut in September 1962. He had served as backup command pilot for Gemini 5; command pilot for Gemini 8 (launched March 16, 1966), during which he had performed first successful docking of two vehicles in space; backup command pilot for Gemini 11; backup command pilot for Apollo 8; and commander of Apollo II.	(nasa Release 71-159)
Air Force Assn.’s Schilling Trophy was presented to Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin and Alfred M. Worden in recognition of “their unique contribution to manned spaceflight and science.” (NASA Activities, 10/15/71,172; afa pio)
Scientists and engineers at mit described planned Apollo 17 surface electrical properties experiment to probe for water on moon, in telephone interview with New York Times. Experiment consisted of 6.8kg (15-lb) radio transmitter with four 35-m (115-ft) lengths of wire which astronaut was to unreel on lunar surface in X pattern as antenna. Radio signals at varying frequencies would be beamed into lunar surface. Small receiver on LRV would receive signals bounced back from beneath lunar surface and signals would be recorded by tape recorder on lrv. Pattern, timing, and strength of reflected signals were expected to indicate presence of water, if any, and kind of material in lunar subsurface. Times said experiment’s importance had been heightened by Oct. 15 announcement of discovery of water vapor on moon. (Wilford, NYT, 10/19/71, 29)
Battery and companion unit in Apollo 15 lm failed during tests at ksc and were replaced. Investigation revealed battery had been contaminated with magnesium chips. Problem did not delay countdown, which continued on schedule toward 9:34 am edt liftoff July 26. (Wilford, NYT, 7/24/71, 29)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
Apollo 14 astronauts were presented Distinguished Service Medals at dod ceremonies. Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee presented usn dsm to Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented usaf dsm and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge to Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa. (NASA Activities 4/15/71, 61; dod Release 218-71; msc Hist Off)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed experiments for eighth lunar day and was put in stationary position for lunar night. Experiments had included examinations of lunar rocks, stereoscopic panoramic photography, and measurements of chemical composition and physico-mechanical properties of crater 150 m (164 yds) in diameter. Vehicle had traveled more than 10 km (6 mi) since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and was still functioning normally. (Sov Rpt, 7/8/71, 12)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden received Order of Leopold from King Leopold of Belgium in Brussels. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
Former New Mexico Governor David F. Cargo presented Apollo 11 moon fragments to Museum of New Mexico at ceremony in Santa Fe. Later, AP said incumbent Governor Bruce King had claimed lunar samples for people of New Mexico, while Cargo said they had been presented to him, personally, by President Nixon. AP said White House records showed plaque presented with moon fragments was inscribed “to the people of the State of New Mexico.” (AP, W Post, 2/11/71)
Interview of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, was published by U.S. News & World Report. Dr. Petrone said: “Many people think Apollo had only a singular goal—that is, land a man on the moon and return him safely to earth. That was not the only goal of Apollo. Very clearly, in President Kennedy’s address to the Congress in May of 1961, a landing on the moon was chosen as a focal point. The intention was that the U.S. would become pre-eminent in space— learning to operate, I believe as President Kennedy said, on a new ocean, a new frontier.” Space research was “definitely relevant. Many of the problems we’re trying to solve have to do with the environment. We’ve already made a head start in that field with our work on spaceships, which requires that we carry the environment with us. We have got to purify the gases we have, we’ve got to remove odors, we have to restore the oxygen we use. . . . We are learning how to rehabilitate an environment. These tools, these techniques, these understandings will have relevance here on earth.” (US News, 8/2/71)
Astronaut-geologist Harrison H. Schmitt praised Apollo 15 astronauts in msc briefing for their completion of eva geological activities: “I don’t think there is any question that we had a fantastic exploration mission. There’s just no question in my mind we sent two very competent observational scientists to the moon.” Samples collected, Schmitt said, “sounded very much like . . . crystalline rocks . . . that may well, and I emphasize may . . . represent the early lunar crust. I am not sure until we see the samples that we’re much closer to understanding the origin of the rille than when we started, except that there probably are some origin theories that can be eliminated now. “I think that the net result of the mission was to indicate that our preliminary thinking about the moon . . . still looks like a valid picture, it’s a valid foundation [on] which to attempt to further select sites and to further approach the analysis of rocks and soils that are brought back.” (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 8/4/71, A6)
Skylab flight hardware manufacturing was nearing completion, MSFC announced. Post-manufacturing checkout would soon begin at industrial and Government installations. Major Skylab spacecraft components include Workshop, Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), and multiple docking adapter (mda). (msfc Release 71-212)
Number of accredited newsmen covering Apollo 15 mission had dwindled to 402 from high of 1200 for Apollo 11, UPi noted. ApoUo 12 had been covered by 700 newsmen and Apollo 14, by 600. (W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Apollo 16 spacecraft was rolled out from ksc Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, in preparation for manned lunar landing mission scheduled for launch March 17, 1972. Rollout was watched by about 10 000 persons at ksc. (upi, NYT, 12/14/71, 12; ksc Release 263-71)
Twin eight-cent stamps commemorating decade of U.S. achievement in space were issued during ceremonies at ksc, msc, and msfc in conjunction with Apollo 15 mission. Stamps, depicting ApoUo 15 lunar landing and lrv carrying Apollo 15 astronauts, later went on sale throughout U.S. (msfc Release 71-132; NYT, 7/18/71, 24; W Star, 8/1/71, B7; msfc pao)
At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4 Cosmonaut Pavel R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft; examined display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A. Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz cm; and admired Lunokhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 spacecraft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model of Soyuz spacecraft; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges. (fbis-Sov-7 1-108, 6/4/71, FI; NYT, 6/3/71, 41)
Cosmic ray tracks found in helmets of Apollo astronauts had indicated that exposure during space mission was sufficient to damage certain nonreplaceable cells on long flights, General Electric R&D Center team reported in Science. On two-year mission, fraction of cells killed could rise to 0.12% in cerebral cortex, 0.05% in retina, and more than 1.5% for giant cells. Proportions might be “highly worrisome, since additional safe shielding would impose important weight considerations on spacecraft design.” (Comstock, Fleischer, et al., Science, 4/9/71, 154r-6)
Return of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to active service with usaf in July 1971 was announced by Gen. John D. Ryan, usaf Chief of Staff. Col. Aldrin would assume command of AFSc’s Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB, Calif. He had joined NASA in January 1964 as astronaut trainee after serving with usaf in Germany and Korea. He held B.S. degree from U.S. Military Academy and Sc.D. degree from mit. (nasa Special Release; dod Release 45-71)
Heart problems encountered by Apollo 15 astronauts necessitated changes in diet and exercise regimen for Apollo 16 astronauts, Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director of Life Sciences, said in speech before annual clinical meeting of American College of Surgeons in Atlantic City, N.J. All three Apollo 15 astronauts had experienced drops in potassium levels during July 26-Aug. 7 mission. Astronaut James B. Irwin had developed cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat) for one minute after he returned to CM from lunar surface and ventricular contractions (premature heartbeats) for following hour. Astronaut David R. Scott also had developed cardiac contractions during mission. Because of findings, first Apollo 16 eva would be shortened, astronauts would rest full eight hours between moonwalks, and more potassium would be added to Apollo 16 diet. (McGehan, B Sun, 10/19/71, A5)
Finalization of order for 175 F-^l jet fighter aircraft by Federal Republic of Germany was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird at DOD press conference. Order amounted to more than $750 million. (Transcript) Luna 18 reached moon’s surface Sept. 11 near Sea of Fertility, 3° 34' north latitude and 56° 30' east longitude. Tass announced landing was “unlucky” and communications stopped at 10:48 am Moscow time (3:48 am edt). Luna 18 was assumed to have crashlanded. Previous mission in series, Luna 17, landed successfully on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and released Lunokhod 1, self-propelled lunar rover designed to carry out scientific investigations. (fbis-Sov-172-3, 9/3/71, LI; 174-3, 9/8/71, LI; 173-3, 9/12/71, LI; SF, 11/71, 401)
Upi quoted MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., as saying in Houston that, because of success of Apollo 15, nasa was considering addition to Apollo program of extra mission to orbit moon and return to earth. (W Post, 10/31/71, A20)
President Nixon issued statement on successful Apollo 15 launch; “The flight of Apollo 15 is the most ambitious exploration yet undertaken in space. Even as it reflects man’s restless quest for his own future, so it also reenacts another of the ‘deeper rituals of his bones’— not only the compulsion of the human spirit to know where we are going, but the primal need in man’s blood to know from what we have come. We hope, by this journey, to know better the origins of Earth, the moon, and their other planets. We hope to understand something more of the mysteries of God’s great work. And ... we hope to understand more of man himself.” {PD, 8/2/71, 1088)
Preliminary results of studies of nuclear tracks in glass lens cover of TV camera landed on moon by Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, and retrieved by Apollo 12 mission were reported in Science by Washington Univ. physicists G. Crozaz and R. M. Walker. Studies gave information about low-energy nuclear particles from sun and provided basic calibration for nuclear tracks in lunar rock surfaces—erosion rate of nearly 10 millionths cm per year. Results also suggested “small-scale erosion process in lunar rocks.” Use of Surveyor 3 TV camera glass filter had enabled General Electric Co. scientists R. L. Fleischer, H. R. Hart, Jr., and G. M. Comstock to determine, for first time, energy spectrum of solar cosmic-ray particles of iron group over energy range from 1 to 100 million ev per nucleon. Difference between observed spectrum and limiting spectrum derived previously from lunar rock tracks gave erosion rate of 0 to 2 A per year. “High-energy fission of lead, induced by galactic cosmic ray protons and alpha particles, has also been observed.” {Science, 3/26/71, 1237-41)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) introduced H.R. 5529 “to authorize the coinage of 50-cent pieces to commemorate the Apollo 11 lunar landing and to establish the Apollo Lunar Landing Commemorative Trust Fund.” Measure was referred to House Committee on Banking and Currency. (CR, 3/3/71, H1254)
First flight model lrv had begun six-week acceptance testing by Boeing Co. preliminary to scheduled delivery to NASA on April 1, NASA announced. Model would transport two astronauts on three extravehicular traverses during Apollo 15 mission in July. Second lrv flight model, being built at Boeing, was scheduled for testing in last week of March and for April delivery. Third model was scheduled for May delivery. (nasa Release 71—25)
President Nixon sent individual messages from Caneel Ray, Virgin Islands, wishing success to Apollo 14 astronauts Alan R. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa on eve of launch. Message to Shepard said: “The courage and determination you have displayed in coming back against such great odds to fly again have earned our unanimous admiration at home and abroad. That this important mission should be entrusted to our Nation’s first man in space makes us especially proud and confident in its success.” (PD, 2/8/71, 151)
Rep. Joel T. Broyhill (R-Va.) introduced H.R. 10065 “to redesignate the Washington National Airport as ‘Neil Armstrong Airport.’ ” Bill was referred to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. (CR, 7/26/71, H7164)
Micrometer-sized silicate grains from all depths in Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 lunar core samples showed unusually high density of nuclear tracks, Univ. of California physicists reported in Science. Densities exceeding 100 billion per sq cm in several percent of grains indicated possibility that grains had been irradiated in space as extralunar dust orbiting sun before being caught by moon to build lunar soil—a possible extralunar origin of part of lunar soil. (Barber, Hutcheon, Price, Science, 1/29/71, 372-4)
Final communications session of 10th lunar day was held by Soviet ground controllers with Lunokhod 1 lunar rover on moon, Tass announced. Vehicle had traveled 215 m (235 yds) during 10th lunar day, bringing total distance covered since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17 to 10 452 m (11430 yds), (fbis—Sov—159—3, 8/17/71, LI)
At Apollo 15 press briefing in Washington, D.C., Astronaut Alfred M. Worden, CM pilot, described planned activities in lunar orbit, including first “working walk” in space. At 320 000 km (200 000 mi) from earth on return journey from moon, he would move outside cm, hand-walk on 7.6-m (25-ft) tether along rail, and open bay in SM to retrieve two canisters of film used to photograph moon while spacecraft was in lunar orbit. It was necessary to retrieve film before SM was jettisoned 160 km (100 mi) from earth before cm’s reentry. Worden said one hour had been allotted to space walk but underwater practice had indicated retrievals could be completed in 20 min. Two roundtrips from cm to SM were necessary because only one canister could be carried at a time. First canister would weigh 36.3 kg (80 lbs) and hold 2000 m (6700 ft) of film, including more than 1600 exposures of lunar surface taken from 113-km (70-mi) lunar orbit. Photos would be enlarged on earth to compose blowup 15.2 m (50 ft) wide and 160 km (100 mi) long showing details on lunar surface as small as 1.5 m (5 ft) in diameter, nasa hoped these would include photo of UEtv. Second canister would weight 3.6 kg (8 lbs) and hold 1100 m (3600 ft) of film used in mapping camera. While Worden retrieved cannisters, cm’s hatch would be opened. Astronaut James B. Irwin would guide Worden along tether and Astronaut David R. Scott would stow canisters when Worden passed them through hatch. Worden told press, “We’re going to be doing something out there, not just testing out an engineering concept or working out a procedure to do something.” (Transcript)
Lunokhod 1—which landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17— was declared officially dead at end of lunar night because resources of its isotope heating system had been exhausted. (SBD, 11/3/71, 18)
Eyewitness to Space by H. Lester Cooke with James H. Dean, published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., was reviewed by Frank Getlein in Washington Evening Star. Book contained more than 250 paintings and drawings by artists in nasa artist program. “What they have Created is an extraordinary record . . . because it records more than the eye, even the trained eye, can see. The sketches and many of the paintings do indeed record what any eye can see, but the seeing is special. Beyond that, artist after artist at some point found himself pushed by the material itself into taking an abstract, symbolic view of the space flights themselves, painting a vision, not a view.” nasa artists program, “one of the most remarkable ventures in art-government relations,” had brought hundreds of artists to NASA facilities to paint or draw what they saw and they were to see whatever they wanted and depict it in whatever manner suited their perceptions.” Only requirement was that all work was to be turned over to NASA, which had given it to National Gallery. Coauthor Cooke was National Gallery Curator of Painting. It was “hard to think of anything in art history that quite compares with the nasa program.” Getlein recalled Italian TV coverage of first moon walk. “One big response to the event was to convene gatherings of famous Italians—non-scientists all—in studios . . . and have them talk about the moon. But at many points in the protracted coverage, against a background of Beethoven, a beautiful Tuscan voice read Dante.” Qualities evoked by this “odd response, but an oddly perfect one,” were “precisely those that have eluded American television coverage of the space program. They are qualities that this book reaches for constantly and often attains.” (W Star, 10/17/71, B5)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented: “Apollo 14 . . . demonstrated that man still has much to learn about the moon. Even with the ability to land in relatively rough areas and to extend useful working time on the moon, the experience of the Apollo 14 duo in the Fra Mauro area indicates that better new equipment is needed to extend the range and accuracy of their explorations. And once the various typical areas of the lunar surface are reached it is obvious that vehicles with payloads much larger than Apollo will be required to haul the equipment needed to establish permanent scientific working stations on the lunar surface. For not until that is accomplished will man really begin to reap the full harvest of knowledge from his lunar capabilities.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 2/15/71, 9)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 15 astronauts to extend good wishes on eve of launch. (PD, 8/2/71,1099)
NASA released 9 color photos, 14 black-and-white photos, and segment of 16-mm film taken during Apollo 14 mission. Pictures showed lm, footprints, tire tracks, Astronauts Shepard and Mitchell during eva, American flag on surface, and large boulders. (AP, W Star, 2/14/71, A3)
nasa announced assignments within msc Flight Crew Operations Directorate: Apollo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had been named Deputy Director and Apollo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would resume duties as Chief of Astronaut Office. Stafford also would assist Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, in technical matters related to flight crew activities. Post of Deputy Director had previously been vacant, (nasa Release 71—116)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover was activated on moon’s Sea of Rains after surviving fourth lunar night since landing on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17,1970. (SBD, 3/10/71,55)
