Apollo 17 experiments were discussed by Apollo Lunar Exploration Director William T. O’Bryant at NASA Hq. press briefing. Mission astronauts would perform “more scientific investigation than on any other Apollo mission.” Experiments originally planned for Apollo 18, 19, and 20 would be aboard Apollo 17, last mission in Apollo series. (McGehan, B Sun, 11/21/72, A8)
Newspaper editorials commented on close of Apollo program with Apollo 17 launch. Los Angeles Times: “Thanks to the marvels of satellite communications, 3,000 European doctors were able recently to ‘attend’ a medical meeting in San Antonio via television. A computer designed for the space agency is helping Detroit design safer steering linkages in cars and trucks. A technique for clarifying spacecraft photos of the moon is being used by hospitals to provide much sharper x rays. The thousands of men and women who have participated in the Apollo program, and the American people who supported it, have all cause for great pride in Apollo. It has been one of the best investments this country ever made, one of the most rewarding adventures it ever undertook.” (LA Times, 12/6/72) Christian Science Monitor: “To the layman, what has been learned about the moon and space has been an extension of our knowledge of the universe, not a radical departure. In this light, it is comforting to think that the Apollo program, remarkable though it has been historically, may illustrate that even the farthest reaches of today’s unknown may prove to be no more than the captive of tomorrow’s familiar.” (CSM, 12/6/72)	_ New York Times: “Even as the world awaits this final launch, debate continues about the wisdom of the entire Apollo project. Some consider the moon landings the most brilliant scientific achievement in history; others still look at the whole venture as a waste of resources needed for urgent requirements here on earth. Yet one fact about the venture is beyond dispute: in the years 1969-72 men landed on another celestial body for the first time and showed they could live and work in the bizarre and literally inhuman conditions on that foreign planet. Long after most other developments of the twentieth century are forgotten, future generations will recall this as the century in which men broke the bonds of terrestrial gravity and began their cosmic destiny.” (NYT, 12/6/72, 42) Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (command module pilot), and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt (lunar module pilot and geologist)—was launched at 12:33 am EST Dec. 7, with illumination from S-IC 1st stage creating brilliance of morning sun. Liftoff, witnessed by crowd estimated at 500 000 and by nationwide and foreign TV viewers, was visible to naked eye as far as South Carolina to north and Cuba to south. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 170-km (105.6-mi) apogee and 168-km (104.4-mi) perigee. Following checkout, spacecraft was inserted into trajectory lor moon at 3:13 ground elapsed time (get) as planned, csm separation from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:42 GET and docking with lm at 3:57 get were shown on TV. During docking possible ring latch malfunction was indicated. Troubleshooting revealed latches 7, 9, and 10 were unlocked. Latch 10 was locked by pushing on handle; latches 7 and 9 were locked and manually fired to lock handles. Following hatch replacement, csm/lm combination was ejected from S-IVB stage at 4:45 get. S-IVB lunar impact maneuver targeted stage to strike moon’s surface Dec. 10. Midcourse correction (MCC-1) was not necessary because of nominal trajectory. MCC—2 maneuver was performed on time at 35:30 get, changing velocity 3 m per sec (9.9 fps). Cernan and Schmitt entered LM at 40:10 get and discovered docking latch 4 improperly latched. Evans moved latch handle 30°^t5°, disengaging hook from docking ring. Mission Control and flight crew decided to wait until second LM entering at 59:59 get for further action on latch. Remainder of LM housekeeping was nominal and LM was closed out at 42:11 GET. Heat flow and convection demonstrations were conducted as planned; results were satisfactory. MCC-3 and -4 were not required because of near-nominal trajectory. LM housekeeping was resumed at 59:59 get and completed at 62:16 get with all systems nominal. Evans, following ground instructions, stroked docking latch 4 handle and succeeded in cocking latch. Latch was left in cocked position for csm-lm rendezvous. Planned trajectory was modified continually because of late liftoff; coast toward moon was accelerated to ensure arrival of spacecraft at lunar orbit insertion (loi) at scheduled GMT time. GET clock was updated 2 hrs 40 min at 65:00 get to place all events on original flight plan schedule. Crew began one-hour visual-light-flash phenomenon observation at 68:19 GET and reported seeing bright to dull light flashes. Cernan reported continuing gas pains during private consultation via separate radio link with Dr. W. Royee Hawkins, Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations. He was told to continue taking antigas pills and to alter diet. Crew jettisoned scientific instrument module (sim) door at 84:12 GET and said SIM bay looked good. S-IVB 3rd stage impacted on lunar surface at 89:39 GET (3:32 pm EST Dec. 10) at 4° 12' south latitude and 12° 18' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 seismometers. Evans described crew’s excitement at reaching vicinity of moon: “We’re breathing so hard, the windows are fogging up.” Schmitt interrupted running commentary on lunar topography with shout: “Hey I just saw a flash on the lunar surface!” When assured by Mission Control that impact of possible small meteor would have been masked on seismometers by S-IVB 3rd-stage impact, Schmitt groaned: “Just my luck.” Cernan—who had orbited moon during May 18-26, 1969, Apollo 10 mission—described sight as “still just as impressive.” Descent orbit insertion (DOI-1) was performed at 90:31 get. CSM and LM undocked and separated on schedule at 107:48 get. Circularization maneuver placed csm in orbit with 129-km (80.2-mi) apolune and 100-km (62.1-mi) perilune. DOI-2, at 109:50 get, inserted lm into orbit with 111-km (69.0-mi) apolune and 11-km (6.8-mi) perilune. Powered descent was initiated and Challenger touched down on Taurus-Littrow site at 113:02 get (2:55 pm est Dec. 11). Cernan descended lm ladder four hours later, at 117:02 get, and said: “As I step off at the surface at Taurus-Littrow, I’d like to dedicate the first step of Apollo 17 to all those who made it possible.” Schmitt, first geologist to walk on moon, followed and asked, “Hey, who’s been tracking up my lunar surface?” Cernan said surrounding hills looked like “wrinkled skin of an old, old, 100-year-old man.” Astronauts deployed lunar roving vehicle. Cernan made short test drive and said, “Hallelujah, Houston! Challenger’s baby is on the roll.” As Cernan and Schmitt set up TV equipment, Cernan called to Schmitt: “Hey, Jack, just stop. You owe yourself 30 seconds to look up over the South Massif and look at the Earth.” Schmitt replied: “What? The Earth? You seen one earth, you’ve seen them all.” Cernan unfurled U.S. flag on lunar surface while Schmitt took his picture. Cernan said, “It’s got to be one of the most proud moments of my life.” Flag had “flown in the mocr [Mission Operations Control Room] since Apollo 11. And we very proudly deploy it on the Moon, to stay for as long as it can, in honor of all those people who have worked so hard to put us here and to put every other crew here and to make the country, the United States and mankind, something different than it was.” While preparing to traverse to Apollo lunar surface experiment package site, Cernan inadvertently knocked extension off of lrv right rear fender and repairs were made with tape. Astronauts crossed to alsep site, where they deployed alsep. Color TV camera beamed live telecast to earth. LRV fender again fell off during traverse to Steno Crater, lunar station 1A. Crew deployed surface electrical properties experiment and explosive packages during 7-hr 12-min lunar surface exploration. First eva ended at 124:13 get. Second eva began 1 hr 20 min late, at 140:35 get (6:28 pm est Dec. 12). Cernan and Schmitt, on instructions from Mission Control, improvised replacement for lost lrv fender extension. Four chronopaque maps were taped together and held in place by two portable utility lamp clamps. “Call me the little old fender maker,” Cernan said. Cernan and Schmitt visited lunar stations 2, 2A, 3, 4, and 5. They deployed explosive packages, obtained photos, and collected and documented soil samples. At station 4, Shorty Crater, Schmitt shouted: “There is orange soil! It’s all over! Orange!” Cernan confirmed finding: “Jack that is really orange. It’s been oxidized.” Schmitt dug trench and extracted sample which he described to Mission Control: “An essential portion of the zone . . . actually has a crimson hue, or red hue. Outside of that it’s orange. And outside of that, it’s gray.” Scientists on ground immediately speculated that soil might have originated from volcanism on moon as recently as 100 million yrs earlier. If so, it would contradict “dead moon” theory that moon had always been cold and inert. Dr. Robin P. Brett, head of MSC Geochemistry Branch, told press, “What we have been witnessing may be one of the most significant finds of Apollo geology.” Schmitt revisited ALSEP site to verify that lunar surface gravimeter had been leveled properly. EVA-2 ended at 148:35 get (2:05 am EST Dec. 13), after 7 hrs 37 min. Total distance covered during second eva was 19 km (12 mi). Third eva began 50 min late at 163:35 GET (5:26 pm est Dec. 13). Cosmic ray detector was retrieved before start of traverse to prevent exposure to low-energy solar protons from small solar flare. Cernan and Schmitt took black and white and color photos and collected 66 kg (145.9 lbs) of samples. Samples included blue-gray breccias, finegrained vesicular basalts, crushed anorthositic rocks, and soils. EVA-3 ended at 170:48 get {0:41 am est Dec. 14), after 7 hrs 16 min. During EVA—3 Evans, orbiting in CSM 113 km (70 mi) above lunar surface, identified series of volcanic domes in Aitken Grater, on moon’s far side. Before entering Challenger for last time, Cernan and Schmitt stepped before TV cameras. Cernan said: “To commemorate not just Apollo ITs visit to the Valley of Taurus-Littrow but as an everlasting commemoration of what the real meaning of Apollo is to the world, we’d like to uncover a plaque that has been on the leg of our spacecraft.” He read inscription: “Here man completed his first exploration of the Moon, December 1972 A.D. May the spirit of peace in which we came be reflected in the lives of all mankind.” Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, congratulated astronauts from Mission Control at msc and conveyed Godspeed message from President Nixon. As astronauts boarded LM, Cernan said: “I believe history will record that America’s challenge of today has forged man’s destiny of tomorrow. And, as we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came and, God willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. God speed the crew of Apollo 17T Total time for three EVAs was 22 hrs 5 min 4 sec, during which Cernan and Schmitt traveled 35 km (22 mi) in LRV, collected 115 kg (250 lbs) of samples, and took 2120 photos. Good-quality TV transmission was received throughout evas. Astronauts depressurized lm and discarded excess equipment, im lifted off lunar surface at 188:02 get (5:55 pm EST Dec. 14). TV cameras in CSM provided excellent picture in Mission Control as lm approached. Cernan in lm said, “Good to see you .... It’s been a good trip.” Evans replied, “Good to have you all back up here.” Observing that “America and Challenger are . . . good tight Navy formation,” Cernan told Evans, “Command module looks as good as the day they put it on the pad.” Evans answered, “And, you know, so does Challenger.” CSM and lm docked in lunar orbit at 190:17 get and Cernan and Schmitt transferred to csm with samples and equipment, lm ascent stage was jettisoned as planned. Impact of stage on lunar surface at 195:57 get was recorded by four Apollo 17 geophones and Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 alseps. Explosive packages were detonated and events were picked up by lunar seismic profiling geophones. Flash and dust from EP 7 explosion were seen on TV. Insertion into trajectory for earth began at 236:42 get, after csm’s 147 hrs 48 min in lunar orbit. December 17-19:	Spacecraft left moon’s sphere of influence at 250:40 get, traveling at 1173 m per sec (3851 fps). Evans left CSM at 257:34 get (3:27 pm est Dec. 17) for 1-hr 7-min inflight eva to retrieve lunar sounder film and panoramic and mapping camera cassettes in three trips to sim bay. TV pictures relayed to Mission Control showed him cavorting in weightlessness in stiff white pressure suit and attached to 7.6-m (25-ft) line. Following space walk, astronauts settled down for final two days of mission. cm separated from sm at 304:04 get, 15 min before entry interface at 121 920 m (400 000 ft). Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and cm splashed down in mid-Pacific 6.4 km (4.0 mi) from prime recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 304:31 GET (2:25 pm est Dec. 19). Recovery helicopter dropped swimmers, who installed flotation collar and attached life raft. Astronauts were transported to recovery ship for postflight examination. They would be flown to Houston via Samoa the following day. CSM was retrieved by recovery ship for transport to San Diego, Calif. Apollo 17 achieved primary objectives—to make selenological survey and sampling of materials and surface features in preselected area of Taurus-Littrow region, emplace and activate surface experiments, and conduct inflight experiments and photography. Launch vehicle and spacecraft system performances were near nominal throughout mission. Only minor discrepancies occurred, with no effect on safety or mission objectives. Flight crew performance was good. Mission was judged officially to be “a great success.” Accomplishments included sixth manned lunar landing and return, first geologist-astronaut on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (74 hrs 59 min 38 sec), longest single lunar surface eva (7 hrs 37 min 22 sec), longest total lunar surface EVA time (22 hrs 5 min 4 sec), longest total lunar distance traversed with LRV (35 km; 22 mi), longest Apollo mission (12 days 13 hrs 51 min), most samples returned (115 kg; 250 lb), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Apollo 17 was 14th and last scheduled mission in Apollo series and 11th manned Apollo mission. Apollo 16 had flown April 16-27. Highlights of Apollo program had been first manned orbit of moon by Apollo 8 (Dec. 21-27, 1968), first landing of men on moon during Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969), and first use of lunar roving vehicle on moon during Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug 7, 1971). Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-220K; msc Transcript 07629; NYT, 12/8-20/72; W Post, 12/8-20/72; nasa pio) December 7:	President Nixon sent message to Apollo 17 crew following successful launch: “With the final mission of the Apollo lunar exploration series man completes another step in his quest for knowledge of his universe and of himself. Those who come after will stand on the shoulders of the men of Apollo and their dedicated support team. I wish you good luck and Godspeed.” {PD, 12/11/72, 1734-5)
International aspects of future space programs were discussed by Crosby S. Noyes in Washington Evening Star and Daily News column. Scientific and engineering aspects of 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission were “minimal compared to the psychological switch which the effort represents.” Project had “most profound political implications for the future.” U.S.S.R. participation in space shuttle development might raise “touchy questions” because of “obvious military aspects of the program.” In distant future efforts, including possible manned flights to other planets, “it is . . . evident that international cooperation on a much wider scale will be essential. What the Apollo program has demonstrated is that manned space flight is an impractical proposition for any single nation to undertake. Which may turn out to be the most valuable discovery of all.” (W Star & News, 12/5/72) December 6:	NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by Cecil Powell, completed 25th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objectives of flight were to evaluate command augmentation system; to ohtain stability and control data at mach 1.1, mach 0.8, and mach 0.7; and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system. All objectives were achieved. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.3. (nasa proj off)
Envelopes carried to moon aboard Apollo 15 and later sold to stamp dealers had been ordered by Harold G. Collins, Chief of Kennedy Space Center Mission Support Office, Manager John H. Jacobs of Brevard Printing Co. told press. Collins had asked that bill be sent to Hughes Enterprises in Las Vegas, Nev. Associated Press said Collins and NASA officials and astronauts at Manned Spacecraft Center had declined to comment on Jacobs’ statement because matter was under investigation by Dept, of Justice. (AP, W Post, 9/19/72, A3)
Lunar Samples Analysis Planning Team, using information imparted at Third Lunar Science Conference [see Jan. 10-13], reported in Science on advances made and problems still outstanding in lunar science. Most important gain had been that “we now know there is a lunar crust.” Primal igneous activity in outer layers of moon had generated feldspathic crust 40 km (25 mi) thick. Apollo 15 core samples had shown that material at all levels had resided within few centimeters (one inch or so) of lunar surface at some time, but gradient in some cosmic ray product allowed tentative conclusion that soil in lower half of core had been stratified for 0.5 hillion yrs. Apollo 15 mission and Third Lunar Science Conference had answered many fundamental questions, but each answer raised new questions. “What are the nature and chronology of rock types in the lunar highlands? Answers to date have been indirect or broadbrush. The most interesting epoch of lunar history, the first half-billion years, is recorded in highland rocks if it is preserved anywhere. Why is the occurrence of lunar norite or kreep so sharply restricted to the northwest quadrant of the moon’s nearside? Is an exceptionally mighty impact . . . required to raise noritic rock to the surface? This would be inconsistent with the supposedly shallow depth of origin of the Fra Mauro Formation cratering debris.” Last two Apollo missions were targeted to regions that offered prospect of answering these questions. Most “profound question of all” was origin of earth-moon system. Apollo science had eliminated once-popular hypothesis that moon had Been captured 1 to 2 billion yrs ago, “but beyond this the question remains unanswered. If the nature of compositional heterogeneities in the moon at the time of its accretion can be inferred correctly from chemical and petrologic studies . . . this information will go far toward answering the question.” Goal of understanding moon would be furthered by international cooperation. Third Lunar Science Conference had been “minor landmark” because of participation of Soviet scientists and exchange of samples between U.S. and U.S.S.R. (Science, 6/2/11, 975-81)
Apollo 17 launch date postmarks would be available from Kennedy Space Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, Washington Sunday Star & Daily News reported. Deadline for obtaining splashdown postmarks from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga had passed. Titusville, Fla., Post Office would accept covers to be postmarked at KSC for 18-hr period beginning 8 am Dec. 6. (Fairies, W Star & News, 12/3/72)
Lunar science press conference at Manned Spacecraft Center discussed Apollo 16 data and portent for Apollo 17 mission, scheduled for launch Dec. 6. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook reported that analysis of pea-size Apollo 16 rock fragments had shown them ranging in age from 3.98 billion to 4.25 billion yrs. Rocks had crystallized some 300 million yrs after moon’s formation. It was possible that Apollo 17 site would yield “very young rocks . . . , young volcanics. So one may be able to extend the mare type ages . . . and see just how long it took the surface of the moon ... to crystallize before it was a rather hard crust . . . with very little, if any, igneous activity.” Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg of Cal Tech reported Apollo 16 rock No. 65015 seemed to have undergone two distinct melting steps. Bulk of this “two-history rock” had 'crystallized 3.93 billion yrs ago but had retained some crystals that had been formed between 4.40 and 4.48 billion yrs ago. First crystallization probably had been associated with great heat during moon’s formation but scientists had no clue to cause of second melting period and subsequent recrystallization. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said “fundamental conclusion” was evolving from new understanding of moon gained “largely out of the Apollo program.” Scientists “have to now look at each individual planet and somehow or another infer its chemical composition.” They were beginning to see chemically heterogeneous solar system. Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 lunar module pilot, described Apollo 17 landing site in moon’s Taurus-Littrow area on rim of Serenitatis Basin: “It’s in that general geographic ring that resembles the Apennine front near where Apollo 15 landed. It has, however, some very distinctive characteristics .... There is no clear evidence that we are close to mare. The nearest obvious mare surface is several hundred kilometers [100 km equals 62 mi] to the . . . northwest—in the Mare Serenitatis. We are landing on a plain that seems to overlie a slightly elevated flat surface that predates the mare. And it seems when you look at all of the basins on the moon, that that surface, a correlative surface in other basins, is somehow related to the formation of the basin. There are comparable plains around all of the big circular basins, and there is a flat floor that predates the mare that is cut by graben faulting .... Also in the site we have the . . . north and south massifs. These are large aggregates of peaks and mountains that . . . are part of the range structure of the Orientale basin.” Dark cover over valley floor and portions of highlands was younger than mare and was as little as 0.5 m (1.6 ft) thick. Radar data had shown cover was “finely fragmented mantle material” that was “ubiquitous in all of the low areas and locally is covering portions of the highlands.” Dr. Schmitt said mantle, although of not as high a priority as the crustal examination in the south massif, had “potential of giving us our most fundamental evidence for studying this evolutionary model.” Potential was high that “dark mantle material has sampled some significant portion of the crust. At least it has sampled its source area, and that source area is very probably deep within the moon.” Dr. Schmitt told press that to be able to say that man was “on the verge, if not already there, of understanding the evolution of another planet is something that is really unprecedented in the history of man. And I think that’s the thing that’s the news of Apollo. That is what we have done.” (Transcript)
NASA Space Shuttle Technology Conference was held in San Antonio, Tex., in conjunction with 13th Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers. Topics discussed included aeroelasticity and loads, structure and liquid interactions, vehicle dynamics test and analysis, thermal protection systems, and structural design. Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was member of panel for high school students that discussed benefits to be derived in space shuttle use. (aiaa Release)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., passed final physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said results showed astronauts “in good shape and ready to fly.” (AP, W Star, 4/11/72, A3)
Signing of space cooperation agreement in Moscow was announced by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Washington, D.C., press briefing attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser; Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center; and Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt, Special Assistant for Organizational Affairs to msc Director. Dr. Fletcher said: “We . . . are very pleased that the President has been able to meet with the officials of the Soviet Union and to provide what we think is by far the most meaningful cooperation in space achieved ever by these two nations.” Dr. Fletcher described rendezvous and docking of Apollo space craft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft as “perhaps the most dramatic” commitment under cooperation agreement. Spacecraft were at present incompatible “because they have different atmospheres. Theirs is a normal atmosphere, ours is a low pressure oxygen . . . atmosphere and there are certain communications and electronics incompatibilities.” Spacecraft would be made compatible by docking module, new device constructed by NASA to link spacecraft. Apollo spacecraft would be launched on Saturn IB rocket. “Then we will make a maneuver at 100 miles [160 kilometers] or so altitude, ... go in and pick out the docking adaptor from the Saturn and then continue on in orbit. Meanwhile the Soviets will launch their Soyuz . . . [and] rendezvous or at least move their altitude to something like 150 miles [240 kilometers]. We won’t be at the same altitude, but hopefully we will be far enough north so too much maneuvering will not be required.” Rendezvous would be performed primarily with U.S.-developed guidance and instrumentation. Then spacecraft would dock with “new kind of . . . mechanism we call androgynous, because it doesn’t consist of a prop and a drogue. ... It is an inverse docking mechanism sp they can dock with us or we can dock with them either way.” System “will apply not only to this . . . mission, but all succeeding spacecraft ... so that we do have the capability, over a long period, of rendezvousing and docking with each other’s spacecraft.” Dr. Fletcher said original plan to attempt rendezvous and docking with Soviet Salyut space station had been canceled when U.S.S.R. “found that was a very complicated mission because it involved not just two launches, their Soyuz and our apollo, but a third of their Salyut.” Universal docking system using docking adaptor between Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft had been selected because “there has been concern for many years that we did not have a rescue capability ... in space [so] that we each would have the option of rescuing the other. Future spacecraft beyond 1975, which is the planned date for this mission, will all have the capability.” Total cost of project was estimated at $250 million. Fringe benefits from U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint program were: “It does have the impact of requiring 4,400 people to be employed . . . primarily from the aerospace industry, partly to prepare the command service model and the Saturn IB launch device, hut also to construct the new docking adaptor,” and “it will keep the APOLLO team together . . . through 1975 in preparation for the first launch of the shuttle ... in 1978.” NASA was optimistic that cooperative space effort “may lead to greatly increased cooperation on still other programs.” Joint mission would be “most visible” U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative effort in history, “since it will involve cosmonauts and astronauts working together on a very complex mission in space while the whole world is watching, presumably on television via satellite relay.” (Transcript)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., successfully completed countdown demonstration test at KSC on board unfueled spacecraft. Final countdown would begin April 10 in preparation for April 16 launch to moon, (ksc Release 55-72)
Change in Apollo 16 schedule necessitated by command module problem had at least tripled cost of beaming TV coverage of mission to Europe, Washington Post reported. European Broadcasting Union had planned to record coverage in New York and beam pictures to viewers via satellite. When cm problem developed, TV officials had decided situation warranted immediate “live” coverage. Later network decided to beam moonwalks live, as well. (W Post, 4/22/72, A10)
StarQuest Ltd., nonprofit firm to promote values of space exploration to U.S. public, had rented $350 000 ocean liner for cruise off Cape Kennedy during Apollo 17 launch Dec. 6, Chicago Sun-Times reported. Firm’s honorary board included science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke and former astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Firm intended to make motion picture of Apollo 17 launch. (Ziomek, C Sun-Times, 10/2/72)
Dismantling of Saturn Launch Complexes 34 and 37, sites of Saturn I and IB launches at start of Apollo program, was begun at Kennedy Space Center by Southern Contractors Service. Firm had hid $15 051 for structures built at cost of $147 990 581. Dismantling would he completed within seven months. NASA spokesman had said total of $53 856 403 had been saved in equipment and structures from complexes, “one of the highest returns ever” for such a program. NASA Centers would receive salvaged equipment for active programs. Equipment valued at $5 891 866 would he given to Atomic Energy Commission; Depts. of Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; and universities with Government research grants. Launch control rooms in Launch Complex 34 and 37 blockhouses would be retained in launch configuration for historical and public information purposes. Historical marker outside would inform visitors of past events. Seven Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Complex 34 culminating in Apollo 7, first manned command and service module launch, Oct. 11, 1968. Complex also had been scene of tragic Jan. 27, 1967, fire that took lives of three astronauts. Eight Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Pad 37B, terminating with Apollo 5, first Apollo lunar module launch, Jan. 22, 1968. (M Her, 4/29/72; ksc Release 88-72; ksc Hist Off; ksc memo to NASA Hist Off)
Senate received nomination of Apollo 10 astronaut Col. Thomas P. Stafford (usaf) to be brigadier general. Col. Stafford was Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center. (CR, 1/31/72, S824; A&A 1971)
Tracks attributed to spontaneous fission of plutonium 224 and uranium 238 had been detected in large whitlockite crystal in lunar breccia No. 14321 from Fra Mauro formation brought to earth by Apollo 14 astronauts, Univ. of California at Berkeley physicists reported in Science. It was first time evidence for decay products of plutonium 244 had been detected in objects other than meteorites and indicated age of rock could be 3.95 billion yrs, No positive evidence of terrestrial or lunar rocks with antiquity comparable to that of meteorites had yet been found. (Hutcheon, Price, Science, 5/26/72, 909-11)
Science commented on June 6 defeat of Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) as candidate for reelection to Congress: Since 1961, when Miller became Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Apollo program has reached fruition and starts have been made on Skylab and the shuttle. Miller was NASA’s foremost advocate in the House and took pride in announcing every latest achievement of the space program.” Miller’s committee had been “influential in having NASA expand its investment in . . . scientific satellites.” Science cited Miller’s age, 81, as “decisive factor” in his loss of election. (Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
One consequence of President Nixon’s Feb. 17-28 state visit to People’s Republic of China could be indefinite ban on overflights of mainland China by reconnaissance drones and high-altitude U-2 aircraft engaged in intelligence-collecting missions, Aviation Week & Space Technology article said. “If the anticipated decision is made, it presumably would end any consideration of flying Boeing’s upcoming long-endurance Compass Cope drone on proposed 24-hr missions over Communist China.” (Av Wk, 2/28/72, 11) February 28-March 24: City of Memphis and Shelby County, Tenn., conducted “Space and Science Awareness Month” to inform citizens about national space program. Project—sponsored by greater Memphis area school systems and supported by NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center—was opened £y Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart and NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. Program exhibited space-related displays—including moon rock, lunar roving vehicle mockup, and models and displays on several NASA programs—at Pink Palace Museum. Also included were displays of educational literature on space technology in 250 school libraries; lectures at 65 schools and at various club meetings by NASA officials; 14 seminars and workshops for teachers; showing of 25 films at elementary schools, on Memphis educational TV station, and to adult groups; and presentation of series of programs on etv station. Memphis awareness month was largest space information program ever held by U.S. city, (msfc Release 72-16)
NASA had spent $800 000 on North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. study and design of system to permit rendezvous and docking of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in orbit, Associated Press reported. Study envisioned 14-day mission with Apollo command and service module linking special docking module with Salyut orbiting laboratory and Soyuz command spacecraft. NR had received $300 000 for method study and $500 000 for hardware design. No contract had been issued for hardware. (CSM, 2/19/72) February 20:	Tenth anniversary of Friendship 7 mission, first U.S. manned orbital space flight. Piloted by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., Friendship 7 had circled earth three times during 4-hr 55-min mission. Since Glenn’s flight—which was third U.S. manned space flight and sixth flight in Project Mercury—30 U.S. astronauts had flown in space total of 7700 hrs, 51 min—nearly 46 wks. Anniversary was observed at Kennedy Space Center Feb. 22, with 3000 guests and dignitaries invited to attend ceremony at Launch Complex 14, where commemorative plaque was unveiled. Glenn said space flight was “not a pleasure cruise for an individual. It’s research at the highest level and it is difficult to tell where it will go from here.” (ksc Release 37—72; B Sun, 2/23/72)
Skylab crew press conference, with prime and backup crewmen, was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said preparations were on schedule for April 1973 launch. Contractor checkouts and tests of hardware were expected to be completed for delivery to Kennedy Space Center in July. Skylab would carry some 20 000 pieces of stowage equipment on board to provide life support for nine men for 140 days. “So it all goes up at one time, and we’ve got a great deal of work to do, not only to learn how to operate this vehicle but also all the experiments in it. It became apparent that we could not be 100 percent cross-trained as we had been in Apollo, so we’ve . . . defined some areas for each guy to become expert in ... . That allowed us to balance out the training hours. Right now ... we have some 2000 training hours per man defined. We’ve been working on the basic training for the past year.” Training hardware would be available about February 1. Commander would have overall responsibility for mission and would be command and service module expert. Science pilot would be expert in all medical equipment and in Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) and its associated hardware. Pilot would be expert in Orbital Workshop systems and electrical systems. Remaining experiments would be divided among crewmembers according to availability and choice. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said photographic data returned from Skylab would be “far superior” to previous data because actual film would be returned to earth. To return film, crews would conduct two extravehicular activities (eyas) on first mission, three on second, and two on third. “We’re going to be moving . . . 240 pounds [109 kg] worth of film, in canisters, magazines, in and out of the cameras. We’ll have to remove the used exposed film and replace it with new film. It’s going to take about 3 hours.” Experiments were described by Astronaut Gerald P. Carr. They included EREP earth resources experiment containing five sensors to calibrate earth’s atmosphere, corollary experiments submitted by high school students, engineering experiments to study effects of zero g on metal alloys and flammability of certain items, habitability experiments to study noise levels and atmospheric composition, and scientific experiments. Scientific experiments would include studies of effect of zero g on single human cells, studies of circadian rhythm of pocket mice and vinegar gnats, ultraviolet stellar astronomy and x-ray astronomy. Technological experiments would include crew vehicle disturbances, manual navigation sightings, and “a study of the little contamination cloud that we carry around with us . . . kind of like Pigpen in Peanuts.” In response to question on illness during missions, Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin said NASA would provide equipment and training on board to take care of most illnesses and injuries that could be handled in a doctor’s office. Science pilot would be able to provide emergency care for illnesses “up to and including quite severe. We have quite a package of drugs on board, administrable by all routes; we have tracheotomy equipment and equipment for maintaining an airway for stopping bleeding. We are attempting to develop in time for the flight intravenous fluids. We feel that, almost regardless of the severity of the injury, we will at least be able to stabilize the patient.” (Transcript)
NASA had definite plans for international rendezvous and docking mission to link three Soviet cosmonauts with three U.S. astronauts in 1975, Washington Post reported. Tentative date was June 14, four days after U.S.S.R. orbited Salyut station and three days after cosmonauts docked Soyuz spacecraft at one end of Salyut 15 m (50 ft) long. Apollo spacecraft would dock with orbiting Salyut on 15th Apollo orbit of earth, day following Apollo launch. For 56 hrs astronauts and cosmonauts would work and live together under guidance of mission control centers in Houston and in Baykonur. There were “no longer any technical doubts that the feat of flying an American and a Russian spacecraft together can be accomplished.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Manned Spacecraft Center, had said, “We haven’t seen anything in a technical sense that says we should stop.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/7/72, B2)
U.S.S.R., “in apparent attempt to display restraint,” had “suspended space maneuvers with its fearsome SS-9 Scarp rocket,” Washington Post reported. The United Nations “international space log shows that the Soviet Union has desisted from the SS-9 maneuvers in space so far this year, in contrast to earlier years.” Since U.S. had not flight-tested any space systems comparable to U.S.S.R.’s fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs), “the Russians might have reasoned it would have been impolite of them to stage maneuvers this year when the salt [Strategic Arms Limitation Talks] agreement appeared in reach.” (Wilson, W Post, 1/6/12, A2) Communique on results of July 6-18 meetings was signed by msc Director, Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., July 17. Agreements had been reached on launching Soyuz before Apollo, acceptable launch windows, necessary communications equipment, and development of technical requirements for compatible docking system. Areas for further study included possible emergency extravehicular activity, possible adjustment of cabin pressures, use of TV as docking aid, attitude control after docking, specific launch date, and development of public information plan that considered obligations and practices of both countries. [See also press conferences July 13 and 17.] Senior members of Soviet delegation were Chairman Boris N. Petrov of Soviet Intercosmos Council and Konstantin D. Bushuyev, astp Director for U.S.S.R. NASA delegation was headed by Dr. Kraft and Glynn S. Lunney, astp Director, (nasa Release 72-134; Marshall Star, 7/12/72, 1; Text) July 7:	Air Force launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg Air Force Base by single Titan HID booster. First satellite entered orbit with 257-km (160-mi) apogee, 173-km (108-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 96.8° inclination and reentered Sept. 13. Second entered orbit with 501-km (311-mi) apogee, 499-km (310-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 96.1° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 7/13/72, 57; 7/18/72, 78)
Apollo 17 astronauts were examined on hoard recovery ship U.S.S. Tieonderoga by Dr. Charles K. La Pinta, Apollo medical team leader. He pronounced them “as good as any crew of astronauts that I have ever seen. They appear to be one of the more well-rested crews to have returned from a space flight.” (Reuters, W Post, 12/21/72, A17)
NASA had invited 63 ambassadors to Apollo 16 launch but had canceled flight scheduled to carry them to Cape Kennedy because only 10 had accepted, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 4/16/72)
Newspaper editorials continued comment on Apollo 16 mission, as astronauts headed back to earth from lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor commented on efficiency with which emergencies had been handled: “We very much appreciate the fine job the Apollo 16 crew has done. Nevertheless, for us, the star of the mission has been the impersonal intelligence expressed throughout the Apollo program. This is what underlies Apollo 16’s success and has added another important reference point to our growing knowledge of the moon.” (CSM, 4/25/72) Chicago Daily News: “This expedition, the fifth and next to last of the moon landings, revealed growing confidence and ability to improvise, and an increasing breadth of engineering genius that will carry over into many Earthbound projects. The advance in ‘pure science’—mainly in knowledge as to how the universe is put together—• is impossible to estimate. Somewhere down the line, whatever is learned on the moon trips should add to man’s ability to cope with his environment. Once more, gratitude is due to the courageous astronauts . . . who carried out their assignment so superbly.” (C Daily News, 4/25/72)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell described tests of extrasensory perception (esp) he made during Jan. 31-Feb. 9, 1971, mission at 15th annual conference of Spiritual Frontiers Fellowship in Chicago. Mitchell had attempted to send messages from spacecraft to four “receivers” on earth and had reported later that some “exchanges” had been made. (C Daily News, 5/13/72; A&A 1971; msc pao)
North American Rockwell Corp. Downey Div. announced receipt of $5 500 000 contract from Air Force Systems Command’s Space and Missile Organization (samso) to build one-of-a-kind satellite for late 1973 launch. Spacecraft would be orbiting base from which quartet of instruments would gather scientific data for several Government agencies. (NR Release) September 22-25:	NASA launched Explorer 47 (imp-h) Interplanetary Monitoring Platform from Eastern Test Range at 9:20 pm edt by three-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered transfer orbit with 237 796-km (147 759.6-mi) apogee, 246-km (152.9-mi) perigee, 7365-min (5.11-day) period, and 28.6° inclination. Primary objective was to provide more detailed understanding of dynamics of regions discovered and broadly surveyed by previous earth-orbiting imps and lunar imp by obtaining scientific data during period of decreasing solar activity. Explorer 47 would continue studies of interplanetary radiation, solar wind and energetic particle emissions, and magnetic fields in earth’s environment from orbit halfway to moon. Apogee kick motor was fired Sept. 25 to place Explorer 47 in circular orbit with 235 639-km (146 419.3-mi) apogee, 201599-km (125 267.8-mi) perigee, 12.3-day period, and 17.2° inclination. Ry Sept. 25, 10 experiments had been commanded on and were operating satisfactorily. Three remaining experiments would be turned on about Oct. 5. Explorer 47 was drum shaped, weighed 378 kg (833 lbs), and carried 13 experiments to measure energetic particles, plasmas, and magnetic and electric fields. Experiments were provided universities, industry, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Explorer 47 was ninth spacecraft in imp series. First—Explorer 18 (imp—a)—had been launched Nov. 26, 1963, and most recent—Explorer 43 (imp—i) . —had been launched March 13, 1971. Four of the eight previously launched spacecraft were still operating, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-185) September 22:	Skylab Orbital Workshop, scheduled to carry three-man crews in earth orbit in 1973, arrived at Kennedy Space Center after two-week barge trip from McDonnell Douglas Co.’s Huntington Reach, Calif., plant. Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) was flown to KSC from Manned Spacecraft Center, where it had been undergoing thermal testing since mid-July. Airlock module (am) and multiple docking adapter (mda) were scheduled to arrive at ksc Oct. 9 and instrument unit Oct. 22. (upi, NY News, 9/23/72; ksc Releases 268-72, 270-72)
Apollo 17 astronauts flew proficiency runs in NASA T-38 jet aircraft from Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., while at Kennedy Space Center five mice were selected to fly on mission experiment. Mice had been selected from 40 small rodents brought from California desert as candidates for mouse-to-the-moon mission. They would remain in orbit around moon when lunar module descended to surface. (AP, B Sun, 12/3/72) December 2—3:	Chicago Daily News editorial commented on impact of Apollo program: “The costly moon race may have helped distort American thinking in a damaging way. If we can go to the moon, so the slogan ran, we can do anything—wipe out poverty, eradicate racism, guide the economy, cure every evil of society. The euphoria created by the burgeoning space program and the crowning successes of the landing may have contributed to the rise of expectations in other fields beyond any solid hope of their realization. Science and technology can do wonders, but social problems do not yield so readily to electronics or telemetry.” (C Daily News, 12/2-3/72) December 3:	Kennedy Space Center technical writers, members of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees, agreed to accept 44% pay increase, ending threat of strike that might have delayed Apollo 17 launch [see Nov. 5]. (Auerbach, W Post, 12/4/72, A20)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial commented on high level of Soviet space activity: “It is fine to talk about devoting activities in space to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind, as the United States has done. But the talk is hollow when the space scorecard shows the Soviets at an all-time high in military launches, and the United States at a low point, with the trend still further downward.” There was urgent need for U.S. “to develop military space weapons capable of neutralizing Soviet supremacy.” (St Louis G-D, 3/27/72) March 27-April 3:	Working Group of NASA and Soviet engineers met at Manned Spacecraft Center to discuss technical details of docking mechanisms. Talks continued U.S.-U.S.S.R. study of compatible rendezvous and docking systems for spacecraft. (NASA Release 72—69; msc pao) March 28:	Space leaders endorsed shuttle in supplement published by Washington Daily News: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said shuttle would “produce substantial flight economies, ease strictures on spacecraft design, lower manufacturing cost, remedy malfunctions in orbit, and afford a built-in versatility that will alter the nature of space planning and operations in major ways.” Editorial writer had described shuttle’s impact on space program as transition from dramatics of a countdown to an airport routine, Dr. Fletcher said. “The dramatics will be fondly remembered by many of us, but nostalgia will not obscure the hard fact that the routine and economic access to space, of which the shuttle is the hinge pin, is the practical and commonsense means by which we shall reap the great harvest of benefits that space holds for mankind.” Supplement interview quoted Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, as eagerly looking forward to shuttle flight. “By the time the first passenger shuttle flies I’ll be 68. I think flying into space in a shuttle will be just like being a passenger in an airliner, only smoother.” Dr. von Braun foresaw use of shuttle for travel to Mars “probably around 1990, or at least before the end of the 20th Century.” Flight probably would begin with Mars spacecraft being hauled, piece by piece, in space shuttle cargo bays, to be assembled in orbit. “I think the only way to fly to Mars is with nuclear power, and because we would never want to ignite a nuclear rock on earth, we’ll have to begin the journey from orbit.” Dr. von Braun saw shuttle preparing way for manned exploration by ferrying small, unmanned spacecraft into orbit and launching them toward Mars in late 1970s and 1980s. Article by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said shuttle offered opportunity “not only to the United States to advance its own aerospace science and technology, but also to countries which could not finance a complete shuttle system. The advantages will be mutual and conducive to needed international scientific cooperation.” Proper use of shuttle “can help us in our efforts toward the resources management necessary to make this planet fit to house future generations of man.” James J. Harford, Executive Secretary of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said in article that guessing shuttle’s significance was “like trying to predict what the DC—3 would lead to in air transportation six years before its first flight. The space shuttle could be that powerful and more.” If shuttle performed the way NASA intended it to—“and NASA’s Apollo track record has to impress even the cynical”—shuttle would “help to create entire new industries and . . . hundreds of thousands of new jobs.” [W News, 3/28/72, 27, 29)
Plans for 1976 private space probe “Mankind 1” were described by spokesmen of Committee for the Future at Beverly Hills, Calif., press conference. Committee of private citizens proposed to buy U.S. or Soviet spacecraft and launch system for one of three proposed missions: orbiting laboratory, 14-day mission to place giant illuminator with one sixth moon’s reflective capacity in orbit 650 km (400 mi) above earth, or combination of both missions. Mankind 1 was successor to Project Harvest Moon which Committee had hoped to finance by selling moon rocks. Committee Chairman John J. Whiteside said first project had been scrapped after July 18 meeting with NASA officials who were skeptical about possibility of flying lunar mission after Apollo 17. (Sweeney, LA Times, 9/21/72)
Fragments of Apollo 17 moon rock would be distributed to other nations for display in scientific and educational institutions, NASA announced. (NASA Release 72—225) Ground-breaking ceremony for Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was held on Mall in Washington, D.C. Museum was scheduled to open July 4, 1976. Chief Justice Warren Burger, Chancellor of Smithsonian, was principal speaker. (Program)
U.S. Postal Service officials had been “somewhat upset” by reports that Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden had taken 400 unauthorized covers—stamped envelopes with postal markings—to moon, Washington Sunday Star reported. German philatelic magazines had reported that Herman E. Sieger, German stamp dealer, had sold 100 Apollo 15 covers at 4850 German marks each for total $150 350 at official exchange rate. Under NASA regulations, astronauts had been permitted to carry on mission small mementos of flight for friends and relatives but not for sale. Official “moon mail” covers were distributed to purchasers by U.S. Postal Service. Specially struck medals had been carried on several Apollo missions and later sold to public through Government channels. NASA officials had identified unidentified “friend of crew now in Germany” as link between Apollo 15 astronauts and German dealer. Friend had told dealer that 20 covers had gone to astronauts’ friends and relatives; remaining covers had been turned over to NASA management. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, said that no member of crew had profited directly or indirectly from covers sold. (Faries, W Star, 6/18/72, 1)
Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev died in Moscow at age 84. During 50-yr career Tupolev and associates had pioneered design of 120 different aircraft from 35-hp ANT-1 in 1920s to Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport scheduled for service in 1975. He had been regarded as originator of all-metal aircraft, which he first designed in early 1920s. In 1934 he had built huge eight-engine aircraft with 63-m (207-ft) wingspan. Aircraft, named Maxim Gorky after Russian author, actually flew, but was demolished in 1935 crash. Tupolev, one of most decorated Soviet citizens, had won three Stalin Prizes and one Lenin Prize and was three-time Hero of Socialist Labor—highest Soviet civilian honor. He had been imprisoned in 1936 for allegedly divulging Soviet aviation secrets to Germany. During three years of forced labor he designed Tu-2 dive bomber which was flown by U.S.S.R. in World War II. Among postwar airliners designed by Tupolev design bureau were Tu-134 medium-range, 80-passenger transport and Tu-154, three-engine, 150-passenger transport scheduled to replace Tu-104 on Soviet domestic routes. (NYT, 12/24/72, 42) December 24:	NASA released Apollo 17 photos including one of best full-disc photos of earth taken from space. Photo, taken Dec. 7 as Apollo 17 spacecraft headed toward moon, showed earth from North Africa and Arabia to Antarctic polar icecap. (Photo 12-H-1578; NASA pio)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other officials testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 NASA authorization hearings. Dr. Fletcher said: “I regard the fiscal year 1973 budget . . . as marking the end of a difficult transition period for NASA. For the past 2 or 3 years, NASA, the executive branch, and the Congress have been grappling with questions on the course the Nation’s space program should take in the 1970’s and beyond. The main goals in science, exploration, and applications, and the advanced system and technology required to achieve these goals, have been identified . . . and generally approved .... But there has remained a basic uncertainty . . . the question of cost. Can the Nation afford the space program of the 1970’s? Will the approval of the Space Shuttle and the other programs . . . commit the Nation to a large increase in future spending levels? “This year we can give clear answers to these questions. We can assure the committee, the Congress, and the public that the program we are proposing does not commit the country to higher budget levels in future years, at least measured in current dollars .... The revised plan is, I believe, more realistic and will give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, reported substantial progress in two basic cooperative activities with U.S.S.R.—joint work on compatible docking systems and exchanges in scientific areas, including lunar sample exchanges. In response to question, Dr. Low said he thought it likely U.S.S.R. would continue lunar program after U.S. completed Apollo program. “They may even try to land men on the moon in the latter part of this decade. That will be a catching-up process.” To further question, Dr. Fletcher said that in late 1970s U.S.S.R. would be “doing things in the manned space program that are beyond what we would be able to do.” From end of Skylab in 1973 until 1978, “it is likely that they will be carrying on some important activity and we will have no opportunity to respond until 1978” [with space shuttle]. Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, submitted statement on NASA’s work force: “When several reductions are made serially, as they have been in NASA over the past several years, the effects compound, and the healing processes, such as the resumption of hiring of younger people, the filling of vacancies via merit promotion ... do not have an opportunity to function.” NASA was “feeling these disadvantageous effects severely.” Most worrying was “dwindling of the supply of new blood.” It was obvious “trend cannot continue without the health and vigor of the organization being undermined.” NASA needed “to embark upon a period of stability” in work force to “return to normal personnel development practices, heal the damage of the past several years, and be prepared to meet the challenges of the 70’s.” With the “prospect of a period of relative stability in the general level of spending” and “clearer view of the NASA forward mission,” such a policy was indicated. Statement submitted by Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, described NASA Regional Dissemination Centers’ assistance to users “ranging from small businesses to the largest companies in our Nation’s economy— across a broad spectrum of business sectors including manufacturing services, transportation and communications. The Centers also serve university faculty and students; varied national, state, and local organizations; and governmental entities at all levels.” NASA RDCs had served more than 2000 organizations in 1971, of which over 48% of industrial users were small businesses. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), NASA Director of Facilities, submitted statement on facilities. In $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities, $27.9 million was for modifications and additions to facilities for space shuttle, $11.2 million for facilities supporting scientific investigations in space, $12.9 million for facilities supporting aeronautical research and technology, and $25.3 million for smaller supporting activities and planning and design. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) had orbited moon 1358 times and was operating satisfactorily, Tass announced. Spacecraft had studied moon’s gravitational field, measured interplanetary magnetic field and meteor-flow density, studied characteristics of space radiation in lunar space for comparison with Mars 2 and Mars 3 data, and collected data on dynamics of changes in intensity of space radiation corpuscular flows. (fbis-Sov, 1/31/72, LI)
Space program costs were recounted for press by unidentified NASA spokesman at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. had spent more than $26,657 billion on manned space program in past 15 yrs and planned to spend $8.85 billion in next 5 yrs. Apollo series—most expensive program—would cost $25 billion through completion of Apollo 17. Gemini program had cost $1283.4 million and Mercury, $392.1 million. Skylab was expected to cost $2.6 billion, and early estimates for space shuttle program were $6.1 billion. NASA had saved $1.5 billion by eliminating Apollo 18, 19, and 20. (upi, NYT, 12/12/72, 38)
Unidentified Administration officials told New York Times there was evidence that People’s Republic of China had deployed strategic missiles capable of reaching Moscow. Missiles were said to have 5600-km (3500-mi) range, carry 3-megaton warheads* and be installed in well protected launching sites. Times said officials had declined to reveal source of evidence but paper surmised source to be reconnaissance satellite. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/72, 67) November 7-8:	Goddard Space Flight Center sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Technology” at Greenbelt, Md. Fifty-two papers covered spacecraft and vehicle technology, sensor technology, ground operations, and communications and navigation. Robert J. Goss of gsfc reported design changes had increased Thor-Delta launch vehicle performance while maintaining reliability and low cost. Payload that could be placed in synchronous transfer orbit would have increased from 45 kg (100 lbs) in 1960 to 680 kg (1500 lbs) when H-l booster was operational in 1974. Joseph Arlauskas of gsfc described multispectral scanner in orbit on Erts 1, launched July 23, that permitted simultaneous imaging in three visible bands and one nearinfrared, to provide data for management of environmental resources. gsfc also sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Science” on high-energy and solar astronomy; optical and ultraviolet astronomy; planetary, lunar, and cometary studies; earth observations; and earth physics. Dr. John A. Philpotts of gsfc reported that three years study of lunar samples from Apollo and U.S.S.R. Luna missions showed essentially three kinds of rocks: iron-rich basalts in mare basins, KREEP basalts in Mare Imbrium and Oceanus Procellarum, and anorthosites in highlands. He thought there was enough material in hand “to work out the origin of these . . . rocks, and from that, the evolution of the moon and its relation to other solar system materials.” (Proceedings, NASA SP-326, SP-331) November 8:	Operational control of Noaa 2 Improved Tiros operational weather satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 15, was officially transferred to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Environmental Satellite Service, (nasa Release 72-221)
Third anniversary of first manned landing on moon. NASA’s Apollo 11 mission had proved that man could carry out scientific and technological work on another planet and had fulfilled U.S. goal established in 1961 of developing technology to transport man to moon and return him safely to earth within 1960s. Since Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., spent 2 hrs 31 min on moon’s Sea of Tranquility July 20, 1969, NASA had launched five more Apollo missions. Eight men had explored moon at four different sites for 55 hrs 34 min. Four geophysical stations placed on moon were transmitting scientific data, 272 kg (600 lbs) of lunar samples had been brought to earth, 16 different scientific experiments had been conducted on lunar surface 48 times, and 17 different experiments had been conducted in lunar orbit 41 times. Apollo 17, last mission in program, was scheduled for launch Dec. 6. Manned Spacecraft Center expanded regular public open house activities with special Mission Control Center program re-creating radio transmissions between Apollo 11 crew and Mission Control Center during lunar landing, duplicating flight controller displays, and showing motion pictures taken during mission. Neil Armstrong Air and Space Museum in Wapakoneta, Ohio, home of Apollo 11 astronaut who was first man on moon, held informal opening to mark anniversary. President Nixon’s daughter, Tricia N. Cox, presented moon rocks to museum, which would be formally dedicated in early autumn when all exhibits had been completed. (nasa Release 72-144; msc Release 72-151; Wapakoneta Daily News, 6/16/72; H Post, 7/21/72)
Pupils from seven suburban schools in Cleveland, Ohio, area visited Lewis Research Center to discuss participation in joint LeRC and Cleveland Div. of Air Pollution Control project to measure trace elements in air. NASA would supply equipment to schools for sampling outside air. Samples would be analyzed at LeRC and compared with Cleveland air. (Cleveland PD, 2/10/72) February 10:	Apparent failure of electronic component had caused loss of major portions of data from two of three scientific experiments on board particles and fields Subsatellite placed in lunar orbit by Apollo 15 Aug. 4, 1971, NASA announced. Affected experiments—magnetometer and particles experiment—appeared to be functioning normally, but not all data could be received from them. Data controlled by 2 of 12 gates which released data in proper sequence were lost Feb. 3 and engineers had been unable to restore the data paths that handled orientation for analyzing magnetometer results, synchronizing pulses that allowed ground-based computers to decipher telemetry data, and portions of data collected by experiments. Manned Spacecraft Center personnel had been manually analyzing thousands of bits of data to determine extent of problem and to work out alternate procedures for obtaining the missing data. Analysis showed that failure was probably due to breakdown of some electronic part, (msc Release 72-37)
Saturday Review editorial appraised Apollo program’s final significance: Militarily “little strategic value beyond increased sophistication in rocketry and global surveillance seems to have been realized.” Scientific benefits were difficult to determine until data were analyzed. Program “signals the end—for the time being—of what must be regarded as a kind of dream . . . wherein human captains ply their ships through the reaches of the heavens. In a way we are all vicarious captains of space ships, and with the end of Apollo it will be infinitely more difficult to imagine ourselves aboard craft that are guided only by the circuitry of electronic crews. As machinery for exploration, the human captain has been superannuated, at least for the foreseeable future. The inescapable corollary is that we are earthbound once again, tightly contained in the atmosphere of our single spinning island by insurmountably vast distances and the laws of physics.” Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s “giant leap for mankind” had been, perhaps, “that the Apollo program, for all its costs and whatever the legitimacy of its birth, created a cosmic event—earth-rise played on the retinas of terrestrially evolved organisms.” (Meyer, Saturday Review, 12/23/72, 22)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans passed final four-hour physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, Dr. W. Royce Hawkins, told press astronauts were “well rested, in good spirits, and physically in excellent shape.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/2/72, 58)
Man’s lunar theories were undergoing major revision because of Apollo 17, Wall Street Journal said. Observations by astronauts of orange soil on moon—clue to past volcanic activity—had promoted review of Apollo 14 color photos. Review had disclosed brown and orange discolorations on dome in crater Langrenus. Orange soil meant there might be other relatively young volcanic features. Discovery could result in major revision of thermal theories of moon. {WSJ, 12/19/72) December 20:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite by Atlas-Agena booster from Eastern Test Range. Satellite entered orbit with 40 728km (25 307-mi) apogee, 31 012-km (19 270-mi) perigee, 1440.4-min period, and 9.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 1973; Sheldon, Sci Policy Research Div, Library Congress; SBD, 12/26/72, 245)
Newspaper editorials commented on decision to develop space shuttle. Kansas City Star:	“The next great step in space for the United States seems assured. President Nixon has pressed the go-ahead button and apparently it will be largely a matter of adequate funding by Congress. In view of the record of space accomplishments, there is not much doubt that the planned space shuttle program will be fruitful both from the standpoint of technological success and long-range scientific benefits.” (KC Star, 1/7/72)	" St. Louis Globe-Democrat:	“There are so many potentialities for the shuttle that it is bard to envision all of them. But there is no doubt that if it is completed space travel for the average citizen may become a distinct possibility in the 1980s.” (St Louis G-D, 1/7/72) Christian Science Monitor said “space discovery versus human needs argument should not be seen as an either/or issue. This is so even leaving aside the jobs creation or economic return arguments.” Monitor believed that “a space shuttle program, because it is so practically linked to fulfilling man’s age-old vision of mastering the heavens, will unleash more constructive human energy than it will consume. And this excess will make meeting earthside demands the easier.” (CSM, 1/7/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution:	“The program . . . has the almost immediate benefit of employing some 50,000 highly trained aerospace workers who have faced a dismal job picture as the Apollo program has phased out. And, again, the proposal demonstrates that imagination and vision and a willingness to dare are still part of the American way of doing things.” (Atlanta JC, 1/7/72) Milwaukee Journal:	“The shuttle offers the opportunity to make space flight fairly routine, of taking large numbers of people and supplies in and out of space, of manning earth resource space stations continuously, of monitoring and repairing communications and resource satellites. It is a worthwhile program.” (MJ, 1/7/72) Los Angeles Times said military aspect of space shuttle needed clarification. “Most taxpayers welcomed the decision to end the wasteful competition between NASA and the Air Force on the shuttle and orbiting space station.” NASA had not explained how shuttle’s civil and military functions would be kept separate. “No American wants the Soviet Union to tip the balance of power with its own space program. But it might help avert a new confrontation if the military applications were enumerated along with a statement of whether the American government thinks shuttles are bound by the international agreement barring nuclear weapons from outer space.” (LA Times, 1/7/72) Seattle Times:	“The history of warfare shows that victory usually goes to the one who occupies the high ground. Near-earth space is the ‘high ground’ of modern military planning. In approving a full go-ahead for . . . space shuttle program, President Nixon this week served notice that this nation intends to occupy the ‘high ground.’ ” (Seattle Times, 1/7/72)
Space Science Awareness Month was celebrated by City of St. Louis, Mo., at instigation of Mayor Alphonso Cervantes. More than 100 space science lectures and demonstrations were presented in area to provide opportunity for teachers, students, and general public to understand space technology and its benefits to society. Eugene Hanses, education director of McDonnell Planetarium, was chairman of activities which included talks by Marshall Space Flight Center officials and display of moon rocks, (msfc Release 72—145; NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 253)
Boston Globe editorial commented on Apollo 17 splashdown. It was “little short of astounding. After a trip of about 500,000 miles [800 000 kilometers], the astronauts brought their command module safely home just a half mile [0.08 kilometer] from the planned splashdown point and within one second—repeat, one second—of the time scheduled when it blasted off two weeks ago. It would be unbelievable if it hadn’t happened.” (B Globe, 12/22/72)
Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ. Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for Apollo seismic experiments, said seismic signals from May 13 crash of meteorite onto moon had confirmed that moon had crust 61 km (38 mi) thick over a mantle and, possibly, a core. Lunar crust measured near Apollo 14 site in Fra Mauro region was about twice as thick as crust on earth. Lunar highlands appeared to have solid rock beneath thick regolith. Change in reflected seismic waves below crust to 8.2 km per sec (5.1 mps) showed moon had mantle similar to earth’s. Measurement of same layer during Apollo 15 mission had been 9 km per sec (5.6 mps), but 8.2 km per sec was more nearly valid and more consistent with known rock types at pressures expected at that depth. Rocks rich in ferromagnesian minerals such as olivine and pyroxene were dominant in earth’s mantle and also produced seismic velocities of about 8.2 km per sec. Signals also appeared to show change of state in lunar material at depth of 1000 km (600 mi), suggesting possibility of core, (msc Release 72-126)
Tass said Soviet test of lunar iron samples from Luna 16 and Apollo 11 had shown lunar iron resisted rust better than iron found on earth. (Reuters, C Trib, 1/26/72)
Collection of 28 paintings by artist-architect-astronomer Chesley Bonestell and 3 original drawings by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, were placed on exhibition at American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in New York for indefinite period. Bonestell paintings of early 1950s depicted future space explorations. Von Braun paintings suggested suit for astronaut extravehicular activity on moon. (Am Mus Release)
Poll of 123 persons in 6 Moroccan villages had shown 63% thought U.S. lunar landings were hoax or had doubts about them, Washington Post reported. Of those polled, 88% said they had heard of manned lunar missions since 1969. Of 20 persons between ages of 14 and 25, 55% believed reports of moon landings; only 25% of 20 persons between ages of 61 and 90 thought reports were true. Of villagers who believed men had gone to moon, 20% thought landings had been made by Russians. (Aubin, W Post, 7/24/72, A14)
U. Alexis Johnson, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on space agreements with U.S.S.R. signed in May, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ special hearing. Johnson said agreement signed May 24 endorsed at highest level understandings reached over past 18 mos between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences for cooperation in space science and applications such as meteorology, study of earth’s environment, further exploration of moon and planets, and space biology and medicine. It permitted development of compatible rendezvous and docking systems which “should enhance safety and value of space flight” and opened possibility of further areas of cooperation. It demonstrated “in full view of the world that the two great space powers have both the will and the capability to work together on important and difficult tasks. We have high hopes . . . that this agreement will be a milestone in our relationship with the Soviet Union. ... It serves our broad national purposes, as well as our specific foreign policy objectives.” Dr. Low outlined earlier agreements and gave details of joint rendezvous and docking mission agreed on for 1975. During April visit to Moscow, agreement had been reached that astronauts must understand Russian to extent normally used in both regular and contingency operations. Soviet cosmonauts also would need to understand other language and be able to respond. Dictionary would be.developed of commonly used phrases. Some astronauts, all interested in flying this mission, had begun studying Russian on their own. Astronauts selected would take formal language training. Others in NASA would also learn Russian. (Transcript)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell retired from NASA and Navy to form Edgar D. Mitchell & Associates, Inc., organization to study psychic potential of man and other forms of life. (NASA pao; AP, NYT, 10/3/72, 45) October 1—7:	Federation Aeronautique Internationale held annual general conference in Paris, fai Gold Space Medal—Federation’s highest honor —was presented to Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Scott also accepted V. M. Komarov Diploma on behalf of Apollo 15 crew. (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 235; nasa Int Aff)
NASA announced signing of $64-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee award-fee contract with North American Rockwell Corp. for design, development, and test of docking module, docking system, and modification of Apollo command and service module (csm) for Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Hardware would be used in joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for summer of 1975. (nasa Release 72-218)
Newspapers commented on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. Wall Street Journal: “Whereas past space efforts have been an extension and symbol of Soviet-American competition, the proposed new effort will attempt to extend and symbolize cooperation.” Question was “whether this change is contrived and doomed to fail as an expression of national needs and attitudes or whether it signifies the dawning of a new era in the progress of man. A case may be made either way. . . .” {WSJ, 5/26/72) Christian Science Monitor saw agreement as “commitment to peace, to friendly relations in the years ahead on the part of the world’s two superpowers.” Agreement meant extension of Apollo program to bridge gap between last Skylab mission in 1973 and 1978 space shuttle flights. “It will mean an estimated 4,400 more jobs in the aerospace industry. It will mean that Soviet space crews will come to the United States for training and vice versa. And once the rendezvous is made televiewers in both countries will be able to watch their astronauts moving from one spacecraft to another and conducting joint scientific experiments.” (CSM, 5/25/72) Miami Herald: “Both sides may learn a bit from each other .... What most people will learn is likely to be more meaningful because emotions are the mainspring of human attitudes and actions. National prestige has been a foremost consideration in space for more than 15 years. Preparation for the joint flight promises to remold the effort into a symbol of international cooperation.” (M Her, 5/26/72) Washington Post: “The promise is that this first docking and the steps that lead to it may be the key to a new coordinated joint effort to explore and exploit those parts of the universe within man’s reach.” If mission was successful, “it ought to be possible for [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] to cooperate on most other aspects of space operations. The benefits to each country from such an arrangement would be great. By curtailing both competition and duplication in space activities, scientists on both sides would be able to do in good time the things that ought to be done without straining the financial resources of their governments nearly as much in the process.” (W Post, 5/26/72) May 27:	Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, said in telephone interview with New York Times that NASA astronaut corps would be cut because it had “three times as many people as are needed.” If all astronauts had stayed in program, many “would just be on dead-end streets. There have been retirements right along, and there will be further reductions. . . . It’s just a fact of life that we have only one Apollo, three Skylab and one ‘ren-dock’ flights ahead of us, and our manpower is over our known requirements by a factor of three.” Of 27 astronauts who had flown on Apollo missions, 12 had already left flying status. As many as 10 astronauts reportedly already had been asked to find other employment as soon as possible, Washington Post said astronaut corps had confirmed. Two had recently resigned— Edgar A. Mitchell and James B. Irwin—and many more of the 43 astronauts remaining were planning resignations. Philip K. Chapman would join staff of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Anthony W. England would join Science and Applications Directorate at msc. Donald L. Holmquest and John S. Bull, both on temporary leave to universities for past year, were also expected to resign. According to one unidentified astronaut, “Slayton really feels that he doesn’t need any more than 15 men” for shuttle and joint Soviet missions. In 1967 and 1968, astronaut total had reached peak of 63 men. (Lyons, NYT, 5/28/72, 1; O’Toole, W Post, 5/28/72, A14)
Chicago Tribune editorial said there was still “a lot of studying to be done” on U.S. conversion to metric system [see Aug. 18]. Question of financing was “sticky” one. “Many of the countries which have gone or are going metric have provided some sort of government help to finance the changeover.” U.S. estimated conversion cost at between $10 billion and $40 billion. “Both labor and industry—especially small business—have been leery of undertaking this expense without government help. But the government is in no position at the moment to give much help; and if it were to convert its purchases to the metric system quickly, the result would be favorable to foreign manufacturers already on the metric system and detrimental to our own.” (C Trib, 8/21/72) August 22:	NASA announced preliminary timeline for Apollo 17 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt—would be launched from Kennedy Space Center at 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. Lunar module would land on moon’s Taurus-Littrow region at 2:55 pm est Dec. 11 and two crewmen would explore lunar surface for three extravehicular activity periods before lm lifted off moon at 5:56 pm est Dec. 14. Spacecraft would splash down in Pacific at 2:24 pm est Dec. 19, after 304-hr 31-min mission, (nasa Release 72-169)
AP quoted scientists as saying new mirror being installed in Boyden Observatory at Mazelspoort, South Africa, would provide most powerful telescope in Southern Hemisphere. Scientists planned to use telescope to flash laser beam to moon. {W Post, 5/14/72, D5)
Crowd estimated at more than half million would witness nighttime launch of Apollo 17, which experts believed would be visible within 800-km (500-mi) radius, Associated Press reported. Lester T. Keene of Kennedy Space Center Data Systems Div. had said exhaust from Saturn V rocket would be equivalent to brilliance of sunlight. Peak visibility would be reached about 2 min 30 sec after launch, when Saturn V was at 68-km (42-mi) altitude and 90 km (56 mi) northeast of Cape Kennedy, and before shutdown of lst-stage engines that burned fuel producing orange flame. Pale blue flame of 2nd stage would not be seen for as great distance. (B Sun, 11/21/72, A8)
New York Times editorial asked, “Which America?” In same week Apollo 17 astronauts fired their spacecraft home from moon, “American pilots fired bombs that broke through the heavens over a peasant nation in Asia. America the ingenious and America the vengeful had both struck.” U.S. and its people were being judged “for what our Government is doing with its mighty technology. Are we now the enemy—the new barbarians?” (NYT, 12/24/72) December 26:	Cosmos 540 was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 805-km (500.2-mi) apogee, 785-km (487.8-mi) perigee, 74° inclination, and 100.7-min period, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)	#
Second press briefing on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement was held at NASA Hq., following White House briefing. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said: “This is not the culmination but a very major milestone in the long period of negotiations with the Soviet Union on space cooperation. And in my judgment this is at least one of the most important missions that NASA has and that is to promote international cooperation.” Mission was, as well, “an important part of the new program of NASA for the 70’s.” Rendezvous and docking mission could be accomplished in context of constant NASA budget. “This constant budget . . . and the programs . . . now planned, the Skylab, the shuttle and now the international rendezvous and docking mission show I think the kind of program that we envision for the rest of this decade.” Program had congressional support “at least partially because of the strong international flavor that NASA has in manned space.” Dr. Fletcher said crew for joint mission had not yet been selected. Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale Myers and Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager, explained details of plans in response to press questions. (Transcript)
Washington Post editorial commented on Apollo 16:	. . what has struck us about the moon flights is that so little has gone wrong and how much of what has gone wrong has been correctable. It is a sad commentary about the quality of life on earth when it takes days to fix a television set or a refrigerator while it takes only hours to analyze and overcome an electronic flaw in a craft that is circling the moon.” (W Post, 4/29/72, A18) April 30:	Apollo 16 discoveries were described in New York Times article. Mission had been “longest, most ambitious and, in many respects, most productive” in Apollo series. Discoveries included fact that Descartes region of lunar highlands contained almost no specimens of unaltered volcanic rock despite region’s age, “older than the seas and the more prominent craters.” Region had been found to contain breccia rock that had been “fragmented, jumbled, and cemented together again.” High magnetism observed at sites visited by Apollo 16 astronauts might provide clue to moon’s early history, since analysis of lava rocks on earth had indicated earth’s magnetic field flipped over at intervals of thousands or millions of years, with shift requiring centuries. Reverse polarity discovered in rocks near Apollo 16 landing site might mean moon had done magnetic flip at some time in its early history. Among experiments whose outcome was still uncertain was attempt to photograph and analyze ultraviolet light from hydrogen clouds thought by some scientists to exist and to be “missing mass” that would explain gravity assumed to be keeping clusters of galaxies from flying apart. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/72, 3)
Fact that all spacecraft orbiting earth or moon traveled “oval shaped path called Keplerian elipse” testified to “durability” of Johannes Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, New York Times said. In article on 1971 celebration of 400th anniversary of mathematician-astronomer’s birth, Dec. 27, 1571, Times noted, “Whether it is the space program or a new fashion in historical research, the life and works of the sickly son of a mercenary soldier who rose to be Imperial Mathematician of the Holy Roman Empire are undergoing a kind of rehabilitation at the hands of scholars.” (Reinhold, NYT, 2/18/72)
nasa announced organizational changes within Office of Manned Space Flight to fit post-Apollo/Skylab activities. New Mission and Payload Integration Office had been established, Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force, Advanced Missions Office was redesignated Advanced Programs Office, and Apollo Program Office became Apollo/astp Program Office. Functions of Engineering and Operations Directorate in omsf had been reassigned to Advanced Programs Office. Mission and Payload Integration Office would plan and coordinate requirements between payload sponsors and shuttle and sortie lab organizations. Sorties Lab Task Force would manage NASA planning and definition activities to produce manned module for research and applications activities with space shuttle. Current project emphasis was on technical definition and planning for hardware development phase. Parallel definition studies were being made by NASA and European Space Research Organization. If Europe undertook development of sortie lab, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said, NASA Task Force would coordinate NASA and esro activities. Philip E. Culbertson was Director of Mission and Payload Integration Office and Acting Director of Advanced Programs Office. Douglas R. Lord was Director of Sortie Lab Task Force, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone was Director of Apollo/ASTP Project for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. (nasa Release 72-232)
Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 17 performance as astronauts worked on moon’s surface following Dec. 11 touchdown: Cleveland Plain Dealer: “On time and on target, the Apollo 17 mission has made it to the moon and provides further proof of excellence in American space technology. The temptation is to dismiss such performance as routine, but there is nothing at all routine about the assignments of the men and equipment on this far journey.” Apollo 17 was “establishing even more clearly the high degree of expertise and • perfection that is built into the American space exploration effort. It is doing so, however, with Schmitt and Cernan continuing the very unroutine work begun by astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin Jr. on the moon three years ago.” (Cl PD, 12/12/72) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “With all the other firsts of this last Apollo mission to the moon, there is tinge of sorrow mingled with the superlatives of performance.” To realize this was “last time humans will visit the moon in the foreseeable future is to feel a certain loss along with the sense of accomplishment.” (P Bull, 12/12/72) Miami Herald: “Knowledge gleaned from the Apollo program . . . is upsetting long-held theories. The venture thus is contributing to the demise of dogmatism, and encouraging open-mindedness which may lead mankind to many new truths.” (M Her, 12/12/72)
NASA announced publication of The Experiments of Biosatellite II (NASA SP-204), edited by Joseph F. Sanders. Book described first successfully completed Biosatellite mission, which carried plants, frog eggs, amoeba, and seeds on earth orbital mission Sept. 7-9, 1967, to determine effect of space flight on living organisms, (nasa WR, 5/1/72, 5; A&A 1967) May 1—4:	Fourth meeting of Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Editorial Board for preparation and publication of space biology and medicine review convened in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Dr. Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Ministry of Health. Under Oct. 8, 1965, Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Board reviewed research from the two countries for publication, (nasa Release 72-89) May 2:	Apollo 16 rock and photography briefing was held at Manned ' Spacecraft Center. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said first few weeks of preliminary examination of Apollo 16 samples would be occupied with opening bags and weighing, dusting, photographing, and examining rocks. Catalog, including photos, of all samples should be completed by end of May. Rocks examined to date appeared to be breccias. One rock—collected during third extravehicular activity and described on moon by Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., as “an honest to goodness igneous rock”—was different in texture and appearance from other typical breccias, but had not yet been precisely classified. “Zap pits” on the surface indicated rock had been lying on one side. It was flattish with very fine, silverish crystals in finer grain matrix with no vesicules. Dr. Gast said rock could be rapidly crystallized igneous rock, very-high-grade metamorphic rock, or metamorphic rock that had been at temperatures of 1000°C (1300 K) long enough to be completely recrystallized. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas and U.S. Geological Survey expressed surprise at “the tremendous number of clasts [rock fragments]” within rocks. Clasts represented “crustal material hauled in from somewhere and that’s a tremendous plus beyond what we had originally conceived of as getting. ... So whether it’s volcanic in origin and therefore . . . this is crust from straight under somewhere or whether it’s impact origin and therefore crustal material thrown in from some distance doesn’t matter.” By selecting Descartes as landing site, NASA*had obtained extra sampling, “maybe even a better sampling,” than in other highlands missions. “And we may even have sampled another quadrant of the Moon that we wouldn’t have gotten in any other way. ... we may have a good deal more than the 15 percent or so of the highlands represented in these rocks and we may have a much older segment of the time scale represented.” (Transcript)
Associated Press reported Apollo 15 crew had been favored to receive Air Force Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy but that trophy would be withheld because of unauthorized postal cover incident [see July 11]. Trophy was awarded annually for most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress. AP said Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin also had been invited to annual meeting of Federation Aeronautique Internationale in Parts in October to receive other awards with Soviet cosmonauts and that Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, had advised Fai that efforts would be made to have astronauts accept invitation. (AP, W Star & News, 7/23/72, A23) * Federal Aviation Administration announced award of $119 249 contract to Parsons, Brinckeroff, Quade and Douglas, Inc., for architectural and engineering plans for 600-by-90-m {2000-by-30Q-ft) elevated STOLport for short takeoff and landing aircraft. Exterior design of structure supporting STOLport would be planned to provide approaching pilot with realistic cues resembling those included in actual landing facility on top of a multilevel structure, (faa Release 72-142)
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)
Apollo program had been “project of peace, producing knowledge that has been and will be made available to all nations and to all peoples,” New York Times editorial said. “No doubt men and women of many other nations will some day rocket across the cosmic tracks that Apollo pioneered. Americans can be proud that this country led the way, and did so with the goal of making space a zone of peace, not a new arena for fratricidal war among nations.” (NYT, 12/10/72, 10)
Belgium released annual Postage Day stamp, depicting Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott postmarking U.S. lunar rover stamp on moon Aug. 2, 1971. (AP, P Bull, 4/23/72) April 23—29:	Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner and Soviet Tu144 supersonic transport were displayed at Hannover Air Show in West Germany. Reportedly they would not appear at U.S. transpo ’72 exposition scheduled to be held at Dulles Airport in Virginia in May. (W Star, 4/30/72, C12) April 24:	Second set of reports by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences Working Groups which met in Moscow Nov. 29 to Dec. 6, 1971, had been approved by NASA and Soviet Academy, NASA announced. Meetings, to define technical requirements for rendezvous and docking of U.S. and U.S.S.R. spacecraft, had not resulted in definite decision to commit either U.S. or U.S.S.R to joint manned space mission. Reports indicated Working Group 1 had completed general documentation on life support systems, coordinate systems, and constraints on spacecraft configuration and had agreed on objectives and preliminary documentation for possible test mission, exchanges on test windows, program elements, and required communications channels. Working Group 2 had listed guidance and control systems and onboard spacecraft equipment to he compatible and had nearly completed documentation on lights, docking targets and contact conditions, control systems, and radio tracking. Working Group 3 had agreed on basic values for compatible docking system, including diameter of tunnel, and to create scale model of docking system that would verify parameters and ensure compatibility in early development stage. (NASA Release 72-88)
Results of analyses of data collected by City of Cleveland’s Air Pollution Control Div. from 1968 through 1971 were reported by Lewis Research Center scientists. State of Ohio standards for total suspended particulate and nitrogen dioxide had not heen met in Cleveland; sulfur dioxide standards had been met only in limited residential areas. Air quality had improved in industrial valley but only sulfur dioxide pollution showed consistent deciease in remainder of city, and suspended particulate levels had increased to west of Cuyahoga River with decrease to east. Trends had been determined by LeRC Environmental Research Office from data obtained during two-year joint LeRC and City of Cleveland project. (LeRC Release 72-102) *	Officials of Corp. for Public Broadcasting (cpb), Public Broadcasting Service (pbs), and National Public Affairs Center for TV (npact) met to discuss NPACT feasibility study of possible special scientific coverage of Apollo 17 evas by PBS [see Nov, 9]. Following discussion CPB President Henry Loomis issued message to pbs stations. Decision bad been made that “live coverage would be impractical for public television and that alternate idea for space project programming would be considered.” Decision was based on study conclusions that time was too short to gather required staff, mission delays might disrupt TV schedules, and coverage by commercial networks would be more extensive than first expected. There was agreement that “scientific findings of the entire Apollo project, which concludes with Apollo, merited serious treatment on public television.” (Text)
Senate received President Nixon’s nominations of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., for promotion from lieutenant colonel to full colonel in Air Force and of Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II for promotion from lieutenant commander in Navy to permanent grade of commander. Senate confirmed both nominations May 16. (CR, 5/2/72, S7135; 5/16/72, S7969) May 3:	Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., held press conference at Manned Spacecraft Center and showed films and still photos taken during April 16-27 mission. Crew’s physical condition was already back to normal. Mattingly’s exercise-response tests had been normal one day after landing, and Young’s and Duke’s had been normal two days after landing. Tests to determine potassium levels were still under way. Young said engine problem that had delayed lunar landing six hours had made Apollo 16 “a cliff-hanger of a mission from where we were sitting in the cockpit; but the ground came through . . . with a couple of clutch hits and put us right back in the ball game. I know there was a lot of work being done on the ground and, speaking for the flight crew, we certainly appreciate it.” Young also praised lunar roving vehicle which carried him and Duke over lunar surface. “The suspension system on the Rover is absolutely remarkable. We never had the feeling of spinning out or anything, but sometimes we went in some deep holes and sometimes the vehicle bounced up in the air and came down on a rock . . . [but] it didn’t seem to affect the performance of the machine.” Duke said lunar surface was so clear that “features look almost like you’re right next door to them,” like a clear day in western U.S. desert. “Some mountains you think are right next to you and [they] end up 20 miles [32 km] away. You have the same feeling on the lunar surface. Looking out the window from the lunar module . . . South Ray Crater . . . looks like it’s just right next to you, but it was 6 kilometers [3% miles] away.” (Transcript)
l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.), Manned Spacecraft Center Associate Director since November 1969, retired. Gen. Bogart had joined NASA in 1964 and had received numerous high awards and honors, including 1969 NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to Apollo lunar landing program, (msc Release 72-18)
National Academy of Sciences was seeking Congressional approval of project to provide funds to Poland for construction of fl-million astronomical research center as gift to mark 500th anniversary of birth of Copernicus in 1973, New York Times reported. Additional funds for equipment would be sought in U.S. from Polish-American community. Facility would be in Warsaw. (Feron, NYT, 5/15/72, 81) May 16:	Press briefing on Apollo 16 preliminary science results was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. David W. Strangway, Chief of msc Geophysics Branch, said magnetic sample returned to moon on Apollo 16 “did pick up fairly strong component of soft magnetization as the result of exposure to the spacecraft systems. On return to the earth, however, we were able to clean that out and to recover the original hard component of magnetization which is what ... we were hoping to do.” Experiment had worked out “quite successfully and suggests that the soft components that we’re seeing in the rocks is indeed of spacecraft origin and is not an artifact of some kind that came from the lunar surface. ... if it did come from the lunar surface we’ve contaminated it so much that we can’t sort it out afterwards. But the hard component then, we believe, is real and it came back through the whole journey and ... is essentially unchanged and unmodified.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said qualitative conclusion from chemical analysis of few samples examined to date was “that the soil is certainly quite homogeneous from point to point.” Homogeneity suggested that rock at Cayley Plains might not be different from rock in Descartes and that neither formation might have been formed from volcanic lava. Samples had very high concentrations of aluminum and calcium—26%% aluminum oxide and 15% calcium—“very different from what we see everywhere on the surface of the earth.” X-rays of core tubes showed dispersion throughout soil of metal particles—probably metallic iron—up to 0.5 cm (0.2 in) in diameter. Tentative conclusion was “that metallic iron, both in the soil and the rocks, is very much more abundant at this site than it’s been at any other site on the moon and this may be a qualitative characteristic of the Apollo 16 site and perhaps a qualitative characteristic of the highlands is that rocks there contain bits of metallic iron. It is tempting to speculate that this has something to do with the high magnetic field at this region.” Although scientists couldn’t tell just from looking at rocks whether any were volcanic, “the opinion is evolving that they are not.” Rocks appeared, to naked eye, to be impact breccias. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 5/17/72)
President Nixon spoke at White House ceremony before his departure for state visit to People’s Republic of China: “. . . if there is a postscript that I hope might be written with regard to this trip, it would be the words on the plaque which was left on the moon £y our first astronauts when they landed there. ‘We came in peace for all mankind.’ ” (PD, 2/21/72, 443^)
Two volunteers began pilot investigation at U.S. Public Health Service Hospital in San Francisco to retrace Apollo 15 mission profile and determine cause of astronauts’ slower-than-usual return to physiologic norm. Program, conducted for Manned Spacecraft Center, included set periods of vigorous physical exercise, bed rest, and posttest analysis. Bed rest portion was considered analogue of weightlessness. Potassium intake would be closely controlled because NASA doctors postulated Apollo 15 crew had not consumed enough potassium for their workload and adjustment to weightlessness. Program consisted of 9-day equilibration, 7-day control phase, 12-day bed rest, and 14-day recovery period, (msc Release 72-39; msc pao)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, discussed spinoff of nasa biomedical research in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Ames Research Center (arc) was evaluating changes in lung tissue of coal miners in collaboration with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare to pinpoint possible damage to astronauts’ lungs from particulate contaminants in atmosphere. Study results suggested “cell destruction can be induced by release of intracellular digestive enzymes into the cell cytoplasm following penetration of the cells by particles, in the case of coal miners, silicates.” Joint NASA and TJ.S. Bureau of Mines program would develop carbon monoxide detecting system, arc and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture would develop hydroponic system for spacecraft to accelerate plant growth under space flight conditions. “The medical information needed to assure man’s safe journey into and return from space has led to the development of many items of information and equipment of great value to terrestrial medicine.” NASA life sciences program “exemplifies the success which can be achieved by combining the special talents of Government, industry, and university scientists.” Dr. Berry also reported there had been “no findings in the manned space flights to date by the United States or U.S.S.R. that would preclude the commitment of man to longer duration missions. Therefore ... we feel confident in committing man to a 28-day mission.” Apollo 16 and 17 and Skylab experiments would study physiological response of body before commitment to 56-day Skylab mission. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Advanced Missions in omsf, testified on space shuttle orbital systems and advanced missions definition and planning: In areas of payloads, research and applications modules (ram), advanced missions, and advanced development, “principal effort is directed toward developing . . . understanding and planning the use of the shuttle.” In RAM program, “we will be continuing the study of concepts of a family of payload carrier modules suitable for transport in the Shuttle Orbiter cargo bay.” Modules would range from “austere shuttle ‘Sortie Can’ with relatively simple laboratory equipment . . . through more sophisticated, dedicated laboratory and observation facilities, including automated free-flyers serviced by the Shuttle.” Sortie mission using orbiter as platform for short-duration experiments was among most promising shuttle operating modes. Mission would use advantages of shuttle in payload design, development, and operation, and, “for the first time, permit the investigator to accompany his experiment into space.” Sortie missions would be modeled after arc Airborne Research Program in which Convair 990 aircraft was used as airborne laboratory. “The goal in developing procedures for managing the Space Shuttle Sortie Missions will be to retain the relatively simple, flexible and highly responsive aspects of the ‘990’ program.” (Transcript)
House Committee on Government Operations in 10th report, Aircraft Collision Avoidance Systems, criticized Federal Aviation Administration’s failure to develop “vigorous and meaningful program for preventing mid-air collisions.” Committee recommended faa research and development program to provide “unified, coordinated approach encompassing all elements of air traffic control, including ground-based air traffic control, airborne collision avoidance, the structure of the Nation’s airspace.” Committee gave faa Administrator until June 30 to report development by FAA, NASA, and aviation community of program to provide U.S. with “acceptable level of collision avoidance capability at the earliest possible date.” (Text) March 15—21:	NASA launched 29 sounding rockets from Wallops Station in cooperative international program to test weather data systems for France, Japan, and U.S. Project was sponsored by United Nations World Meteorological Organization’s Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation. Objective was to compare data for better understanding of upper-air temperature and wind measurements and to encourage international cooperation in exchanging data obtained from meteorological rockets. Rockets—which carried radiosonde payloads ejected at apogee and descending on parachutes—included 12 U.S. Loki-Datasondes carrying NASA payloads, 10 Japanese MT-135s carrying Japan Meteorological Agency payloads, and 7 U.S. Super Areas rockets carrying French National Meteorological Agency payloads. Twenty-four flights were successful, three were failures, and two were partially successful. Second series of launches was planned for late 1973 with U.S., U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, Brazil, France, and India. (WS Release 72-3; WS pao) March 16:	President Nixon praised ability of Americans to “harness the discoveries of science in the service of man” in message to Congress on science and technology: “They have found a way of preventing polio, placed men on the moon, and sent television pictures across the oceans.” But, “when other countries are rapidly moving upward on the scientific and technological ladder, challenging us both in intellectual and in economic terms,” U.S. position in aircraft, steel, automobile, and shipbuilding industries “is not as strong as it once was. A better performance is essential to both the health of our domestic economy and our leadership position abroad.” U.S. should “combine the genius of invention with the skills of entrepreneurship, management, marketing and finance;” ensure favorable environment for technological innovation; realize “that mere development of a new idea does not necessarily mean that it can or should be put into immediate use;” encourage young people to become “dedicated scientists and engineers;” continue priority assigned to basic research and to “exploratory experiments which provide the new ideas on which our edifice of technological accomplishment rests;” and “appreciate that the progress we seek requires a new partnership in science and technology—one which brings together the Federal Government, private enterprise, State and local governments, and our universities and research centers in a coordinated, cooperative effort to serve the national interest.” President had increased FY 1973 Dept, of Defense budget to “ensure our strategic deterrent capability, continue the modernization of our Armed Forces, and strengthen the overall technological base that underlies future military systems.” To “apply our scientific resources in meeting civilian needs,” President had developed “overall strategic approach in the allocation of Federal scientific and technological resources.” He urged Congress to support new strategy that included reorientation of space program “to focus on domestic needs—such as communications, weather forecasting and natural resource exploration. One important way ... is by designing and developing a reusable space shuttle, a step which would allow us to seize new opportunities in space with higher reliability at lower costs.” President also advocated “providing new sources of energy without pollution;” developing “fast, safe, pollution-free transportation;” reducing losses from natural disasters; improving programs to curb drug abuse; increasing biomedical research; providing better health care; and drawing more directly on “capabilities of our high technology agencies”—NASA, Atomic Energy Commission, and National Bureau of Standards—in applying r&d to domestic problems. To improve “climate for innovation” President had proposed National Science Foundation support of “assessments and studies focused ... on barriers to technological innovation and on the consequences of adopting alternative Federal policies which would reduce or eliminate these barriers.” Additionally he would “submit legislation to encourage the development of the small, high technology firms” and “provide additional means for the Small Business Investment Companies (sbics) to improve the availability of venture capital to such firms.” Among “cooperative international efforts” in science and technology President cited exchange of lunar samples with U.S.S.R. and exploration of “prospects for closer cooperation in satellite meteorology, in remote sensing of the environment, and in space medicine. Beyond this, joint working groups have verified the technical feasibility of a docking mission between a salyut Station and an Apollo spacecraft.” {PD, 3/20/72, 581-90)
San Jose [Calif.] Mercury editorial, commenting that Apollo 16 astronauts were safely on their way home “after a hugely successful exploration of the highlands of the moon,” said: “Space exploration should continue to command a relatively high place in the nation’s list of priorities; five trips to the moon have only served to whet the appetite for more and better knowledge of the earth’s nearest neighbor.” (San Jose Mercury, 4/26/72) April 27:	President Nixon telephoned Apollo 16 astronauts aboard U.S.S. Ticonderoga following splashdown, to offer congratulations on successful completion of mission. He invited astronauts to be special guests at state dinner for Mexican President Luis Echeverria Alvarez in June and said he would nominate L/Cdr Thomas K. Mattingly II (usn) for rank of commander and l/c Charles M. Duke, Jr. (usaf), for rank of colonel. President then issued statement from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “The journey of Apollo 16 has ended, but the contributions of this mission to scientific progress have only begun. Rarely if ever has so much new information been made available to science in such a brief period. As the work of evaluation and analysis goes forward, the impact of Apollo 16 will be felt for many years to come. “On behalf of all Americans, I am pleased to welcome Astronauts Young, Duke, and Mattingly back to earth and to salute them for a job well done. Their skill, their courage, and their enthusiasm have written another proud chapter in the stirring story of mankind’s struggle to unlock the mysteries of the unknown.” White House press officer later said President had asked possibility of promoting Capt. John W. Young to admiral. He was told Capt. Young had received two recent promotions and Navy would not permit third at this time. {PD, 5/1/72, 796; NYT, 4/28/72, 22)
Completion of satellite communications station at Emeq Haela, Israel, was announced by Jerusalem Domestic Service. Station would become operational in about three months. Israeli Post Office Director General Simha Sorokov said opening of station “will speed up the possibility that every resident in the state will be able to dial directly from his house to anyone abroad without ... an operator. When the system goes into operation, Israeli residents will be able to watch a man walking on the moon at the exact moment he is doing it.” (FBIS-Israel, 3/9/72, H3)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial adapted from paper by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator, presented views on future trends in space: Decade of 1970s would see emphasis on “beneficial returns from our investments in the first decade of the space age. It will also be a decade in which we will consciously seek to avoid the large funding peaks that characterized the Apollo era.” Number of achievements possible within limited budgeting would be limited. “In the science arena, and in particular in the exploration of the solar system, this will mean some effort on extending our exploration of earth-like planets. And that will be about it, unless some circumstances again change our emphasis on space science.” In 1980s NASA would “be getting to those very special, very important missions to the smaller bodies of the solar system . . . which will give us probably our best look at the very earliest days of the solar system. Then, in addition, we should during the 1970s look to the best husbanding and application of our space sciences resources to see if we can’t get in one or two early missions of this type.” At any progress rate, “the nation, and indeed the world, is not going to run out of important and exciting and inspiring things to do in exploring and seeking to understand this wonderful universe.” (Av Wk, 5/8/72, 7)
NASA announced selection of 10 scientists and their proposals for Skylab ground-based astronomy program to acquire corollary solar data from ground simultaneously with Skylab observations from earth orbit. In related program, Apollo Telescope Mount principal investigators had offered guest investigator opportunities to all interested astronomers worldwide. Principal investigator and guest investigator would arrange for access to selected atm data of mutual interest, and guest investigator would publish scientific paper on analysis of atm data he received. Guest investigators would be approved by NASA but would have no automatic claim on NASA funding. Some astronomers interested in program had proposed that rocket and balloon flights be conducted in addition to ground-based observations. Acquisition of simultaneous solar data from many of these observations, with Skylab data, was expected to greatly enhance development of models of solar atmosphere. (nasa Release 72—39)
Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70 (Senate Document 92-51) was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The 670-page report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.— noted that Soviet space program remained “a strong and growing enterprise” unhindered by budgetary strain and undimmed by deaths of three Soyuz cosmonauts in 1971. Current level of Soviet space activity exceeded that of U.S. at its peak in 1966, with perhaps 2% of Soviet gross national product devoted to space (U.S. spent about 1% of its gnp at peak). Although U.S. launch record had been declining steadily since 1966, Soviet launches had continued to climb, at least until 1970. Contrary to assertion that it was concentrating its efforts on unmanned program rather than manned program, U.S.S.R. apparently was still planning manned lunar landing and might spend $49 million on both advanced unmanned and manned lunar programs. U.S. would have committed $35 billion to total Apollo program when complete. In unmanned research satellite program “the level of activity currently runs ahead of the corresponding level of work at NASA.” Compendium of every known Soviet launch that had achieved orbit showed that, along with scientific satellites, Cosmos program consisted of unmanned tests of spacecraft designed to carry cosmonauts, lunar and planetary probes that failed to leave earth orbit, unsuccessful Mars probes, and military research and development and observation satellites that accounted for 80% of Cosmos payloads. According to study, Cosmos series through April 1971 had included at least 16 tests of fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and 22 tests of experimental spacecraft designed to inspect and destroy other nations’ observation and navigation satellites. Soviet achievements in near future were dependent on success or failure of G booster (in Saturn V class) or similar booster. Studies of moon with Luna series spacecraft would continue, perhaps with spacecraft launched by advanced booster carrying both rovers and sample returners. Planetary program would continue, probably with flyby mission to Jupiter and landing mission to Mars. Dr. Sheldon stressed that “the Soviet program is not a sham. It may be exploited for political purposes, but it is real and it is pursued in earnest.” (Text)
NASA released photos of Apollo 16 astronauts on lunar surface during
Twenty-fifth anniversary of transistor—invented Dec. 23, 1947, by Dr. John Bardeen, Dr. Walter H. Brattain, and Dr. William Shockley at American Telephone & Telegraph Co.’s Bell Telephone Laboratories. Invention had introduced age of electronic miniaturization, advanced computer development, and simplified communications. New York Times said that, “without the tiny transistor, it is highly unlikely that man would yet have walked on the moon.” (Smith, NYT, 12/22/72, 45)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial commented on Soviet announcement of plans for Soviet-American space mission: “If successful, the way would be opened for further joint exploratory missions, and for emergency rescues. Hopefully, the experiment would provide a stimulus for further combining . . . space efforts. This would provide a valuable interchange of scientific data and a saving in money. The goal should be co-operation in spacefaring by all the nations of the earth.” (St Louis P-D, 4/17/72) F—14 jet fighter aircraft to complete Navy’s order for 134 unless Government restructured contract. Grumman would require at least $2.2 million more per aircraft to compensate for expected losses, plus additional amount to provide profit. Navy was seeking $734 million in FY 1973 for 48 F-14s at current unit cost of $16.8 million. Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt, Chief of Naval Operations, testified April 19 that Government should “stick to the contract.” F-14 was “real winner, one the country really needs,1’ but aircraft could be produced profitably under current contract terms. (CR, 4/17/72, 4/19/72; Madden, NYT, 4/18/72, 1; Vasquez, NYT, 4/20/72, 5) April 18:	Science briefing on magnetic enigmas of moon was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Finding that rock samples of different kinds collected at all four Apollo landing sites were imprinted with magnetic field from 3 billion to 4 billion yrs ago was reported by Dr. David W. Strangway, Chief of msc Geophysics Div. Laboratory tests had shown 400 to 500 gammas of local magnetic field would have been needed to leave magnetism observed in lunar rocks—% o t0 Vioo as strong as magnetism on earth’s surface. Earth’s magnetism was believed to be caused by earth’s rapid spin and molten core but moon spun only once a month and had been assumed to be solid throughout. Analysis had determined that lunar rocks cooled from molten state between 3.6 billion and 4 billion yrs ago and it was “almost certain” that rocks had acquired their magnetism at that time. Dr. Paul J. Coleman of Univ. of California at Los Angeles reported that findings obtained with Subsatellite launched from Apollo 15 Aug. 4, 1971, had shown marked variations in lunar magnetism on moon’s far side, with sharp, even peak near crater Van de Graaf close to center of moon’s far side. Dr. Palmer Dyal, Ames Research Center physicist, said Apollo 16 efforts to find explanation for observed lunar magnetism would include survey of Palmetto Crater north of landing site to assess possibility that impacts of large meteorites could leave residue of local magnetism. Equipment included magnetometers left on moon by previous missions and lunar subsatellite to be ejected from Apollo 16 command module. (Transcript)
SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator completed third year of continuous operation on lunar surface. Atomic battery had been deployed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts Nov. 19, 1969, to power scientific experiments. SNAP-27, which had one-year life requirement of 63.5 w, was supplying more than 69 w. Generator, developed by Atomic Energy Commission, was fueled with plutonium 238 isotopes, (aec Release P-372)
Detroit News editorial commented on Apollo 15 astronauts’ carrying unauthorized postal covers on mission: “The trio did not follow through with the script but for the men to even contemplate the scheme was dead wrong. The nation has expended considerable money on them, trained them for national duty and paid them well. No one doubts their courage and skill but the spirit of the whole enterprise is tainted now the truth is out.” Paper said NASA should cancel astronaut privilege of carrying personal items to moon on condition they not be used later for commercial purposes. (D News, 7/17/72)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 16 mission as astronauts conducted second extravehicular activity (eva) on lunar surface. New York Times commented on April 20 decision to continue Apollo 16 mission despite technical problems: “Thursday’s dilemma and its solution were particularly useful in reminding all concerned that there are two kinds of errors that can be made in situations of this type.” There was possibility of mission directors “deciding to continue the journey in the face of a danger that brings disaster. Against that is the alternate risk of being overly cautious and aborting a mission unnecessarily, at huge financial and scientific loss.” It was “delicate dilemma” and “tribute to the Project Apollo leadership and organization that to date these voyages have foundered on neither rock.” (NYT, 4/22/72, 30)	' Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Science has been well served. Mankind has made its giant steps. The pure, fresh enthusiasm of Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., with his ‘Yahoo!’ and his ‘Fantastic!’ is infectious, but it cannot waken again the public’s wonder over the first moonwalk.” Everyone wished Apollo 16 well but “they have seen this show before. What refinements have been added in this latest version are obscurely technical. The Apollo program is aging, and the American public ... is quite willing to see it come to a close.” (Cl PD, 4/22/72)
Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt retired from Air Force and received Air Force Distinguished Service Medal with Oak Leaf Cluster during ceremony at Bolling Air Force Base, D.C. McDivitt, who held rank of brigadier general, had announced retirement from NASA effective Sept. 1 [see June 7]. (Boldt, W Post, 9/1/72, Cl)
Overview of Apollo 17 mission, scheduled for Dec. 6 launch, was given by Mission Director Chester M. Lee at nasa Jdq. press briefing. Mission experiments would include lunar surface gravimeter to detect possible lunar surface deformation from pull of earth and sun and to confirm existence of gravity waves; lunar ejecta and meteorite experiment to determine mass, velocity, and frequency of meteorite impacts on moon and nature of their ejecta; lunar seismic profiling experiment to acquire data on lunar near-surface structure and layering; lunar atmospheric composition experiment (masspec) ; experiment to measure solar flares; and lunar traverse gravimeter with receiver carried on lunar roving vehicle Rover to survey anomalies of gravity at all science stops. Among major new experiments on Apollo 17 mission would be surface electrical properties experiment to determine lunar surface layering and measure electrical properties of material; lunar neutron probe to measure capture rate of low-energy cosmic ray secondary neutrons and neutron energy spectrum as function of depth; and medical experiment biocore to be carried in command module (cm), biocore would carry six pocket mice in environmentally controlled situation. On return to earth, mice would be returned to principal investigators for examination for effects of high-Z particles. New experiments to be carried in scientific instrument module (sim) bay were far-ultraviolet spectrometer to determine composition density of lunar atmosphere; infrared scan radiometer to obtain data to correlate and confirm earth-produced thermal maps; and lunar sounder module to probe lunar near subsurface to depths of 1 to 1.05 km (0.6 to 1 mi). First Apollo 17 launch window would open at 9:53 pm est Dec. 6 and close at 1:31 am est Dec. 7. Alternate launch windows would occur in January and February. To reach moon at optimum sun angle, Apollo 17 would be launched at night; entry into trajectory toward moon would be made over Atlantic rather than over Pacific as on previous Apollo missions. “This means the TLI [translunar insertion] will occur about 45 minutes later than ... in the past.” Countdown preparations were proceeding normally. Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt were scheduled to land Dec. 11 on flat valley 9.7 km (6 mi) wide near southeastern edge of Sea of Serenity on northeastern side of moon’s front face. Landing site was more difficult than that of previous Apollo missions, Lee said, because “here we’re faced with a scarp that is a number of kilometers down.” Site was surrounded with “sculptured hills at the east, the north massif and the south massif; you are coming into a little tighter valley, but we have . . . plenty of clearance.” Astronauts would remain on moon for record 75 hrs, would make three traverses in Taurus-Littrow valley during three 7-hr extravehicular activity periods, and would drive electrified, four-wheeled Rover record 33.8 km (21 mi), including one drive that would take them almost 8 km (5 mi) from lunar module. Astronaut Ronald E. Evans would remain in lunar orbit in command module. Cernan and Schmitt were to rejoin cm at 5:56 pm est Dec. 16. Splashdown was scheduled for 2:24 pm est Dec. 19 in Pacific 560 km (350 mi) southeast of Samoa. Recovery ship would be U.S.S. Ticonderoga. (Transcript)
Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne had record 608 000 visitors— increase of about one third over 1971. Museum was considered most active museum in Switzerland and Europe’s most popular transport museum. Planetarium rated second to New York’s American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in number of annual visitors. Swiss Transport Museum’s Air and Space Wing was dedicated July 1. Dedication ceremonies were attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. During year, James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator, officially presented model of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facility to Museum. (Dir Swiss Trans Museum letter to nasa Hist Off, 2/19/72; A&A 1972)
S.S. Stcctendam of Holland-American Line sailed from New York with about 100 passengers for cruise advertised as “Voyage Beyond Apollo.” Itinerary included Cape Kennedy for close-up view of Apollo 17 launch, scheduled for Dec. 6. Passengers included novelists Norman Mailer and Katherine Anne Porter, science writer Isaac Asimov, and Northeastern Univ. physicist Dr. Robert D. Enzmann. Dr. Wernher von Braun—Fairchild Industries, Inc., Vice President and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—and former astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell and science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, who had been advertised as participants in space seminars aboard ship, did not appear. (Buckley, NYT, 12/12/72, 43)
Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin said in telephone interview with Baptist Press that Apollo 15 crew “thought they were doing the best for our families” in carrying unauthorized postal covers to moon. Their decision not to accept share of proceeds from sale of covers had come about eight months before incident was reported in press [see June 18]. “We acted in haste and under the terrific pressures of the pre- and post-flight schedule—but that does not excuse it.” nasa had had “no choice but to reprimand us.” (AP, B Sun, 7/24/72, A5)
Dr. George R. Carruthers of Naval Research Laboratory received nasa Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal at special NASA Hq. ceremony. Dr. Carruthers—outstanding black astrophysicist who had developed rocket-borne instrument that detected molecular hydrogen in interstellar space for first time in 1970—was cited for development of far-ultraviolet camera-spectrograph for Apollo 16 mission. Instrument had taken nearly 200 pictures of earth, Milky Way, and other galaxies in far-UV wavelengths not observable from earth and was providing new information on structure of universe. (NASA Release 72-149)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden visited President Nixon at White House to report on their 16-day goodwill tour to Poland and Yugoslavia. (PD, 2/7/72, 196)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to walk on moon, was made honorary Freeman in Langholm, Scotland, ancestral home of Armstrong family. Armstrong, now professor of aerospace engineering at Univ. of Cincinnati, had been invited to Langholm by town council after July 20, 1969, moonwalk. (AP, W Star, 3/13/72, A3)
Dr. John Teegan, Chief of Launch Site Medical Operations at Kennedy Space Center, announced his resignation to press at Cape Kennedy. Dr. Teegan, who would return to private practice, said he had resigned because his patients—astronauts-—were too healthy. Astronauts were unusually healthy because they were in excellent physical condition when they were chosen and made it a point to stay that way. “I was educated to care for people who were ill and I want to get my feet wet again in clinical medicine. This chapter in space history was a very valuable experience that few people have had the opportunity to experience.” (Reuters, B Sun, 2/13/72; ksc pao) February 14^-25: U.S.S.R. launched Luna 20 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 8:28 am local time (10:28 pm est Feb. 13). Tass said objective of mission was “further exploration of the moon and near lunar space.” On Feb. 18 Luna 20 entered near-circular lunar orbit with 100-km (62-mi) altitude, 1-hr 58-min period, and 65° inclination. Engine firing on Feb. 19 placed spacecraft in elliptical orbit with 100-km (62-mi) apolune and 21-km (13-mi) perilune. Main retroengine burn for 267 sec on Feb. 21 thrust spacecraft toward moon and Luna 20 free-fell to 760-m (2490-ft) altitude. Spacecraft was then guided by braking rocket to softlanding northeast of moon’s Sea of Fertility at 12:19 am Bay-konur time Feb. 22 (2:19 pm est Feb. 21). Landing coordinates were 3° 32' north latitude and 56° 33' east longitude. Spacecraft began transmitting radio signals and conducting experiments. After drilling lunar rock, collecting lunar samples, photographing lunar surface, and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna 20 lifted off moon at 3:58 am Baykonur time Feb. 23 ( 5:58 pm est Feb. 22), after 27 hrs 39 min on lunar surface. Tass said samples had been obtained with earth-operated, percussion-rotary drill designed to handle hard and loose rock samples simultaneously. Luna 20 reentered atmosphere Feb. 25 and parachuted to landing at 12:12 am Feb. 25 Baykonur time (2:12 pm est Feb. 24) 40 km (24 mi) northwest of Djezkazgan, Kazakhstan, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered despite “extremely unfavorable weather conditions—strong wind, blizzard, and low clouds.” Luna 20 was second unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. First had been U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (Sept. 12-24, 1970). Luna 17 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and had released Lunokhod 1 lunar rover. Luna 18 (launched Sept. 2, 1971) had crashlanded on moon Sept. 11, 1971, and Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) was still in lunar orbit on photography and mapping mission. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 2/14/72, LI; 2/22-24/72, LI; 2/28/72, LI; SBD, 2/15/72, 226)
Families of Astronauts Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chaffee—who lost lives in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire—received awards totaling $300 000 from spacecraft manufacturers. North American Rockwell Corp. and former North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell-Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. had been charged with negligence in suits filed by Chaffee’s widow Nov. 6 and White’s widow Nov. 7. In out-of-court settlement, Mrs. Patricia White Davis would receive $50 000 for herself and $50 000 for each of two children; Mrs. Martha Chaffee Canfield would receive $70 000 and $40 000 for each of two children. Widow of Virgil I. Grissom, third astronaut killed in fire, had won $350 000 settlement from NR March 8. (W Star & News, 11/8/72, A4; AP, NYT, 11/11/72, 7)
Apollo 17 crew had selected mission emblem to emphasize beginning of golden age of space flight that final Apollo flight would usher in Dec. 6, NASA announced. Emblem showed Apollo gazing toward planet Saturn and a galaxy, symbolizing that man’s goal in space would someday include planets and even stars. Suspended behind Apollo image was American eagle with four red bars on wing, representing U.S. flag. Three white stars represented Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt. Eagle’s wing overlying moon suggested moon had been conquered by man. (nasa Special Release)
Newspaper editorials commented on successful conclusion of Apollo 17. New York Times:	“Astronauts Cernan, Schmitt and Evans returned safely to earth yesterday in a splashdown that miarked the brilliantly successful end of one of the most successful series of scientific experiments in history. Less than four years ago men had never been even in the vicinity of the moon. Now about two dozen men have orbited the satellite, and a dozen have walked and ridden on its surface. Hundreds of pounds of lunar rock and soil are now ... on earth, available for study, while instruments planted on the moon give daily reports of lunar conditions, and will do so for years. The moon is now a distant but accessible outpost of earth, better known now than the North Pole was before Admiral [Robert E.] Peary discovered it in 1909. Project Apollo may be ended, but man’s interest in the moon is still very much alive.” (NYT, 12/20/72, 42) Baltimore Sun: “No doubt the success of the $25 billion Apollo program will encourage astronauts of the future to hurtle far past the moon to the solar planets, and perhaps beyond. But the immediate significance of Apollo is much closer to home. We are today much more aware of the fragility of our spaceship earth and of the unique chance mixture of elements that sustain life as we know it. If this vision of 'a rather small but infinitely precious planet can inspire us to take better care of it, Apollo will have produced its greatest dividend.” (B Sun, 12/20/72, A12) Pittsburgh Press:	Apollo program demonstrated “that the U.S. is still a will-do, can-do nation rather than a won’t-do, can’t-do has-been. In the days ahead we must hold fast to this national legacy of pioneering—and continue to nurture among our people the spirit of adventure, the quest for knowledge, the drive to explore the unknown, whether it be in the vast vacuum of space or in the tiny test tube of a laboratory. For therein lies our future, and the future of all mankind.” (Pittsburgh Press, 12/20/72) St. Louis Post-Dispatch:	“So let Apollo’s epitaph be that the program was magnificent but that it is also done. The evils that Apollo was never intended to cure remain and deserve—as they have all along—attention. If money is to be spent on further space projects such as the shuttle and the skylab, let Congress insist first that funds go where they are needed most. And that, as 1972 ends, is not out among the stars but in America. The moon, after all, can wait for its next human visitor. But for the poor, the hungry and the dispossessed, time wasted is misery compounded. The measure of our greatness will be found in how quickly the nation turns to them.” (St. Louis P—D, 12/20/72) Washington Post:	At outset of Apollo program “we spoke glowingly of the challenge but we were principally in a ‘race’—one that the cynical conventional wisdom of the time had it we would lose.” Apollo had ended “with the prospect of the joint Apollo-Soyuz testing mission. Somewhere in all this . . . mixed in with the great political trends and the particular political accidents that have contributed to the altered relations among the world’s super powers, the technology of Apollo itself played a part. You do not have to be a sentimentalist or a hopeless romantic to acknowledge that manned space flight in general and the successful moon landings in particular have had at least a subliminally humbling and unifying impact upon people, that the first astronauts to land on the moon were seen to be proxies for humankind, that their bravery and their achievement were regarded as human triumphs and that the first photographs of earth taken from the moon conveyed a unique and invaluable sense of planetary vulnerability and openness.” (W Post, 12/20/72) Detroit News:	“Today we know that the dream was not an impossible dream. And there will be more dreams to come and new worlds to conquer, all of which is, in essence, the true purpose of civilization, provided all men share the knowledge acquired and thus reap the harvest of benefits.” (D News, 12/20/72) Chicago Tribune:	“Welcome home. . . . The trail you helped to blaze will be used again some day.” (C Trib, 12/20/72)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin were received by Vice President Boris Bakrac of the Assembly of Croatia and met with President of Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts, Dr. Grga Novak, during two-day visit to Zagreb, Yugoslavia. Astronauts were touring Europe to discuss Apollo 15 mission with scientists. (FBis-Yugoslavia, 2/4/72, 112)
France and U.S. had agreed on three-year project FAMOUS (FrancoAmerican Midocean Undersea Study) to explore rift valley 2.4 km (1.5 mi) beneath Atlantic for volcanic activity that was slowly pushing America away from Europe and Africa, New York Times reported. Paper compared project, outgrowth of 1970 Franco-American Agreement on Scientific Cooperation, to Apollo program. Training and employment of international crews had anticipated U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation. Similarities to Apollo were “use of special vehicles [deep-submergence craft] to carry men across otherwise inaccessible terrain, the development of special geologic tools and the training of participants in accessible areas thought to bear some resemblance to the forkidding target sites.” Crews would begin training in August in Gulf of Maine. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/5/72, 12)
Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II received Distinguished Service Medal and astronaut wings from Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Mattingly was Navy commander, (dod Release 526-72)
NASA and Soviet Acadfemy of Sciences had approved results of fourth meeting of joint working groups on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) at Manned Spacecraft Center July 6-18, NASA announced. Croups had agreed to base future work on three astp documents: Project Technical Proposal, Organization Plan, and Project Schedules. Number of working groups would be increased to five. Groups had agreed to launch Soyuz spacecraft before Apollo spacecraft and had decided that sufficient progress had been made to proceed with system design and development for 1975 joint mission. Areas requiring future study included possible crew transfer by extravehicular activity (eva) in emergency situation, possibility of changing spacecraft pressure to shorten time required for crew transfer, TV system for docking, and choice of specific July 1975 date for mission. Next meeting of working groups was scheduled for October in Moscow. (NASA Release 72—190)
New York Times editorial commented on discovery by Apollo 17 astronauts of orange dust on moon: Discovery had “astonished the scientific world. Nothing similar had been previously seen on the moon. It is premature, though tempting, to conclude that this is evidence of relatively recent—in geological terms—volcanic activity. Final judgments have to await analysis of this strange material .... Nevertheless, it is already evident that Apollo 17 is turning out to be the most productive of the moon visits; and the probability seems higher than ever that the crew will bring back both the oldest and youngest lunar rocks yet to be found. It is already indisputable that the Taurus-Littrow site was an excellent choice for an Apollo landing since much of the terrain material there is quite different from that found on earlier trips.” (NYT, 12/4/72, 46)
President Nixon sent $246.3-billion FY 1973 budget request to Congress— increase of $9.6 billion over FY 1972. National total included research and development budget of $17.8 billion (increase of $1.4 billion), with $3,740 billion requested for civilian and military space R&D. Total request for NASA new obligational authority (noa) of $3,379 billion (1.3% of total U.S. budget) was $83 million more than FY 1972 NOA of $3,296 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase by $11 million, against decline of $200.9 million in FY 1972. Increase to $3,192 billion reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle engine and airframe. Of budget request, $2.6 billion would go for R&D, $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $701 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $472.5 million, to $128.7 million, reflected completion of Apollo program with Apollo 16 and 17 scheduled for launch during calendar year. Manned space flight operations—including $540.5 million for Skylab, $200 million for space shuttle, and $23 million for orbital systems and experiments—would increase from $682.8 million in FY 1972 to $1,094 billion in FY 1973. Space life sciences would receive $25.5 million and development, test, and mission operations would receive $305.2 million, including funds for detailed design and development of shuttle airframe and engine. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,224 billion, down $61 million from FY 1972. Funding for NASA space science and applications programs would increase $123.7 million, from $740.4 million in FY 1972 to $864.1 million in FY 1973. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for High Energy Astronomy Observatory ($59.6 million in FY 1973) and orbiting explorers ($32 million) ; to lunar and planetary exploration (up $29.7 million, to $321.2 million, with $229.5 million for Viking project, $31.6 million for Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, and $18.7 million for supporting research and technology advanced studies) ; and to launch vehicle procurement. Funding for Pioneer planetary exploration program would decrease from $12.8 million in FY 1972 to $10.2 million. Increase of $7.2 million in applications programs, to $194.7 million in FY 1973, included $48.4 million for earth resources survey, $61.2 million for ATS, and $28.3 million for Nimbus. Total requested for NASA aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $212.8 million in FY 1972 to $249.3 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $110 million in FY 1972 to $163.4 million, including $27.5 million for quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft and $3 million for vertical takeoff and landing (vtol) research/ experimental vehicle programs. Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) development was terminated in favor of reoriented program to define smaller nuclear rocket system. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $4.9 million, to $259.1 million. Dept, of Defense FY 1973 budget of $83.5 billion was all-time high, $6.3 billion above FY 1972 budget authority, 30% of total Federal outlays for FY 1972, and 6.4% of Gross National Product—-but percentage of gnp had dropped from FY 1972’s 7%. dod total included $8.6 billion for research, development, technology, and engineering, $1.1 billion increase over FY 1972. Of requested Rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, continued flight experiment programs, and applied research and technology programs— would receive $454 million (up $49.4 million). Military sciences would receive $572.7 million (up $34.9 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,948 billion (down $36.8 million) and missiles rdt&e $2,383 billion (up $437.8 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for undersea long-range missile system (ulms) to supplement and eventually replace Poseidon-Polaris fleet ($942.2 million, up $802 million), B-l advanced strategic bomber ($444 million, up $74 million), F-15 air superiority fighter ($910 million, up $490 million), airborne defense warning and control system (awAcs) ($470 million, up $331 million), and Safeguard antiballistic missile program ($1,483 billion, up $366 million). Some $299 million was requested for advance procurement of components for new nuclear-powered CVAN-70 aircraft carrier. Increases were also programmed for prototype development of vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft for Navy, stol transports for possible C-130 replacement, Air Force SCAD strategic bomber penetration decoy, and engines for future transport and fighter aircraft. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration FY 1973 budget included $39.9 million for meteorological satellite operations, $6.8 million more than FY 1971 allocation of $33.1 million. Funding would complete financing of fourth satellite in ITOS series, continue financing of fifth and sixth ITOS satellites and one Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes), and initiate procurement of seventh itos. Dept, of Transportation budget request of $8.56 billion was decrease of $91.5 million over FY 1972. dot funding would start 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect atmosphere, and design safer and more productive airport system. Atomic Energy Commission FY 1973 budget request of $2.56 billion, up $247 million over FY 1972, would be used for development of liquid-metal fast-breeder power reactor and for controlled thermonuclear fusion research. National Science Foundation FY 1973 budget request of $653 million would cover basic scientific research, experimental program to test incentives to stimulate non-Federal R&d investment, program to analyze effect of R&D on national economy, continuation of research applied to national needs in advanced technology and environmental problems, program to improve research management at institutions of higher learning, and funding for astronomy to permit development of very large array of antennas for radio astronomy, (omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 1973; omb, US Budget in Brief; omb, Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; dot budget briefing transcript; aiaa Release 72-3; nsf Release 72-106; Kelly, W Star, 1/24/72, A14; Av Wk, 2/14/72, 14)
NASA announced it would reprimand Apollo 15 crew for carrying 400 unauthorized postal covers on July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Astronauts’ actions would be considered in future assignments. Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin had acknowledged giving 100 covers to acquaintance, currently in Germany. Covers later were sold to stamp collectors for $1500 each. NASA inquiry had shown astronauts had at one time agreed to accept “trust fund” for their children in return for the 100 covers but had later realized impropriety of transaction and had voluntarily declined to accept fund or alternative offer of stamps. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in release to press: “Astronauts are under extreme stress in the months preceding a flight to the Moon and their poor judgment in carrying the unauthorized covers must be considered in this light. Nonetheless, NASA cannot condone these actions.” (nasa Release 72-140)
Romanian President Nicolay Ceausescu had sent telegram to President Nixon on successful conclusion of Apollo, 17 mission, Romanian news agency Agerpres announced in Bucharest. Telegram had said: “We express our conviction that the remarkable successes in outerspace exploration scored during the Apollo programme that concluded with this brilliant mission will serve the general progress of science and technique and will be put in the service of humanity, peace and understanding among people.” (FBis-Romania, 12/22/72, HI)
Robert Stern of Bellcomm, Inc., said in Washington, D.C., that his studies “tended to agree” with those of Rice Univ. scientists who had reported on Oct. 15, 1971, detection of possible water vapor being vented from lunar surface. Reuters had reported release March 2 of Bellcomm computer analysis suggesting vapors could have come from urine dumped .into lunar orbit by Apollo 14 astronauts. {NYT, 3/4/72)	.
Apollo program accomplishments were praised by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in New York Times article: “Two developments stand out in my view: (1) The remarkable advance in sophistication of flight techniques and capabilities of the crews, and (2) . . . the eye opening increase in both the extent and results of the scientific activities of manned lunar exploration.” After completion of Apollo 17 mission would come realization “that we have only begun the exploration of the moon. As the analysis of Apollo lunar data and specimens proceeds, it will dawn on us what an enormous treasure trove awaits mankind just offshore from our planet. It will also occur to the scientific community that a base on the moon is just as important as a base in the Antarctic.” (NYT, 12/3/72, 68)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director, reviewed program in Los Angeles Times article: “As one looks back over the 12 years of Apollo, the biggest effort . . . was the engineering effort—the understanding of the demands that would be placed on the flight hardware, the understanding of the laws of nature that we would have to work with in order to fly to the moon, the conversion of dreams into hardware, the manufacture and testing of this hardware, so that we could feel confident to fly our men to the moon and return. “But within that overall engineering program, we knew we would be exploring, we knew we would open up new vistas and for that reason we developed the experiments to be taken along on later flights.” There had been “only one reason for flying Apollo after the first landing and that was to gather information for science, to continue the exploration of the Moon.” Underlying drive of Apollo “—to reach into space, to seize these new challenges, to learn more about the moon and also about earth, to explore for new opportunities for man to use in his future development—is not well understood by the public.” Apollo had “lifted mankind from his cradle and started him on the pathway to the stars.” {LA Times, 12/24/72)
Navy’s Manned Spacecraft Recovery Forces in Pacific and Atlantic would again cachet and cancel philatelic mail for Apollo 17 mission scheduled for Dec. 6 launch, Washington Sunday Star and Daily News reported. Covers would be processed in Norfolk, Va., and Honolulu; Pacific covers would be postmarked on board prime recovery ship on splashdown date. Atlantic covers would be canceled at Norfolk. (W Star & News, 9/10/72, G19)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) flight unit was being readied for threemonth, post-manufacturing checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center. ATM would be moved in May from Quality and Reliability Assurance Laboratory to Astronautics Laboratory for vibration tests and would be delivered to Manned Spacecraft Center June 1 for thermal and vacuum tests, atm would be launched on first Skylab mission in 1973. Series of preliminary Skylab experiment planning simulations was being conducted by flight controllers, flight planners, and other experts at MSC. Purpose of simulations was to exercise basic plans and procedures necessary before detailed simulations with Skylab team could begin, (msfc Release 72-8; MSC Release 72-32)
Federal Communications Commission had been asked to decide on feasibility of U.S. Postal Service using satellites to transmit facsimile mail for business items, Newsweek reported. (Newsweek, 1/24/72) January 25:	Apollo 16 spacecraft had developed fuel leak in reaction control system and would be removed from launch pad for replacement of fuel tank, NASA announced. Leak had apparently been caused by overpressurization of teflon bladder by ground support equipment. NASA later said repair was not expected to delay launch, scheduled for April 16. (Reuters, NYT, 1/26/72, 27; W Post, 1/28/72, A5)
New York Times science reporter John Nobel Wilford toured Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), near Moscow, as first Western correspondent to be invited to center of U.S.S.R. cosmonaut activities. Guide for visit arranged by Soviet Novosti News Agency was Soyuz Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training. Shatalov said U.S.S.R. did not announce space mission dates “because we don’t want to bind the people who are preparing the flight.” Cosmonaut flight training areas were closed to most visitors “because we just don’t want journalists to interfere with the working atmosphere of the cosmonauts.” Area contained medical center with centrifuge that cosmonauts called “Devil’s merry-go-round.” From size and number of apartment buildings, Wilford estimated Star City population at 1500 to 2000, City was “smaller than Houston space center because it does not also serve as the mission control complex and apparently has no primary responsibility for the management of spacecraft design and development.” Like NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Star City contained facilities for premission training of cosmonauts and postmission physical examinations and recreation. Like U.S. astronauts, Soviet cosmonauts were trained in aircraft “that make deep dives to simulate weightlessness.” Parachuting tested ability to handle high-stress situations. First simulator for Salyut orbiting laboratory was being installed in new building to be completed at year’s end. Wilford said that “this could mean that no major advance beyond the present version of Salyut should be expected until well after the simulator is ready.” Of about 50 cosmonauts in Soviet space program, one third were civil engineers living in Moscow, Shatalov said; remainder were Soviet air force pilots who lived in Star City. No women were preparing for space missions but U.S.S.R. had “many women who specialize in meteorology and medicine, which are professions necessary on the orbital stations.” From descriptions by Shatalov and Cosmonaut-engineer Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, Wilford had constructed outline of preparations for Soviet space mission: Cosmonauts were assigned to mission one year in advance of launch date by commission of medical and engineering experts and Shatalov. There were two backup crews. After learning spacecraft mechanics and electronics and practicing in spacecraft simulator at Star City, crew went to Baykonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan three weeks before launch. There they completed training in actual spacecraft, checked instruments, stocked food, adjusted couches, and recommended minor changes in housekeeping. “Unlike Cape Kennedy,” Baykonur had no simulators for last-minute practice. For two days before launch, “after the state commission approves the spaceship’s readiness,” crew relaxed. On launch morning cosmonauts were examined physically and biomedical sensors were attached to their bodies before they donned spacesuits. Traditionally, cosmonauts then gathered in quarters for few moments of silence broken by shouts of “off we go!” They signed their names on door before leaving for launch pad. Between missions, cosmonauts were expected to devote time each month to “social work”—visits to schools, collective farms, and factories. Shatalov had suggested that new Soviet manned missions were possible within months and that U.S.S.R. was studying mission longevity in preparation for earth-orbiting laboratories. Of next Salyut mission, Shatalov said: “We are going to make it better .... We will prolong the visits of men, and the number of expeditions will grow. This is the difference now between our program and yours.” Yeliseyev had said his countrymen would “probably” be on the moon by 1975. At tour’s completion, Shatalov had offered toast: “To cooperation between our peoples, to working together in space, which is our future and the future of the world.” (Wilford, NYT, 3/22/72, 30 ; 3/26/72, 7; Huntsville Times, 4/2/72, 17)
Chicago Daily News editorial on Pioneer 10 said: “After several moon landings and all the fuss over spending on space ventures, the public is probably a bit jaded by now with outbound rockets. Yet there is something special, and more than a little bit eerie, about this one.” Only “scientists whose minds can absorb the concept of infinity can really appreciate the possibilities wrapped up in the voyage of Pioneer 10. But the rest of us can share a sense of awe as the spacecraft plunges into eternity, and think a bit about the specks called Man, lost in the vastness of the Universe.” (C Daily News, 3/6/72)
President Nixon, arriving in Hawaii for meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka, recalled previous visit “at the time of the Apollo 13 flight, when we welcomed back brave men who hadn’t succeeded but who came hack, and it was one of those epics in American bravery which all of us wanted to pay tribute to.” {PD, 9/4/82, 1314)
Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1971 was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his achievements as Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). Trophy was awarded annually by National Geographic Society to Air Force member who made most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace. Gen. Phillips had been Apollo Program Director in NASA and was currently Director of National Security Agency, (msc Release 72—197)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, denied reports that he had announced he might resign after Apollo 17 mission in December and return to Univ. of Utah. Reports had followed Administrator’s dinner speech before Knife and Fork Club in Salt Lake City, Utah, Sept. 19. Dr. Fletcher—who had headed NASA since April 27, 1971—issued reply to queries received at NASA Hq. saying that “he had given no thought to resigning from NASA and could not possibly commit [himself] to going hack to the University of Utah at this time.” (nasa pao; Off of Admin; SBD, 9/21/72, 84, 90)
Appointment of Dr. Noel W. Hinners as Deputy Director and Chief Scientist, Apollo Lunar Exploration, in Office of Manned Space Flight was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Hinners had headed lunar exploration department of Bellcomm, Inc. (msc Release 72-82)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 15 astronauts’ carrying unauthorized postal covers on mission. Baltimore Sun said their actions in “novel attempt to capitalize” on mission could not be excused. “From the start of the nation’s space program, astronauts have become instant celebrities and in some cases instant millionaires through endorsements, publications and investments. We’re not opposed to a little free enterprise, but the space program, as envisioned by the late President Kennedy, was a noble exercise in exploration not exploitation.” If space program was to be exploited at all, “profits should go back into the national treasury.” (B Sun, 7/14/72, A12) Chicago Tribune: “It is disappointing to realize that man has already tainted the moon with moral pollution, but we are impressed less by the gravity of the crime than by the debasement of the stamp collection business which it reflects. If stamp collectors were more discriminating, and stamp dealers less greedy, the moon might not have been contaminated so soon.” (C Trib, 7/14/72)
Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan announced that command module had been named “America” and lunar module “Challenger,” during Apollo 17 press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. “We have never turned our backs on a challenge and the name The Challenger fits into the theme of what made America what it is today.” Mission scientist, astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, said he was confident that Apollo 17 findings would “help us understand that moon so it can start telling us what happened in the early history of the earth.” (W Post, 11/11/72, A12; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/72, 24)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
NASA released official summary of reasons for selection of North American Rockwell Corp. for $2.6-billion prime contract to build space shuttle. Summary said NR had been chosen over competitors—Grumman Aerospace Corp.; Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Inc., Space Systems Div.; and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—because “North American Rockwell attained the highest score from a mission suitability standpoint* because its cost proposal was lowest and credible, and because its approaches to program performance gave high confidence to us, to the [Source Evaluation] Board, and to the Manned Space Flight center directors, that it will indeed produce the Shuttle at the lowest cost.” Summary—signed Sept. 18 by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—said NR’s “greatest advantages” within mission suitability area were in management, with efficient control of program and best overall top project management team. NR design provided lightest dry weight. NR’s “good understanding of all electrical power subsystems reflected the very thorough studies . . . made following the Apollo 13 accident.” Analysis of maintainability was excellent. Further, NR management techniques “should provide earlier identification of cost problems” and planned constrained buildup of resources in beginning of program lent confidence in ability to control costs. Grumman Corp. had been “very close behind” but its plan to build up its work force to early manpower peak had been seen by NASA as threat of “premature commitment of resources during the course of the program.” Grumman’s greatest strength had been in its technical design; McDonnell Douglas design had strong features but some technical drawbacks; and Lockheed’s proposal had lacked “consistent technical depth.” NASA had originally made summary available only to General Accounting Office and to competing bidders because of potential embarrassment to losers. Agency had later released summary, Wall Street Journal said, “to demonstrate that politics didn’t play any role in the decision and that the most painstaking selection procedures in the agency’s history were observed.” (Text; WSJ, 10/5/72, 12)
New York Times editorial praised accomplishments of Atomic Energy Commission’s new nuclear accelerator at Batavia, 111. [see March 1]: It was at accelerator “that some of the most illuminating experiments of the next decade are likely to be carried out. For this powerful instrument may have the resources—the penetrating power of its incredible proton beam—to answer some of the ultimate questions about the structure of nuclear particles. If so, man’s understanding of the material universe and his powers over it may well be revolutionalized in the years immediately ahead.” (NYT, 3/5/72, 4:12) March 6:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to nasa staff that Pioneer 10 (launched March 2) if successful would be “technological and scientific achievement of the first magnitude.” During launch it had set spacecraft speed record of some 51 500 km per hr (32 000 mph). “One small detail that impressed me was . . . Pioneer 10 passed the Moon only 11 hours after launch. It makes the Moon seem very close at hand. So we have a new measure for the nearness of what we used to call ‘outer space.’ It brings home, even as we begin the great adventure of exploring the outer planets, the primary importance of moving forward with our preparations for the routine exploitation of inner space.” (NASA Activities, 3/15/72, 44)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent detailed medical examination and began technical debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Willard Hawkins of msc said astronauts looked good, were “in good physical shape,” and had normal responses. (AP, B Sun, 5/1/72, A3) During April: Soviet Space Program, 1971 was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as supplement to Senate Document 92-51 [see Jan. 6 and 22], Report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—said 1971 had been peak year in Soviet space activity, with 83 successful launches against 31 for U.S. Soviet successes had included “remarkable performance of the roving lunar vehicle, Lunokhod 1, the versatile manned space station Salyut in which a manned world duration record was set, the arrival in Mars orbit of two very heavy payloads, Mars 2 and 3, and the placing in lunar orbit of the heavy automated laboratory Luna 19.” On negative side had been inability to develop large G booster, death of Soyuz cosmonauts, crash of Luna 18 on moon, failure of first Mars probe, and failure of Mars 2 and 3 landers to carry out planned experiments. U.S.S.R. in 1971 had flown manned-precursor spacecraft “with greater maneuverability than' the present ones, quite possibly testing the advanced propulsion needed for manned lunar flight.” Soviet spokesmen had reiterated commitment to manned space stations, applications satellites, and unmanned planetary exploration throughout solar system. Manned lunar and planetary flights “continued to get mention as a later goal.” U.S.S.R. was expected to launch another Salyut to be visited by Soyuz 12 and 13 for long stay. Thus far U.S.S.R. had given space program “continued verbal support” and had demonstrated “commitment of hardware which has been rising for the 15 years flights have been undertaken.” (Committee Print)
Nearly half billion dollars worth of equipment, mostly junk, had been left on lunar surface during six Apollo landings, Chicago Tribune reported. List included rocket engines, electronic devices, golf ball driven by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., feather left by Apollo 15 commander David R. Scott (who had dropped feather and hammer simultaneously during televised extravehicular activity to show that they both fell at same rate in vacuum), and 12 prs of hoots costing $4000 a pair. Boots included those that Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong had used to make first footprints on moon. Technological items left on moon included 5 S—IVB rocket engines costing $20 million each, 6 $40-million lunar modules, 3 lunar rovers at $2 million each, TV and photography equipment costing $5 million, 12 backpacks costing $3.6 million, and assorted tools valued at $600 000. Still operative on moon were five nuclear-powered scientific stations costing $25 million each and three laser reflectors costing total $2 million. (Kotulak, C Trib News Service, C Trib, 12/16/72) December 17: Apollo 17 orbital science briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center while astronauts continued flight homeward from moon. Data from laser altimeter and S-band gravity experiments were described by Dr. Wilbur R. Wollenhaupt, Chief of msc Experiments Support Section and S-band transponder coinvestigator. Profiles of near-side lunar basins appeared to be flat and depressed with surrounding terrain. Far side appeared mountainous. Copernicus Crater was deficiency region; Sinus Aestuum, Mare Serenitatis, and Mare Crisium were high regions; and Littrow landing site was low. Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey, member of Apollo Orbital Science Photographic Team, said panoramic camera aboard Apollo 17 had “acted better than on the two previous flights [Apollo 15 and 16], and we essentially accomplished the tasks assigned to it.” During Apollo 17 mission “we saw the successful rectification of the 15 and 16 panoramic photographs, and they looked very good indeed. So, hopefully, we will have the rectification of 17 done shortly and put out a series of photomosaics, putting the high-resolution panoramic frames together into what we think will be the best series of maps that we have developed for the Moon.” Correlation of photography with gravity tracking and laser altimetry had produced “a great deal of data” to confirm earlier interpretations from Apollo 15 that lunar front side was low and that “largest area of mare material on the front side is an ocean basin floor, . . . not a result of the impact as the large gravity anomalies indicate in the impact basin.” Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Walter E. Brown reported lunar sounder experiment had “behaved about as we expected except that there were a couple of surprises.” Experimenters had expected that “over the Mare, the smooth areas, . . . we’d have a reasonably smooth, well-behaved echo, and over the mountainous area it might bounce around a little bit.” Sounder data had shown “it was fairly smooth over the mountains and it bounced around over the Mare.” Until mission film was returned, “we won’t know . . . just exactly what is going on, but it’s . . . extremely interesting.” Dr. Frank J. Low of Univ. of Arizona and Rice Univ. said scanning radiometer experiment performance “was essentially perfect.” It produced coverage of about one third of the surface area of the moon and made some 100 million independent temperature measurements. With “beautiful Atlas of thermal measurements generated by this magnificent flight,” scientists had “foundation of a new technique for exploration of planetary surfaces without atmospheres.” Johns Hopkins Univ. scientist William E. Fastie said far-ultraviolet spectrometer had “performed perfectly . . . and all of the observations that were intended were accomplished.” Experiment had detected neither major nor minor constituents of atmosphere. “And, pending further analysis, we have . . . identified only one trace constituent of the lunar atmosphere. The immediate conclusion ... is, that the Moon is not outgassing, because the only other possible gases that could be in the lunar atmosphere are neon and argon, and neither of them are the primordial atmosphere of the Moon.” Mood of briefing was conveyed by Apollo orbital science program scientist Floyd I. Roberson: “I think we’ve got a lot of tools in our hands now and we sit up here and we’re all tired and we talk about the results of our experiments and maybe we don’t convey the excitement that’s upon us. But, we really feel that this is a beginning as far as lunar science is concerned, as far as the Apollo data is concerned, and we’re really going to get there now.” (Transcript)
Bellcomm, Inc., scientist Dr. Farouk El-Baz had suggested that water vapor detected on moon March 7, 1971, could have come from water and urine dumped into lunar orbit from Apollo 14 spacecraft, Reuters reported. He had shown particles of waste water could have combined, orbited moon for several weeks at gradually decreasing altitudes, and finally descended to lunar surface, where they were detected as water vapor. Bellcomm’s findings were rejected by Dr. H. Kent Hills of Rice Univ., who said waste discharge would have spread out in orbit and would not have produced as high a reading on two suprathermal ion detectors as he and codiscoverer Dr. John W. Freeman had found. Discovery of water vapor had been announced Oct. 15, 1971 [see also March 3], (NYT, 3/3/72, 22; Bellcomm pio; NASA proj off)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, had been assigned additional responsibilities as Program Director of Apollo Soyuz Test Project (astp), NASA announced. Dr. Petrone would have overall responsibility for direction and management of U.S. portion of joint earth-orbital mission with U.S.S.R. (NASA Release 72-174)
Reporting on Jan. 10-13 Third Lunar Science Conference results, Science said “far more comprehensive picture of the moon but far fewer claims to understand how the moon evolved were evident.” Conflict in geochemical evidence suggested “an initially cold moon in which partial melting of its outer layers took place and magnetic evidence that suggests an initially hot moon with a molten core during the early part of its history.” Other puzzles were indication that radioactive materials on moon’s surface were concentrated in one area and evidence of unexpectedly high heat flux from moon’s interior at Apollo 15 site. Seismic evidence that moon had layered crust 65 km (40 mi) thick had been unexpected. More details on lunar chronology had been determined, “such as the date of formation of the Imbrium basin about 4.0 billion years ago and of the Copernicus Crater only 900 million years ago.” It also appeared that, “because of the initially high rate of meteoroid impacts on the moon, very little if any of the original crustal rocks have survived.” Lunar-sample chemistry was “proving far from easy—the possibility that volatile elements have migrated on the lunar surface ... is complicating the analysis of trace constituents.” Despite complications, “scientific understanding of the moon is much further advanced than . . . even a year ago. The systematic coverage of the moon’s surface provided by the orbital experiments on Apollo 15, in combination with the lunar samples, laboratory work, and the experiments on the lunar surface have provided new data to replace what sometimes proved to be unfounded speculations.” (Hammond, Science, 2/25/72, 868-70)
National Science Foundation announced issuance of Solar Energy in Developing Countries: Perspectives and Prospects. Report of NAS Board on Science and Technology for International Development said solar energy had “capability to meet energy needs substantially beyond the applications now being made.” But best course was to study general energy needs of developing nations and methods of satisfying these needs without placing excessive hope in promising but unproved applications of sun’s energy. Report recommended establishment of regional centers in developing nations to evaluate supplies and uses of all kinds of energy and to begin research and development efforts on applications suitable to local conditions, (nas Release) April 13:	Soviet and NASA scientists exchanged lunar soil samples in ceremony at Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow. NASA representatives Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., and Dr. Michael B. Duke, Lunar Sample Curator at msc, presented Soviet scientists with 1 g (0.04 oz) of soil brought to earth by Apollo 15 astronauts. Exchange brought total weight of Apollo 15 lunar material given to Soviet scientists to 3 g. Soviet scientists gave NASA representatives 2 g (0.07 oz) of soil brought to earth by Luna 20, several photos of Luna 20 landing site, and pictures of separate rock fragments, (nasa Release 72—77; fbis—Sov, 4/13/72, L4; nasa omsf)
President Nixon issued statement on U.S. space program following splashdown of Apollo 17 command module: “The safe return of the command module America marks the end of one of the most significant chapters in the history of human endeavor. In October 1958, this Nation set about sending men into a hostile, unknown environment. We had little idea what lay before us, but there was new knowledge to be gained and there was a heritage of meeting historical challenge— the challenge of greatness—to be sustained. Project Mercury, begun in 1958, taught us that man could survive and work in space. In 1961, President Kennedy voiced the determination of the United States to place a mem on the moon. We gained the understanding and the technology to embark on this great mission through Project Gemini and we accomplished it with the Apollo lunar exploration series. In 1969, for the first time, men from the planet Earth set foot on the moon. “Since the beginning of Apollo, nine manned flights have been made to the moon. Three circled that nearest neighbor in the universe, six landed and explored its surface. We have barely begun to evaluate the vast treasure store of extraterrestrial data and material from these voyages, but we have already learned much and we know that we are probing our very origins. We are taking another long step in man’s ancient search for his own beginnings, pressing beyond knowledge of the means of human existence to find, perhaps, the meaning of human existence. “Nor is this great work ending with the return of Gene Cernan, Jack Schmitt, and Ron Evans from the moon today. Rather it has barely begun. As Sir Isaac Newton attributed his accomplishments to the fact that he stood ‘upon the shoulders of Giants,’ so Newton himself is one of the giants upon whose shoulders we now stand as we reach for the stars. The great mathematician once wrote: ‘I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.’ I believe we have finally moved into the great ocean and we are trying now to understand what surrounds us. “The making of space history will continue, and this Nation means to play a major role in its making. Next spring, the Sky lab will be put into orbit. It will be aimed not at advancing exploration of deep space, but at gaining in space new knowledge for the improvement of life here on earth. It will help develop new methods of learning about the earth’s environment and the earth’s resources, and new methods of evaluating programs aimed at preserving and enhancing the resources of all the world. It will seek new knowledge about our own star, the sun, and about its tremendous influence on our environment. Scientists aboard the Skylab will perform medical experiments aimed at a better knowledge of man’s own physiology. Also, they will perform experiments aimed at developing new industrial processes utilizing the unique capabilities found in space. Skylab will be our first manned space station. It will be in use for the better part of a year, permitting the economy of extended usage, and laying the groundwork for further space stations. “Economy in space will be further served by the Space Shuttle .... It will enable us to ferry space research hardware into orbit without requiring the full expenditure of a launch vehicle as is necessary today. It will permit us to place that hardware in space accurately, and to serve or retrieve it when necessary instead of simply writing it off in the event it malfunctions or fails. In addition, the Shuttle will provide such routine access to space that for the first time personnel other than trained astronauts will be able to participate and contribute in space as will nations once excluded for economic reasons. “The near future will see joint space efforts by this Nation and the Soviet Union in an affirmation of our common belief that the hopes and the needs that unite our people and all people are of greater consequence than the differences in philosophy that divide us. “Finally, we will continue to draw knowledge from the universe through the use of unmanned satellites and probes. “We cannot help but pause today and remember and pay homage to those many men and women—including those who made the ultimate sacrifice—whose hopes, whose energies, skill, and courage enabled the first man to reach the moon and who now have seen with us perhaps the last men in this century leave the moon. But the more we look back the more we are reminded that our thrust has been forward and that our place is among the heavens where our dreams precede us, and where, in time, we shall surely follow. “Though our ancestors would have called the deeds of Apollo miraculous, we do not see our age as an age of miracles. Rather, we deal in facts, we deal in scientific realities, we deal in industrial capacity, and technological expertise, and in the belief that men can do whatever they turn their hands to. For all this, however, can we look at the record of 24 men sent to circle the moon or to stand upon it, and 24 men returned to earth alive and well, and not see God’s hand in it? “Perhaps, in spite of ourselves, we do still live in an Age of Miracles. So if there is self-congratulation, let it be tempered with awe, and our pride with prayer, and as we enter this special time of spiritual significance, let us reserve a moment to wonder at what human beings have done in space and to be grateful.” {PD, 12/25/72, 1788-9)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The Apollo missions are still high adventure. And if the firing sequence is now familiar, there was still suspense yesterday as the huge Saturn V rocket engines lifted another brave crew of American astronauts .... But as the thunder faded away . . . there was the same old question every recent space probe has inspired: What is to be the future of U.S. space research when the Apollo missions are completed?” (P Bull, 4/17/72) New York Times: “The Apollo effort began in 1961 in an aura of cold war Soviet-American rivalry. But yesterday the Moscow television news gave the Apollo 16 launch equal time with events in Vietnam. Soviet-American space cooperation—perhaps a prelude to truly international team-work—could help greatly in easing world tensions. It would be an unexpected but welcome by-product of the Apollo program.” (NYT, 4/17/72, 33)
Apollo 15 astronauts had been “disciplined out of the astronaut corps” for ignoring warning by Chief of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton not to carry items to moon for commercial gain, Washington Post said. Slayton’s warnings had been in personal briefings to crew and memorandum to all astronauts. Warnings had been inspired by discovery that Franklin Mint had profited from melting down coins taken to moon by Apollo 14 astronauts during Jan. 31-Feb. 9, 1971, mission, mixing their molten silver with other metals, and producing 130 000 coins for sale. (O’Toole, W Post, 8/1/72, A8)
Pan American World Airways’ waiting list for reservations on first commercial flight to moon contained names of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong—first man to walk on moon during July 16-24, 1969, mission—Edwin A. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. List had been closed after 90 000 reservations had been accepted. Pan Am spokesman had said flight would not be possible before 21st century, but most applicants had paid $10 or $25 as reservation fee. (M Her, 11/30/72)
Soil sample collected by Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., from natural hole beneath 3-m (lO-ft)-high “Shadow Rock” on moon had been found to have characteristic resonance identical to that of sunlit soil near by, Naval Research Laboratory announced. Scientists were agreed that sample had not been in direct sunlight since being buried by rock propelled by ancient meteorite collision creating North Ray Crater on moon, nrl investigators were considering two explanations for similarity between soil under rock and exposed soil. Either North Ray Crater had been formed relatively recently or tens of millions of years of solar heat had not affected characteristic resonance. Either way, experiment had revealed that resonance of North Ray Crater soils probably contained fossil record of thermal and weathering histories of those soils during or immediately after North Ray collision, (nrl Release 53-72—9)
Congress received Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas Mattingly II. In welcoming speech Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) said, “The trail they took into space has further inspired all of us to reach for greater accomplishments.” Astronauts urged continued support of space program. Astronauts earlier in morning reported preliminary results from April 16-27 lunar landing mission to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Slides shown included first photo showing intensity of ultraviolet light around earth and also aurora belts, including magnetosphere on equator never seen before [see May 12]. They also showed photo of geocorona protecting earth from uv rays from sun. Mattingly said of lunar exploration. “I think as we go further . . . into our exploration of the moon, we’ll find it more and more complex than we suspected it would ever be. In our fondest dreams, I believe we never suspected the hidden treasures that are buried underneath the lunar soil.” (CR, 5/16/72, S7839-40; W Post, 5/17/72, Al; Hearing transcript)
Half-hour documentary film “The Worlds of von Braun” was televised by wmal-tv in Washington, D.C. Documentary, filmed at NASA Wallops Station, included footage never before televised, from NASA, U.S.S.R., and moon. In film, Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, discussed his careers as World War II rocket expert and with NASA in interview with wmal-tv Public Affairs Director James Clarke. Washington Post TV critic Victor Cohn said of film: “Wernher von Braun is a compelling man and a true believer . . . and the joy is that of seeing any man so thoroughly absorbed in a discipline that he absorbs you, even at the distant end of a TV tube.” (nasa Special Ann, 1/4/72; W Post, 1/7/72, Bl)
Astronauts’ image was discussed in New York Times Magazine article. Of 73 pilots and scientists selected for astronauts corps only 39 remained active, and corps faced future cuts. Three astronauts had died in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire; five others in aircraft and auto accidents. Of 25 who had left corps, “many have followed the conventional paths of glory into business and Government.” But “in the behavior of others there is more than a touch of the eccentric, and a large dose of trouble, almost a mythological element: the wandering hero back among his tribe, after stealing the sacred fire and grappling with terrifying demons, condemned to ask tough questions.” World might regard some astronauts as “Byrds and Lindberghs of our time.” As space program emphasis shifted, “they may be an endangered species. For the hotshot pilot seems destined to he replaced in the space stations of the near-future with scientists given training of shorter duration for their flight duties.” Astronauts had been “wandering heroes who tried to unite us with their vision of earth as a small ball floating in an oceanic universe, with all men as passengers. But they weren’t really poets, and they flew at a time of bitter earthly quarrels, with many resentful of the price tag on their odyssey.” Like most heroes, “they were magnified versions of all of us, men of great daring and courage whose competitiveness was no doubt fierce, whose outlook was often corporate and even corny, whose ingenuousness was at times profound. But their image as a comforting symbol to Middle America did them an injustice.” (Muson, NYT Magazine, 12/3/72, 37, 142)
There was “much reason to suspect that sooner than most Americans realize there will be Soviet cosmonauts striding and riding on the moon’s surface,” New York Times article said. But U.S.S.R. was “no more capable of fully exploring the moon and achieving monopoly control of, the lunar surface than the United States.” It would take “resources of all nations to finance, equip and staff the permanent manned bases on the moon which will be needed if the moon’s scientific, economic and other potentials are to be fully exploited.” (Schwartz, NYT, 12/11/72, 39)
Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, presented report on Luna 20 samples to Academy. He had earlier, on May 4, published data on soil sample in Pravda. Luna 20 had landed near moon’s Apollonius Crater in mountainous area between Sea of Crises and Sea of Fertility and returned to earth with lunar samples. Luna 20 soil was light grey, porous consertal (of texture in which irregular crystals interlocked) material containing fewer glassy, fused particles than Luna 16 samples from Sea of Fertility. Average particle size was 70-80 millimicrometers with largest particle in excess of one millimeter. Albedo value was higher than for samples returned by Luna 16, Apollo 11, or Apollo 12. Basic mass of particles were anorthositic rock containing large amount of feldspar, metallic iron, and olivine. “The lunar samples’ surprise proved to be the presence of pulverized metallic iron, which . . . does not oxidize, as distinct from terrestrial iron. This discovery may be of great practical significance. We have shown experimentally that under certain conditions it is possible to obtain such iron in the laboratory from basalts. If we succeeded in developing cheap technology for the industrial production of inoxidizable iron, this would give technology a magnificient construction material.” Understanding nature of formation of anorthosites would be of even greater significance. “Perhaps it will even elucidate the most ancient history of our planet. A popular hypothesis once existed among geologists that the earth’s crust originally consisted of anorthosite rocks. Now it has unexpectedly received strong ‘corroboration’ from the moon. “After study of the lunar rock the nocturnal luminary appears before us as a ‘twofaced Janus.’ On the moon’s visible side vast territories are occupied by basaltic seas, while the entire far side is practically a solid continent, apparently formed from anorthositic rocks. Such a sharp difference is one of the moon’s most exciting secrets.” (Izvestiya, fbis-Sov, 5/17/72, LI; Sov Rpt, 5/19/72, 1)
Historians would have difficult time explaining decision to abandon Apollo program, Time magazine article said. “Having trained the men, perfected the techniques and designed the equipment to explore the earth’s own satellite, having achieved the ability to learn more about man’s place in the universe, Americans lost the will and the vision to press on. Barely three years after the first lunar landing, the nation that made it all possible has turned its thoughts inward and away from space.” Though U.S. spent $5.9 billion to develop Apollo rocket system, “production of Saturn boosters has been halted. The painstakingly assembled team of skilled technicians, engineers and scientists that made Apollo possible is slowly being disbanded.” Those who had branded lunar landings propaganda ploys or technological stunts were “prisoners of limited vision who cannot comprehend, or do not care, that Neil Armstrong’s step in the lunar dust will be well remembered when most of today’s burning issues have become mere footnotes to history.” (Time, 12/11/72, 35)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., was inducted into Aerospace Primus Club of Air Force Systems Command by Gen. George S. Brown, AFSC Commander, in ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md. Aldrin, retired Air Force colonel, became 28th member of club restricted to military and civilian members of Air Force who had accomplished significant aerospace firsts. He was recognized for his historic flight to moon as pilot of Apollo 11 lunar module Eagle July 16-24, 1969. (afsc Newsreview, 10/72/16)
NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had approved recommendations of joint working session of scientists on planetary exploration held in Madrid May 19-20, NASA announced. Session had recommended that Mars study try to determine physical and chemical properties of planet’s surface, seek evidence of biological activity, determine precise composition of Mars atmosphere, and ascertain role of water in Mars’ evolution. Venus study should determine how and why planet became hotter than earth by determining planet’s atmospheric composition, cloud structure, depth of sunlight penetration in Venusian atmosphere, and characteristics of Venusian surface. Outer planets study should emphasize exploration of Jupiter and Saturn and environments. Session agreed meeting should be held before year’s end to define promising Mars landing sites and small group of U.S. and Soviet scientists should meet to consider probe of Venusian atmosphere. Madrid session had been held in accordance with recommendation of Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Exploration of NearEarth Space, the Moon and the Planets, made Aug. 6,1971. Cochairmen of Madrid session were Dr. Georgy I. Petrov of Soviet Academy and Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in nasa Office of Space Science, (nasa Release 72-187)
Question of whether moon was hot or cold was discussed in Science by California Institute of Technology scientists Dr. Don L. Anderson and Dr. Thomas C. Hanks. High surface concentrations of uranium, thorium, and potassium found on moon and Apollo 15 heat-flow value of 33 ergs per sq cm per sec had indicated high present-day temperatures in lunar interior. But recent interpretations of lunar conductivity profile—“non-hydrostatic shape of the moon, the existence of mascons, the remarkable aseismicity of the moon, and the absence of present-day volcanism”—had suggested lunar interior had always been cold. “We find that the basic observations do not demand a presently cold moon and are, in fact, consistent with a hot moon. We find that an iron-deficient, highly resistive, hot lunar interior, capped by a cool rigid lunar lithosphere with a thickness of several hundred kilometers [100 kilometers = 62 miles] can explain the relevant observations and is a reasonable model of the moon today.” (Science, 12/22/72, 1245-9)
Explosion and flash fire at Newhall, Calif., plant of Space Ordnance Systems, Inc.—manufacturers of Apollo spacecraft components—injured six workers. Facility made explosive bolts used to separate Apollo lunar module ascent stage from descent stage on liftoff from moon. Explosive substance causing fire was identified only as “commercial product.” (W Post, 7/22/72, A4; NASA proj off)
Senate confirmed nomination of Apollo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford as U.S. Air Force brigadier general. {CR, 2/18/72, S2125)
Photos taken by far-ultraviolet camera-spectrograph trained on earth from moon during April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission had supported theory that photosynthesis by green plants was less important as oxygen source than commonly believed, Naval Research Laboratory reported. Experiment indicated “that solar effects on the earth’s water that evaporates to the high atmosphere may provide our primary supply of oxygen.” NRL principal investigator for spectrograph experiment, Dr. George R. Carruthers, said new photos provided much greater detail about geocorona than had been inferred from earlier measurements, (nrl Release 30-72-7; AP, NYT, 7/12/72, 24)
Spaceflight magazine reviewed Vanguard—A History, by Constance M. Green and Milton Lomask. Book presented “fine coverage of the project [first U.S. satellite program] which should be of interest at all levels. The subject is still controversial and though the present treatment will not meet with full approval everywhere, they have shown that without Vanguard a manned landing on the Moon in 1969 would have been highly unlikely.” (SF, 2/72, 77) March 1:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Air Force Eastern Test Range by Titan IIIC booster at 4:39 am est. Satellite entered orbit with 35 964-km (22 347-mi) apogee, 35 418.5-km (22 008-mi) perigee, 1429.9-min period, and 0.2° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/2/72, 15)
National Public Affairs Center for TV began poll of 223 public TV station managers at request of Corp. for Public Broadcasting, to determine response to CPB proposal to show up to 21 hrs of live coverage from moon during Apollo 17 moonwalks Dec. 11, 12, and 13. Washington Post said later that NASA had offered public broadcasting opportunity to cover past Apollo missions but cpb had declined, to avoid conflict with commercial networks. TV coverage of astronauts’ extravehicular activities (eva), however, had been declining. During Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27), American Broadcasting Co. had shown 6 of estimated 21 hrs of eva, National Broadcasting Co. had shown 8 hrs, and Columbia Broadcasting System, 6% hrs. (Carmody, W Post, 11/10/72, Bl)
Five Soviet aviation officials toured Kennedy Space Center and were briefed on current and future NASA programs. They were among first Soviet citizens to visit ksc. Poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko had visited ksc and witnessed Apollo 16 launch as NASA guest April 16. (ksc pao) November 17:	Successful radio tracking of solar energetic particles through interplanetary space was reported in Science by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Dr. Joseph Fainberg, Larry G. Evans, and Robert G. Stone. Satellite observations by Explorer 6 (launched Aug. 7, 1959) of ejection of energetic sun particles at long radio wavelengths had provided means of investigating gross magnetic field configuration over distances of one astronomical unit. (Science, 11/17/72, 743-5)
Retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees as Marshall Space Flight Center Director and appointment of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, to succeed Dr. Rees in January 1973 were announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Rees, with Dr. Wernher von Braun, had pioneered U.S. space and rocket activities. He had succeeded Dr. von Braun as msfc Director in 1970. Dr. Petrone had been Apollo Program Manager at Kennedy Space Center before becoming Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. in 1969. Dr. Fletcher commended Dr. Rees for “successful completion of the Marshall Center’s role in the Apollo program. The performance of the Saturn launch vehicle . . . has been magnificent. The development of the Lunar Roving Vehicle and its performance ... is a tribute to his leadership.” (nasa Release 72-244)
Twenty-First Annual Report of the Activities of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, Congress of the United States was transmitted to Congress. Report said U.S. might soon be entirely dependent upon U.S.S.R. and Japan for titanium used in jet aircraft construction. Last titanium plant in U.S.—Reactive Metals, Inc., in Niles, Ohio—had closed Dec. 13. It was third plant to go out of business in 1971 because of lack of titanium market, oversupply of titanium sponge, increased foreign competition, and critical financial losses. U.S. Bureau of Mines later reported that two U.S. titanium plants reopened during February 1972.	(Text; Bureau of Mines pio) February 22:	Apollo 16 press conference was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Manager, said Apollo 16 lunar landing site would consist of volcanic highland material. “The highlands which we are landing on . . . are composed of two types of units. One type is material formed early in lunar history and subsequently fragmented and redistributed by the numerous meteorite impacts which have scarred the lunar highlands. These units are predominantly ejecta deposits now. And on Apollo 15 with the genesis rock we hopefully have sampled some of these early deposits. The second major unit ... is materials which have modified these early deposits by flooding them or building up on top of them predominantly by volcanic processes. The primary objective of Apollo 16 is the exploration and sampling of this lighter type of highland terrain with hopefully a fragment or two of the old original stuff brought in by impact from . . . the old original crust which is probably still exposed down in the lower southern hemisphere.” Dr. M. E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory explained changes in drill design, with joints to permit core samples to be brought out more readily. Dr. H. J. Moore of U.S. Geological Survey described orbital science experiments, including photographic system to determine moon’s geometric shape. Apollo 16 cm would also photograph floor of Alphonsus Crater—where Ranger 9 impacted March 24, 1965—to provide positive identification of Ranger 9’s impact. Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., said astronauts would begin lunar surface extravehicular activity (eva) as soon after landing on moon as they could complete postlanding checkout. They would conduct 7-hr EVA, and reenter LM about 17 hrs after previous sleep period. Crew would conduct three evas On first, primary objective was to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiments package; on second, to sample as high on Descartes and Stone Mountains as possible; and, on third, to reach North Ray Crater. (Transcript)
First Skylab command and service module (CSM—116), which would transport astronauts to and from Skylab orbital workshop in 1973, was shipped by aircraft from North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant to Cape Kennedy, Fla., for start of prelaunch operations. Other Skylab segments—including Orbital Workshop, multiple docking adapter, airlock module, and Apollo Telescope Mount —were undergoing final checkout at contractor plants and at Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-144)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced completion of largest solarcellarray system for electric power ever devised for spacecraft. Two arrays, with almost 236 sq m (2540 sq ft) of surface area, would use sunlight to power electrical systems of Orbital Workshop, Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), and other major components of Skylab cluster scheduled for launch in 1973. Each array could provide 10 500 w of power— more than twice average level needed for three-bedroom house—-‘at 328 K (130°F) during 58- to 69-min portion of each 94-min orbit. (msfc Release 72-54)
Results of Apollo 16 far-ultraviolet camera and spectrograph experiment on lunar surface were described in Science by Naval Research Laboratory scientists Dr. George R. Carruthers and Dr. Thornton L. Page. A major objective of experiment had been to obtain spectra and imagery of terrestrial atmosphere and geocorona in 500 to 1600 A range. Among data obtained were images and spectra in wavelength below 1600 A. These had provided spatial distributions and relative intensities of emissions due to atomic hydrogen, atomic oxygen, molecular nitrogen, and other species—some observed by spectrograph for first time. (Science, 9/1/72, 788-91)
Revision of NASA’s FY 1973 operating plan to adhere to $3.2-billion budget limitation would necessitate work reductions in manned space flight, NASA announced. Work reductions at Manned Spacecraft Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Kennedy Space Center would not affect Apollo 17 or Sfeylab launch schedules or safety and quality assurance requirements. Support contractor manpower at msfc would be reduced by 600 to 700 positions. Cost ceilings also would necessitate additional reductions in prime contractor personnel. (NASA Release 72-176; msfc Releases 72-111, 72-113)
U.S. press commented on safe April 27 return of Apollo 16 astronauts. New York Times: Mission had “reminded us once again that man’s study of the moon is but in its infancy, and that the great bulk of the moon’s territory is still completely unexplored.” Yet, “only one more manned lunar mission is now scheduled.” As Apollo program ended, “its enormous successes underline the opportunities on the moon and compel all men to lift their eyes to the heavens if they would understand whence and how our species, our world and our solar system came into being.” (NYT, 4/28/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution: “These three strong young men are heros in the truest sense of the term. They have pitted their courage, their physical strength and their minds against a multiplicity of awesome forces which singularly or collectively could totally obliterate them. And they did it for the noblest of reasons—the pursuit of knowledge. If mankind has any claim to greatness, surely it is men like this that give it credence.” Editorial also approved space funding: “It is appropriate to note, just when the next-to-last planned Apollo spacecraft is safely home from the moon, that a few days ago the U.S. House voted approval of a $3,4 billion space agency budget bill. Part of the money will go for the development of a space shuttle, the next logical step in the great adventure of exploring space. The technological advances that are part of the space program have already proven themselves of value here on earth. It’s likely that this kind of extra technical dividend will continue to lead to break-through areas not even related to space.” (Atlanta JC, 4/28/72) San Francisco Examiner:	. . Apollo 16 may well turn out to be the most rewarding of all our moon expeditions. All Americans can take pride in a feat so remarkably compounded of scientific precision and human courage.” (SF Exam, 4/28/72) Chicago Daily News: “With experience, the crews and the thousands of technical experts supporting them from the Earth have learned to correct the minor flaws and juggle the entire intricate timetable when necessary. It seems a pity that much of the experience so dearly gained is soon to be put on the shelf. . . . But the lessons of Apollo can be applied at least in part to the portions of the space program that will remain. . . . And if the pioneering aspects of the space program are about over, its benefits will continue—most spectacularly in the weather and communication satellites, but extending also into more mundane improvements in daily living.” (C Daily News, 4/28/72)
NASA released color photo of Shorty Crater area of Apollo 17 TaurusLittrow lunar landing site. Photo, taken Dec. 12 during second extravehicular activity of Dec. 7-19 mission, confirmed existence of orange soil discovered by astronaut-geologist Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, (nasa photo 72-HC-933)
Apollo 7 Astronaut Donn F. Eisele was sworn in as a Peace Corps director. He would supervise 315 volunteers and 14 paid staff members in Bangkok, Thailand, beginning assignment in mid-June while on terminal leave from Air Force. His retirement from Air Force, after 20 yrs service, would be effective July 1. (W News, 5/23/72; NYT, 5/23/72, 27) had said that “decade ended with an adventure so fantastic as almost to overshadow and redeem all the turmoil that had scarred it.” Redeeming adventure had been Apollo 11 moon landing, which Dr. Fletcher called “the one great event of the decade that gave the American people renewed faith in their destiny.” William M. Magruder, special consultant on technology to President Nixon, said U.S. had lost any chance of competing for first airline supersonic transport orders. He predicted U.S. would produce “second generation” SST that would begin carrying passengers in a decade. l/g Otto J. Glasser (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff, Research and Development, said in speech that U.S. aerospace industry had become “overbuilt, overmanned, and overmanaged. Not only are there too many companies, but collectively they have more production capacity than we have any conceivable future need for. The passing of relatively ineffective . . . DC-3s and P—51s has gradually rendered obsolete and archaic our production oriented industry.” Gen. Glasser recommended that U.S. firms follow European approach of “very small, tightly integrated design teams manned by top-of-their-graduating-class engineers.” (Texts; NYT, 5/23/72) May 23:	Scientists	at Manned Spacecraft Center detonated by radio command three of four explosive mortar charges left on moon by Apollo 16 astronauts. Fourth grenade was not detonated because data indicated attitude sensor might have been knocked out of position by previous firings. Analysis of data on pitch sensor was under way to determine if sensor had failed or if mortar package had shifted its position. First grenade contained 270 g (0.6 lb) of explosive with predicted range of 910 m (3000 ft). Second had 45 g (0.1 lb) and 150-m (500-ft) predicted range. Third had 140-g (0.3-lb) charge and 300-m (1000-ft) predicted range. Signals from three explosions, recorded by geophones left on lunar surface, indicated that moon’s surface layer was at least 50 m (164 ft) thick, (msc Release 72—112; O’Toole, W Post, 5/24/72, A3; upi, C Trib, 5/24/72)
Attorney for widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, said Mrs. Betty Grissom had agreed to $350 000 out-of-court settlement of her $20-million suit against North American Rockwell Corp. and three subsidiaries for negligence in construction of spacecraft. (AP, W Post, 3/9/72, A17)
Soviet scientists had suggested system of time registration for moon in lunar stellar days, hours, minutes, and seconds, Tass announced. They had also calculated positions of 72 stars and of Jupiter for every 10 days of lunar year. Work was outlined in book Formulas and Ephemerides for Field Observations on the Moon. (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, LI)	_
U.S. and U.S.S.R. began seventh round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in Helsinki, Finland. (Hamilton, NYT, 3/29/72, 3) March 29:	Apollo 16 spacecraft, loaded with propellants, completed countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center, (ksc Release 55-72)	' ' _
Walter S. Sullivan, New York Times science editor, commented in article on conclusion of Apollo program as Apollo 17, final mission launched Dec. 7, neared lunar orbit insertion: “In the spaceflight community one senses sadness at the finality of this mission, but resignation to the inevitable, rather than bitterness. The scientists are already so glutted with data and specimens that some say it will take years of study to formulate the questions that should be asked by experiments on future landings, be they manned or unmanned.” (NYT, 12/10/72)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden and Manned Spacecraft Center Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, were named by National Aeronautic Assn, to receive 1972 Robert J. Collier Trophy May 31. (AP, W Star, 3/22/72, A25)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin arrived in Belgrade from Warsaw, Poland, for tour of Yugoslavia. They would meet with Yugoslav scientists to discuss Apollo 15. (AP, W Star, 1/23/72, All)
Soviet President Nicolay V. Podgorny had sent congratulations to President Nixon on successful conclusion of Apollo 17 mission, Moscow radio reported. Message had conveyed best wishes to brave crew, their flight, and explorations that “have contributed greatly to the study of space.” (fbis-Sov, 12/21/72, Gl)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 16 astronauts presented 50 awards at Marshall Space Flight Center to Government and industry personnel who assisted successful Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27). (msfc Release 72—75)
Astronauts Edgar D. Mitchell and James B. Irwin announced plans to resign from NASA and military. Mitchell, Navy captain, had been lunar module (lm) pilot on Apollo 14 (Jan. 31—Feb. 9, 1971). Irwin, Air Force colonel, had been lm pilot on Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) and was backup pilot for Apollo 17, scheduled for launch in December. Because of Irwin’s plans to retire, new backup crew for Apollo 17 had been named, effective July 1: John W. Young, Stuart A. Roosa, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Original Apollo 17 backup crew was David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and Irwin. Scott, Worden, and Thomas K. Mattingly II had been assigned to Space Shuttle Program in Manned Spacecraft Center Astronaut Office. Mattingly, who recently had become a father, had requested' assignment which would allow him more time with his family during next six months, (nasa Release 72-110)
Houston, Tex., public TV station kuht—tv announced it had been only TV station to carry entire coverage of Apollo 17 extravehicular activity. On Dec. 11, 12, and 13 station had shown uninterrupted coverage of Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt on moon. On Dec. 17 station had carried Astronaut Ronald E. Evans’ space walk live from earth orbit, kuht eva coverage had totaled 25 hrs. British Broadcasting Corp. had sent 13 hrs of Apollo 17 programming through kuht’s facilities to United Kingdom via satellite. (kuht Release)
Belgian artist Paul Van Hoeydonck, who had sculpted small statue “Fallen Astronaut” that was left on moon by Apollo 15 astronauts [see April 18], was selling 950 copies of statue at $750 each through New York art dealer Waddell Gallery, Washington Evening Star and Daily News reported. NASA spokesman had said that astronauts had carried statue to moon with agency’s approval and felt they had “gentlemen’s agreement” with Van Hoeydonck that precluded any commercialization of venture. Spokesman said he knew of no regulations violated by astronauts in moon sculpture incident. (Delaney, W Star & News, 7/21/72, 1)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) told press in Washington, D.C., that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would include probe of Apollo 14 crew’s decision to carry 200 privately minted silver medals on Jan. 31-Feb. 7, 1971, mission in scheduled Aug. 3 hearings on commercial exploitation of Apollo 15. (AP, Pasadena Star-News, 8/1/72)
New York Times editorial commented on plaque launched on Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe March 2:	“Despite the uncanny >mastery of celestial laws that permits man to shoot his artifacts at the stars, we find ourselves still depressingly inept at ordering our own systems here on earth. Even as we try to find a way to insure that sapient man will not consume his planet in nuclear fires, a rising chorus warns us that man may very well exhaust his earth either by overbreeding or by inordinate demands on its resources, or both. “So the marker launched into space is at the same time a gauntlet thrown down to earth: that the gold-plated plaque convey in its time the message that man is still here—not that he has been there.” (NYT, 3/4/72, 26) March 5:	Apollo Program Director Rocco A. Petrone, in interview published by Washington Post, described Apollo 16 experiment to determine whether moon had its own magnetic field. Apollo 16 astronauts would carry to moon a magnetic rock collected by previous Apollo landing to see if it changed when returned to moon. “We want to see if the magnetism that we have found in moon rocks was not somehow picked up on the voyage back to earth. The whole purpose of this exercise is to prove the existence of a magnetic field on the moon, which in effect proves that the moon was once hot like the earth. Most scientists believe there will be no change, that the magnetism was locked forever into these rocks when they solidified in the moon’s magnetic field.” Astronauts would also set up magnetometer on moon and place a moon rock on head of instrument for instant reading of its magnetism. When rock was brought to earth, it would be read again for comparison with reading on moon. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/5/72, A3)
More than 70 students from six continents would witness Apollo 17 launch and visit major U.S. science centers during Dec. 4-17 tour sponsored by NASA in cooperation with Dept, of State, NASA announced. Students 15 to 17 yrs old with top academic ratings had been selected by their governments on NASA invitation. U.S. tour would give students broad view of work in science and space. Tour would include Washington, D.C.; Tennessee Valley Authority; Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Marshall Space Flight Center; Manned Spacecraft Center; Ames Research Center; Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and facilities of National Bureau of Standards, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and United Nations. Project also was supported by U.S. Information Agency and National Science Teachers Assn, (nasa Release 72-219)
Apollo 16 countdown demonstration test (cddt) without propellants began at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for launch toward moon April 16. (ksc Release 55-72)
Reassignment of Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden from Astronaut Office at Manned Spacecraft Center to Airborne Science Office Space Science Div. at Ames Research Center was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Worden would use astronaut experience in developing and evaluating systems and procedures for arc airborne science and space-shuttle-vehicle simulation studies and in earth resources surveys and high-altitude astronomy using NASA aircraft, (msc Release 72-197)
Sen. John G. Tower (R-Tex.) introduced S.J.R. 238 requesting President Nixon to designate July 20, 1972, as “National Moon Walk Day.” Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary. {CR, 6/2/72, S8712) June 3:	Lewis Research Center announced award of four fixed-price contracts for four-month studies of methods to measure pollution due to aircraft emissions in upper atmosphere. American Airlines would receive $11 697, Trans World Airlines $14 177, and United Air Lines $19 699 to study costs of installing and servicing pollutionmeasuring instruments on. commercial aircraft. Boeing Co. would receive $31 350 to determine aircraft modifications needed to install instruments, data recorders, and support systems. Studies were in support of Global Air Sampling Program (gasp), managed by LeRC. (LeRC Release 72-39)	,
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo program day after Apollo 17 astronauts lifted off moon’s surface: “Over the long term the chief product of Apollo is likely to be in man’s consciousness, not only in scientific thinking. Man’s entire perspective on the universe and on his place in it has been radically changed. Man evolved on the earth, but he is no longer chained to it. Man has walked on another planet and returned to tell the tale. The impact on the future must be enormous. Yesterday’s farewell to the moon was certainly not a farewell to space.” (NYT, 12/15/72, 46)	_	_
Richard Witkin commented on clarity of Apollo 16 TV pictures in New York Times article: “The space agency has a $46,008 contract with a three-month-old California company to process signals from the moon and improve the quality of Apollo television reception. The verdict so far from Apollo 16 scientists, the primary beneficiaries, is that the money is being well spent. And there appears to be no quarrel from the viewing public.” What company, Image Transforms, Inc., had been doing to signals from Apollo 16 was being kept confidential—even from NASA—to protect seven existing and two pending patents. Signals were sent from Apollo 16 to Houston and were immediately sent to Image Transform’s North Hollywood, Calif., plant and back before being displayed on NASA screens and being sent to networks. Extra delay was only one fifth second. NASA had arranged image processing so geologists could give astronauts better input on which rocks to collect on moon. Better reception for home TV viewers was side benefit. Process had been developed by Canadian John Lowry, coowner of company. (NYT, 4/22/72, 16; LA Times, 4/23/72)
Scientist-Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt was calmest of Apollo 17 astronauts at launch time, United Press International reported. His heartbeat at liftoff was 115 beats per minute, with 130 for Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Ronald E. Evans. Apollo 16 rates had been 108 for Astronaut John W. Young, 115 for Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II, and 130 for Astronaut Charles M. Duke. Launch Director Walter J. Kapryan had said Apollo 17 crew was more tense because of liftoff delay. (C Trib, 12/8/72)
Spokesman for Columbia Broadcasting System said in New York that CBS, American Broadcasting Co., and National Broadcasting Co. had dissolved plans for three-network-pool coverage of Dec. 6 Apollo 17 launch. Action would avoid problems that might develop because of 28-day-old strike against CBS by 1200 cameramen, technicians, and engineers. CBS would cover launch with cameras manned by supervisory personnel. ABC and NBC spokesmen said they would restore two-network pooled coverage. (AP, B Sun, 12/1/72, A5)
General Accounting Office released report to Congress that said Lockheed Aircraft Corp. would have to sell 275 TriStar transport aircraft to recover its investment in airliner program. As of Oct. 31, Lockheed had received firm order for 117 TriStars and purchase options for additional 67. (Reuters, B Sun, 12/9/72, B7) December 9:	Indian Space Research Organization’s experimental satellite communication earth station at Ahmedabad began tracking Apollo 17 spacecraft. It was first time India had tracked a space mission. (Delhi radio, FBis-India, Bhutan, Sikim, 12/13/72, 01)
The first fully automatic landings by a manned helicopter at a predetermined spot were announced by NASA, A Langley Research Center team had made the landings at Wallops Station the second week in February in a research program to permit helicopters and future vtol aircraft to fly under conditions of poor visibility. highlight in 1971 astronomy program had been observations made by x-ray astronomy satellite Vhuru (Explorer 42), which was making map of universe in x-ray wavelengths. One hundred sixteen x-ray sources had been studied. “Space” science, Dr. Naugle said, was no different from research man had been doing on earth . . . since he became man: “Man does love to wonder—to explore and understand his environment. The ability to wonder—the desire to extend one’s horizon—is a measure of the mental health and vigor of an individual or a society. The ability of a nation to educate its youth and provide them with the necessary tools to explore our environment, whether it be the innermost secrets of the nucleon or the outermost regions of the universe, is one measure of that Nation’s vigor and its capability to better understand, and in turn guide and control, its destiny.” (Transcript) * House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 12824, FY 1973 NASA authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, described Apollo 15 mission (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) as “most rewarding mission so far.” Mission “demonstrated the operational maturity of the [Apollo] program .... Because of its greatly increased capability for astronaut mobility, surface exploration, sample return, and orbital science, Apollo 15 added as much new data as that gathered by the three previous missions combined.” Mission had marked first use of Lunar Rover and of orbital science experiments to collect lunar-wide information. “The scientific returns from lunar orbit and surface have significantly increased our accumulated knowledge of the moon and by extrapolation of the data from this vacuum-packed laboratory, knowledge of the solar system, including our earth.” Upon completion of Apollo program with Apollo 17 in December, “we will have accumulated a vast treasure of lunar data. Many exciting scientific results have already been published; however, an adequate assessment of the total body of data will require scientific effort for years to come. “As Apollo draws to a close, we are concentrating our activities in earth orbit—the primary field of manned space flight during this decade.” Skylab was “first step in this direction” and “one of the most significant benefit-oriented programs of the space age.” Skylab was four times larger than Soviet Salyut spacecraft and weighed 77 180 kg (170 000 lbs) with total 344 cu m (12 150 cu ft) pressurized volume. Skylab typified variety of activities that could be accomplished in space. “Several years ago we began to look at this total space arena in a different way. . . . While we were driving toward our goal of a manned lunar landing ... a distinction was made . . . between manned and unmanned flight programs.” Distinction “really does not exist” in nasa’s program for 1970s. “The transition is already underway in Skylab.” Survey of total space activity had also led to shuttle concept. “We started with a fully reusable system . . . using winged flyback booster and orbiter stages with all fuel carried in internal tanks.” Studies confirmed feasibility. Estimated development costs were close to $10 billion, but cost per flight, at $4.1 million, “made it extremely attractive.” Problem was lack of funds. NASA “learned that there were cost advantages in using an expendable liquid hydrogen tank for the orbiter.” This became baseline with booster configuration unchanged except for modification. While process reduced development costs, expendability of tanks increased flight costs. NASA found “additional savings could be made if we placed both the hydrogen and the oxygen tanks outside the orbiter.” In efforts to economize on booster development, NASA first considered “flyback booster incorporating F—1 engines and phasing orbiter systems” and later “unmanned ballistic boosters.” Leading candidates were recoverable and reusable pressure-fed liquid-propellant booster and booster with solid-fueled rocket motors. Contractors were completing studies, and decision would be made shortly. Mathematica report of study for NASA in May 1971 had shown shuttle with flyback manned booster was cost-effective when averaging 39 flights a year. Myers submitted new edition of report, incorporating refined data and changes in shuttle configuration, which showed shuttle cost effective with traffic as low as 30 flights per year. “I believe that practically all of this country’s future earth-orbital space activities will use the Shuttle’s capability in exploiting the potential benefits of space and providing the taxpayer as large a return of his space investment as possible.” (Transcript)
Honorary lifetime membership in Auto Body Assn, of America was granted to Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt for fender repair work done on lunar rover on moon. Reg Predham, president of national organization of auto repairmen, said astronauts would be sent lapel pins and membership certificates. Boeing Co. would receive certificate for manufacturing “vehicle that can be repaired 250 000 miles [400 000 kilometers] from a part supplier.” (AP, C Trib, 12/15/72)
On the Moon with Apollo 16 by Dr. Gene M. Simmons, former Manned Spacecraft Center Chief Scientist, was available for sale from Government Printing Office, NASA announced. Book described landing site and scientific aspects of mission scheduled for launch to moon’s Descartes region April 16. (nasa Special Release)
Saturn IB stage for Skylab 2 arrived at Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Orion. Saturn IB would launch command and service module to join orbiting Skylab Workshop day after Workshop launch as Skylab 1 in 1973. Stage would Be processed in Vehicle Assembly Building and would be erected on Mobile Launcher Aug. 31 at ksc. Arrival of stage marked first time in nearly four years that a Saturn IB had been in processing at ksc and first time vehicle would undergo flight preparation in Vab. Last mission for a Saturn IB was Apollo 7 earth-orbital mission Oct. 11, 1968. (ksc Release 246-72)
Tass announced Apollo 16 launch 22 min after U.S. news agencies reported blastoff and issued brief report when spacecraft entered orbit. UPl said coverage was quick by Soviet standards and was part of “gradual expanding coverage the Russians have been giving to U.S. space shots which were all but ignored ten years ago.” (W Star, 4/17/72, A6)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
Success of first 27 test flights of new Maverick missile had enabled Air Force Systems Command to end demonstration phase of Maverick flight testing ahead of schedule, AFSC reported. Maverick Program Director Col. James A. Abrahamson (usaf) had canceled 13 additional tests originally scheduled under contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. (afsc Release 256.71) January 12—14:	Secretariat for Electronic Test Equipment—organization funded by NASA, Dept, of Defense, and Federal Aviation Administration to collect and disseminate test equipment information for Government agencies—held electronic test equipment conference at Kennedy Space Center. NASA presentations described design, development, procurement, and deployment of automatic test equipment for Apollo program, sete was administered by New York Univ. under direction of David M. Goodman of New York Univ. School of Engineering and Science, (ksc Release 8-72; ksc pao)
Llewellen J. Evans, President of Grumman Corp., died at age 49. Evans had joined Grumman in 1951 after four years in Navy Office of General Counsel and had played important role in development of Apollo lunar module. (W Post, 7/17/72, C4; NASA Hist Off)
Smithsonian Institution displayed collection of 60 works by astronomical artist Chesley Bonestell in Aerospace Art Hall of Arts and Industries Building. Artist had been commissioned by Collier’s magazine in 1952 to illustrate series of articles by rocket expert Dr. Wernher von Braun, later NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and by rocket historian Willy Ley. Articles had resulted in Viking Press books: Conquest of Space, Conquest of the Moon, and Exploration of Mars. Smithsonian exhibition was coincidental with American Museum showing of Bone-stell’s works in New York [see May 16]. (Smithsonian Release; Smithsonian Pio) June 1:	President Nixon returned from state visits to Austria, U.S.S.R., Iran, and Poland and reported to Congress on trip. Commenting on agreements signed with U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings, he said: “Recognizing that the quest for useful knowledge transcends differences between ideologies and social systems, we have agreed to expand United States-Soviet cooperation in many areas of science and technology. “We have joined in plans for an exciting new adventure ... in the cooperative exploration of space, which will begin—subject to Congressional approval of funding—with a joint orbital mission of an Apollo vehicle and a Soviet spacecraft in 1975.” President asked for “fullest scrutiny” of antiballistic missile treaty signed May 26, “because we can undertake agreements as important as these only on a basis of full partnership between the executive and legislative branches of our Government.” {PD, 6/5/72, 975-81)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 489 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1004-km (623.9-mi.) apogee, 967-km (600.9-mi) perigee, 104.7-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/72; SBD, 5/9/72, 48) May 7:	Tank cart defueling recovered Apollo 16 command module for storage at San Diego Naval Air Station exploded because of overpressurization. Forty-six persons were hospitalized. All were suspected of having inhaled toxic fumes, but examination revealed no symptoms of inhalation. One suffered broken kneecap and two broken toes. Six were treated for lacerations and bruises, (upi, W Post, 5/8/72, A2; AP, B Sun, 5/8/72, Al; msc pao)
Plans for illuminating night launch of Apollo 17, scheduled for 9:53 pm EST Dec. 6, were released by NASA for photographic fans. Spacecraft would be surrounded on launch pad by 72, 20-kw xenon searchlights and 2, 60-kw xenon searchlight banks that would provide 225 foot-candles of light. Light from Saturn V lst-stage booster engines would not increase illumination until liftoff, when some 7500 foot-candles emitted and reflected would create almost daylight exposure. Searchlight illumination for inflight coverage would not be available beyond first 18 m (60 ft) of flight, (nasa Release 72-208)
New York Times, in editorial on Apollo 16's technical problems, praised entire Apollo effort: “Whatever the outcome of the present Apollo expedition . . . enough has already been accomplished by these vehicles to assure them an imperishable place in the history of technology and science. Each Apollo rocket . . . has been the most complex and complicated machine ever made by man. Each has been composed of millions of parts, all or almost all of which have had to work perfectly for the voyage to succeed.” Apollo was “most impressive example of what American engineering can do at its best, and an implicit rebuke to the more routine areas of technology where far lower standards are too frequently the rule.” (NYT, 4/18/72)
NASA spokesman said agency was tightening flight rules for Apollo 17 mission scheduled for Dec. 6, following commercialism of souvenir articles carried on previous missions. Personal preference kits in which astronauts carried articles to distribute to family and friends might be eliminated. (AP, W Star & News, 7/22/72)
High-powered telescopes at Univ. of California at San Diego picked up satellite Toros, “earth’s other moon,” at distance of 20 million km (12.4 million mi)—closest approach of Toros to earth in centuries. (upi, W Star-News, 8/9/72, A15)
Retirement of Dr. Frank M. Branley as Chairman of American MuseumHayden Planetarium was announced by museum. He would be succeeded by Dr. Kenneth L. Franklin, Assistant Chairman, codiscoverer of high-frequency emissions from Jupiter, and innovator of first lunar watch to tell time on moon. Dr. Branley would devote time to science writing and communications. (Museum-Planetarium Release)
Apollo 16 astronauts’ electrocardiograms would be transmitted from space to heart specialists at Stanford Univ. and Univ. of Wisconsin if astronauts experienced irregular heartbeats and potassium loss during mission, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Chief of Life Sciences, said in interview. Dr. Berry said he would stop extravehicular activity if Apollo 16 astronauts developed symptoms experienced by Apollo 15 crew. (Altman, NYT, 4/19/72, 1)
Dr. William W. Duke, twin brother of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., replied in letter published by Washington Post to April 26 article by Post columnist Nicholas von Hoffman that criticized astronauts and Apollo 16 mission. “My brother stated publicly that he would go to the moon anonymously. He sought no personal gain. No one will recall the names of these space explorers, but each time one mission is completed, the next is easier. I am sure the second, third, or one hundredth man to sail around the world found it easier than the one preceding. Who is to judge what is to be gained now or one hundred years hence in and from space?” (W Post, 5/10/72, A15) May 10—24:	Committee on Space Research (cospar) held 15th meeting in Madrid. First firm indication of water ice on Mars from photos returned by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Dr. James A. Cutts. He and team had noted that residual south polar cap 320 km (200 mi) wide was unchanged throughout southern summer but was hidden by thin carbon dioxide frost that covered region 3200 km (2000 mi) in diameter during winter. In spring, it appeared that dry ice again evaporated and cap shrank to 320-km zone of water ice. Working sessions on terrestrial planets and outer planets were held by NASA and Soviet scientists to discuss programs for exploration of Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter. Discussions fulfilled recommendation of August 1971 nasa-U.S.S.R. Working Group that planetary exploration be discussed jointly at international colloquia. Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council submitted United States Space Science Program: Report to COSPAR. Report, covering 1971, summarized analyses and observations from experiments on board spacecraft, sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft. (Miles, LA Times, 5/11/72; Text; NASA Int Aff; NASA Release 72—106; W Post, 5/23/72, A10)
Relation of U.S. space program to national interest was discussed in Foreign Affairs article by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator: “To some, space is, or should be, pure science; to others, it is prestige and the American image; to still others, space means national security.” Some space program students had said “its impact will be felt in other respects than the costaccounting of economic productivity versus technological investment. There has been much discussion of the influence of space exploration on the mind and spirit of man, as an extension of the revolution in thought that was initiated by Copernicus and continued by Newton and Darwin. A study of the history and pre-history of man suggests that the human drive is expressed through just such tentative movements out of the world of tried experience into a new world of untested promise. “Sputnik and the moon landing signaled the opening of a new frontier across which man can now travel into the endless reaches of outer space. The new frontier of space will not be closed quickly, for astronomical knowledge shows that billions of stars, some undoubtedly accompanied by earthlike planets, surround us in the galaxy. Space exploration has brought home to more people than ever before the reality of this vast complex of stars and planets. ‘Out there’ is really there, a place that one can get to. Never again can we make the mistake of identifying our speck of planetary matter as the universe.” (Foreign Affairs, 4/72, 532-44)
Edwin E. Aldrin, Apollo 11 astronaut and second man to set foot on the moon, announced he was retiring from Air Force in summer. Col. Aldrin had been Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilots School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., since he retired from NASA July 1, 1971. He said he was leaving usaf because his 10 yrs with space program had hurt his chances for promotion. (W Post, 1/15/72, A9)
Columbia Univ. sociologist Dr. Amitai W. Etzioni suggested “most hopeful epitaph for Project Apollo” in New York Times article: “This was the last gasp of a technologically addicted, public-relations-minded society, the last escapade engineered by an industrial-military coalition seeking conquests in outer space, while avoiding swelling needs on earth.” {NYT, 12/3/72, 64)
Tenth anniversary of start of Saturn V project at Marshall Space Flight Center. Since inauguration of Advanced Saturn development Jan. 25, 1962, Saturn V launch vehicles had been used successfully to launch eight manned space flights. Apollo 16 Saturn V booster would be 26th Saturn launch vehicle flown from Kennedy Space Center since firing of first Saturn I Oct. 27, 1961. (msfc Release 72-3)
NASA issued technical memorandum “Description, Dissection and Subsampling of Apollo 14 Core Sample 14230,” describing techniques used to preserve lunar sample intact. Techniques—developed originally by Dr. Roald Fryxell of Washington State Univ. to preserve sediments surrounding bones of “Marmes Man,” oldest well-documented human remains in Western Hemisphere—had produced first permanent record of layering in dust that covered lunar surface. Scientists first removed 55 tiny subsamples from core length, working through rubber gloves in sealed nitrogen cabinets to protect samples from earth atmosphere. They then impregnated with resin three successive thin strips of lunar core with all layers intact and grains undisturbed. Stabilized deposits were then mounted on plexiglass as first permanent record of deposits beneath moon’s surface, (nasa Release 72-30; NASA pao) February 16:	nasa announced selection of moon’s Taurus-Littrow region as site for Apollo 17 manned lunar landing in December. Region, named for Taurus Mountains and Littrow Crater and located just beyond southeast edge of Mare Serenitatis (one of largest mascons), had been selected to help fill in major gaps in development model of moon based on data from previous Apollo missions. Lunar Module landing point 20° north’ and 30° east of moon’s center as viewed from earth would be one prime sampling objective. It contained very dark nonmare material believed to have eroded off mountains and volcanic-looking cinder cones which suggested material was explosively produced volcanic ash. One sampling site would be rock slide containing debris that had fallen into valley from high up on 2000-m (7000-ft) mountain. Astronauts would travel over surface on foot and on lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover. They would deploy advanced Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep), containing heat flow experiment similar to that on Apollo 14 and four new experiments, and two new surface traverse experiments not powered by alsep central station. Experiments were traverse gravimeter to measure vibrations in and provide data on subsurface, seismic profiling and surface electrical properties investigations to measure physical properties of lunar interior down to depth of one kilometer (six tenths mile) and indicate subsurface electrical and mechanical properties, tidal gravimeter to study response of moon to earth’s tidal pull and its response to gravity waves, mass spectrometer to measure constituents of lunar atmosphere, and lunar ejecta and meteorite experiment to determine frequency and energy of small meteorites impacting moon. Orbital science payload would include three new experiments: laser lunar sounder would identify electrical properties and layering of lunar crust overflown by spacecraft, infrared scanning radiometer would provide high-resolution thermal map of portions of moon for first time, and far-ultraviolet spectrometer would measure compositional and density variation of lunar atmosphere, (nasa Release 72-33)
Apollo 17 astronauts arrived at Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., after flight from Samoa, via Hawaii, aboard Air Force C—141 jet transport. After reception at airport by crowd of 5000, they went to Manned Spacecraft Center for debriefings that would continue through Dec. 23. (Wilford, NYT, 12/22/72, 15; WSJ, 12/22/72)
Houston Post editorial described Apollo 17 nighttime launch: “The starstudded sky exploded so violently and in such huge dimensions that it seemed as though a vast reflecting curtain, blended with the night, had been hung directly behind the Apollo 17 launch rocket with the specific role of casting all that fire and light right back over the audience. The climax was reached at the beginning. The drama dwindled swiftly to the view of a bright star fading farther and farther away as it headed toward the moon. An author could write tomes about the space program, but he couldn’t write one line about the nighttime launch of an Apollo and get away with it.” (H Post, 12/10/72) December 11:	Soviet news agency Tass announced “the perfect execution” of Apollo 17 lunar landing “at 22 hours 55 minutes Moscow time in the north-eastern part of the visible side.” Announcement was made five minutes after landing. [See Dec. 7-19.] (fbis-Sov, 12/12/72, Gl; Agence France-Presse, NYT, 12/12/72)
Chemical & Engineering News published views and plans of presidential candidates for science and technology beyond general pledges in Democratic and Republican Party platforms. Same set of questions had been submitted to campaign organizations of Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) and of President Nixon. President Nixon said he would continue general pattern of previous years on Federal research and development funding; its division among defense, space, and civilian sectors; its possible link to gross national product (gnp) ; and appropriate balance for basic research, applied research, and development. Pattern would include increasingly effective program in civilian sector R&D, “prudent space program, and a sufficient defense R&D budget.” Administration believed r&d funding should be based on opportunities for effective programs and necessity for creating new opportunities through fundamental studies and that R&D resources, excepting basic research, should be allocated to areas that provided “greatest opportunity for leverage or that satisfy an immediate future need.” Sen. McGovern recommended increased Federal R&D funding. Principal problem was “government spending that has masqueraded as R&D, yet has little technical content. For example, when an Apollo is launched ... all of the kerosene and liquid oxygen that it uses comes out of the federal R&D budget. Only a very small percentage of the federal R&D budget actually represents laboratory investigations, instrument design, feasibility studies, and other technical efforts that involve scientists and engineers.” Sen. McGovern would emphasize civilian sector R&D and strong military R&D program as “good investment for long-term national security. My space program would emphasize unmanned planetary exploration and scientific satellites and also earth resource and communications satellites.” Nixon Administration would continue to maintain “strong and up-to-date defense force” and to capitalize upon past space investments. Both candidates recommended increased priority on developments of new energy sources. Nixon Administration was opposed to S. 32, reconversion bill introduced by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy to amend National Science Foundation Act of 1950 to establish framework of national science policy. Bill would focus policy and U.S. scientific talent and resources on Nation’s priority problems. Administration believed segment of S. 32 that would establish independent agency within nsf was “particularly unwise” because it would “divorce the R&D from the departments of Government responsible for using its results” and “would divert attention from the primary mission of nsf—to support fundamental and basic research.” Sen. McGovern would continue to support S. 32. “In its original form, before compromise to get Republican support, it would have provided $1.2 billion for a new NASA-type Civil Science Systems Administration that would fund genuine r&d across a broad range of civilian technology needs.” Administration did not believe in Cabinet-level science department or “supra” agency, nor that “existing science apparatus is totally adequate. As with all human and governmental institutions, it too should be dynamic and subject to change as conditions and events dictate.” Sen. McGovern felt “more centralized federal science management and funding apparatus might be useful, but the key need is not to change the institutions but rather to give them more power in the Federal Government.” He favored establishment of Office of Technology Assessment [see October 13] which would “assess each new technical program with an eye toward cost efficiency and effectiveness, and domestic betterment.” Asked if federally owned laboratories should be expanded to deal with problems of health and environment, Nixon Administration pointed out that NASA Centers were “closely involved with the R&D components of other federal agencies in an effort to solve pressing national problems.” Sen. McGovern believed Federal laboratories and research facilities had “plenty of problems in their immediate areas” with which to cope. “I have no intention of taking the easy route and putting them on safe subjects.” (Chemical & Engineering News, 10/23/72, 14-19) October 23-27:	Conference on high-energy astrophysics was held at Cal Tech by division of American Astronomical Society. Dr. Kenneth I. Kellerman of National Radio Astronomy Observatory said most baffling phenomenon observed by radiotelescopes was speed at which objects seemed to be moving. If measurements taken in past two years were accepted at face value, objects associated with quasars were speeding away from each other faster than speed of light. Such speed had been considered impossible. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. W. L. W. Sargent said strange blue objects sighted in sky by Hale Observatory astronomers might be newly formed galaxies “about 100 million years old, and they seem to be made up of very young stars.” Discovery indicated that galaxies might still be forming. Dr. Herbert Gursky of American Science and Engineering, Inc., said astronomers using Uhuru (Explorer 42 Small Astronomy Satellite launched by NASA Dec. 12, 1970) had spotted several x-ray objects that could not be detected by wavelengths other than x-ray. Impact of x-ray astronomy might be that “this new wavelength range may show some different aspects of stars and galaxies.” Through x-ray astronomy scientists “hope to . . . learn something about these objects that radio and optical observations can’t tell us.” Evidence of black hole—star whose gravity field was so strong that light could not escape from it—in constellation Cygnus was reported by Dr. Kip Thorne of Cal Tech, Dr. J. P. Ostriker of Princeton Univ., and Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering. Evidence had come from photos taken at Hale Observatory that showed bright blue line near source Cygnus X-l and from data gathered by XJhuru (see also Sept. 2). Scientists thought line in photos might be result of superhot gas being drawn from neighboring star in black hole. If finding was accurate, Cygnus X—1 would be first black hole discovered. Existence of black holes had been predicted by Einstein as part of his theory of relativity. (Cooke, Pasadena Star-News, 10/24/72; West, LA Times, 10/27/72; O’Toole, W Post, 10/28/72, A3; W Star & News, 10/28/72) October 24:	Soviet news agency Tass announced opening of Soviet National Conference on Space Biology and Medicine at Kaluga, U.S.S.R. Conference would hear papers on use of “terrestrial” atmosphere in spacecraft cabins, food and water regeneration, and establishment of bacterial medium in which future cosmonauts could live and work on extended space missions. Conference also would discuss weightlessness, crew selection and training, radiobiological aspects of flight, and psychophysiology of space crew work. Soviet Academician Oleg Gazenko had presented paper on topical problems of space biology and medicine at opening session. (fbis-Sov, 10/25/72, LI)
Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Manned Spacecraft Center Director and former msc Director of Flight Operations, reviewed Apollo program in Associated Press interview published in Baltimore Sun. Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) had been program’s pivotal mission. “It proved so many things that had a bearing on the progress of the program—things that it might have disproved. The navigation to and from the moon, the ability of the spacecraft systems to perform, the ability of man to survive the deep space environment, all hinged on the Apollo 8 mission.” Mission also had changed competitive position of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in space. “I really believed the Russians planned to fly a cir-cumlunar mission, sending a manned spacecraft looping around and returning it without orbiting the moon. That way they could say they sent the first man to the vicinity of the moon. And when we . . . decided to fly Apollo 8 as a moon-orbit mission, there was nothing left for them to do.” There was no major technological field that “hasn’t been materially changed or had some reflection of not only Apollo but of the whole space program.” Space technology had been important to maintenance of U.S. position as leading nation in world. Five manned lunar landing flights had produced greater scientific return than envisioned. “We have done just about all we should have done with the Apollo program in terms of lunar exploration. This is a good time to stop, evaluate what we have and use our resources to do other things in the space program.” (B Sun, 11/24/72, A10)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
National Book Committee included Norman Mailer’s Of a Fire on the Moon, account of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission, among 102 books it announced as nominees for National Book Awards. Final choice of 10 winners for $1000-prizes would be announced April 11. (Raymont, NYT, 3/27/72, 42)
Col. H. J. Odenthal (usaf, Ret.), pioneer airman who once assisted in rescue of Orville Wright after his aircraft had crashed, died at age 84. Col. Odenthal had helped organize Signal Corps air photographic and mapping division and had been awarded Croix de Guerre for his mapping flights in France during World War I. (Barker, W Post, 1/23/72, B16) January 22—25:	Intelsat-IV F—4 comsat was launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat) . Launched from Eastern Test Range at 7:12 pm est by Atlas-Centaur booster, satellite entered elliptical transfer orbit with 36 523-km (22 694.3-mi) apogee, 5984-km (3718.3-mi) perigee, and 28.2° inclination. Primary objective was to place satellite in transfer orbit accurate enough for onboard propulsion systems to transfer it to planned synchronous orbit for commercial communications over Pacific. Apogee-kick motor was fired at 7:32 pm est Jan. 24 and Intelsat-IV F—4 entered circular orbit with 35 787-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 25 625km (22 136.4-mi) perigee, 23-hr 52-min period, and 0.7° inclination over Pacific at 165° east longitude. It would drift 1.1° per day to reach station at 174° east longitude in early February. Satellite’s first major mission would be coverage of President Nixon’s visit to People’s Republic of China in February.	, Intelsat-IV F-4 was third comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1402 kg (3090 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000—9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F-3 had been launched Dec. 19, 1971, and was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; nasa Release 72-16) January 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA plans for continuing fruitful space program in interview published by Christian Science Monitor: “For the next few years, we may have fewer of the more spectacular explorational missions .... We will focus more on . . . communications satellites, weather satellites, earth resources survey satellites.” Next Applications Technology Satellite (ats) would demonstrate direct TV broadcasting in region of Rockies and Alaska, using large satellite with big antenna that could beam programs directly to augmented receivers in individual homes. Demonstration—-in cooperation with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare—would work through educational network rather than directly to homes, however. Comsats were “not quite so exciting an aspect of space technology” in U.S. but, “worldwide, there has been more interest in this than in almost any other aspect of our program.” Interest equaled that of ERT satellite. “Countries with vigorous mineral exploitation and agricultural development are interested in ERT satellites .... Countries with underdeveloped communications and education, such as India, are keenly interested in the broadcasting satellites.” In weather satellite field, new sophisticated instruments “give hope that we can get a really world weather observing network going.” Infrared sensors, microwave sensors, and high-resolution optics that obtained temperature profiles throughout atmosphere by looking “through holes in cloud systems” should help “to get points all over the globe where we now get only pieces of the picture.” NASA would try processing materials in zero g during Skylab program. “If it works with men doing it, there are cheaper ways we could do it without men. It may be one of those things that will be worth doing when we can get routine access to space with the shuttle.” In response to question, Dr. Fletcher said second Skylab would be “a very good thing for the country. But I’m not sure the budget needed for both a Skylab and the shuttle would be salable. The shuttle is more important in the long run. Not to do more of the Skylab sort of thing will be bad for prestige. The Russians will be doing much more than we will. I’m sure there will be criticism from Congress and the public.” But with shuttle and current budget level, “we could do virtually all those things we have talked about doing in this century. We could go back to the moon and establish crude bases .... We could establish a permanent space station. We just might be able to send men to Mars and get them safely home.” Apollo industrial base had already been destroyed, Dr. Fletcher said. “We could assemble a nucleus of people who know these things within NASA. But that’s about all.” As NASA turned toward space shuttle, “We hope and expect that many of the people who worked on Apollo will be in that program, so we won’t lose all the basic space flight know-how.” In international cooperation, France had asked to participate in Skylab mission and U.S.-U.S.S.R. meetings to establish compatible space docking system had progressed. “It looks as though we can do it technically. With existing hardware, we could do a docking in something like 1974 to 1975.” Scientific community was “still debating whether it would prefer an intensive Jupiter and Saturn explorational program or some form of grand tour to other planets as well,” Dr. Fletcher said. There was “no slackening of interest in Grand Tour” on NASA’s part. (CSM, 1/22/72)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1971 was presented by National Aeronautic Assn, to Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden and former Manned Spacecraft Center Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, during Washington, D.C., ceremony. (Abrams, W Post, 6/1/72, Dl)
Retirement of Dr. Fred L. Whipple as Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory—effective July 1, 1973—was announced by Dr. S. Dillon Ripley II, Secretary of Smithsonian Institution. Dr. Whipple would be succeeded by Dr. George B. Field, professor of astronomy at Harvard College Observatory. Director of SAO since 1955, Dr. Whipple received President’s Distinguished Federal Civilian Service Medal in 1963 for leadership in developing Baker-Nunn satellite tracking camera and optical tracking network that had gathered data since launch of world’s first satellite in 1957. Known internationally for studies of moon, meteors, and comets, he would become a senior scientist at Smithsonian. (Smithsonian Release; NYT, 11/5/72, 12; 6/13/63, 21; Green, Lomask, Vanguard,—A History, SP-4202)
Trailer in which NASA formerly quarantined astronauts returning from moon was being used by Air Force Military Airlift Command, St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported. Trailer was positioned at McGuire Air Force Base, N.J., and could be airlifted by Air Force C-141 cargo aircraft to transport patients with communicable diseases. Previously aircraft had to be decontaminated after carrying contagious patients. {St. Louis P-D, 11/26/72)
Newspaper editorials continued comment on Apollo program. Christian Science Monitor:	“Such technological feats as going to the moon do not absolve people of responsibilities on earth. It may be only an irony but the last Apollo splashdown, amazingly within a mile of its target, occurred while the United States again renewed bombing of North Vietnam in that excruciating war. Millions in America and elsewhere are hungry or unhappy. Great leaps in human relationships comparable to those in space are called for. Nonetheless, though we do not yet fully grasp the impulse that led to the moon venture, and though it but the more reveals what remains unresolved in the human lot, we are aware that Apollo 17 has written finis to something marvelous in mankind’s annals.” (CSM, 12/21/72) Pasadena, Calif., Star-News editorial praised Apollo Program: “The American knowhow and resources, which have made the Apollo missions and space travel so successful, have confirmed for the world our scientific leadership and perfection. This has resulted in more pride and esteem for our nation than all the foreign aid, diplomacy or pats on the back that Uncle Sam has bestowed in his lifetime.” (Pasadena Star-News, 12/21/72)
Reassignment of Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden from Astronaut Office at Manned Spacecraft Center to Airborne Science Office, Space Science Div., at Ames Research Center became effective, (msc Release 72-197)
NASA officials at Manned Spacecraft Center celebrated successful completion of last Apollo mission, following splashdown of Apollo 17. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director since 1969, said mission “goes into the record books as the most perfect mission, the most sophisticated science mission ever conducted.” Apollo 17 “closes a golden chapter in the age of space exploration. In a way, it brings a close to what has been a very romantic era in space exploration. But . . . the book is still being written. The next chapter will open the age of exploiting and utilizing space for other benefits.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said, “All great things must come to an end so we can move on to even greater things.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director, said he had “never seen a more perfect mission” than Apollo 17. Apollo program had been greatest engineering feat of all our lifetimes.” Before Apollo, “my mind, like most of us, was bound to earth. It’s certainly not that way anymore.” nasa spokesman at msc told press Apollo 17 was “the last, longest, and most successful of seven manned lunar landing missions.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/20/72, 1; AP, B Sun, 12/20/72, 1; upi, W Star & News, 12/20/72, A4)
Institute of Navigation presented Thomas L. Thurlow Award to John P.	Mayer, Chief of Manned Space Center’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div., in recognition of his outstanding and continuing efforts in all facets of navigation from NASA Mercury missions through Apollo manned lunar landings. (Av Wk, 7/10/72, 9; Inst of Nav pio)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
John N. Wilford contrasted U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs in New York Times article: “As American astronauts prepare for another Apollo voyage to the moon . . . their counterparts in the Soviet Union are training for long-duration flights in earth-orbiting laboratories, leaving their own lunar exploration to automatic probes. As the American Pioneer 10 heads for Jupiter, a Soviet spacecraft, Venus 8 is traveling toward a planned softlanding on Venus. As American engineers design a reusable shuttle for ferrying men and satellites into space, the Russians apparently are still trying to develop a giant rocket to give them lifting power as great or greater than the Saturn V. As American launchings run about 30 a year and the space budget is under public attack, the Russians are launching nearly three times as many spacecraft and, if anything, are expanding their space program.” Contrasts had been highlighted in interviews with space officials during Wilford’s month-long visit to U.S.S.R. during March. According to Dr. Boris N. Petrov, director of Soviet Academy of Sciences Intercosmos Branch, “the priorities of the Soviet space program will remain the systematic research of near-earth space with the help of automatic stations, manned spaceships and orbital stations. For the moon and the nearest planets, the priority will continue to be research with the help of automated means.” (NYT, 4/14/72, 10)
Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin received honorary Doctor of Science degree from Samford Univ. in Birmingham, Ala. (Birmingham News, 5/14/72) May 27—June 4: U.S. International Transportation Exposition transpo ’72 was sponsored by Dept, of Transportation at Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va. More than 400 exhibitions from 10 countries included military and civil aircraft and aerial demonstrations, experimental safety vehicles developed by automobile industry, Apollo 12 command module with Apollo 12 moon rocks, and four working models of independently powered 6- and 12-passenger “people movers” operated by pushbutton for urban mass transportation. NASA theme, “Aviation Serves the Community and the Nation,” was illustrated with exhibits on aviation passenger growth, airport planning, aircraft noise reduction, pollution control, aircraft safety, long-haul aircraft for 1980s, new vehicle technology, general aviation, nagivation and communications, and equation of ecology with technology. Exhibition was marred by three accidental deaths during aerobatic and precision flying demonstrations. (Langley Researcher, 5/12/72, 1; Grubisch, W Post, 5/4/72, HI; Transpo 72 News) May 28:	President Nixon discussed Moscow summit meetings and resultant agreements in radio and TV address to Soviet people from Kremlin in Moscow. He said: “We have agreed on joint ventures in space. We have agreed on ways of working together to protect the environment, to advance health, to cooperate in science and technology.” Most important agreement was “historic first step in the limitation of nuclear strategic arms.” By settling arms limitation, “people of both of our nations, and of all nations, can be winners. If we continue in the spirit of serious purpose that has marked our discussions this week, these agreements can start us on a new road of cooperation for the benefit of . . . all peoples.” (PD, 6/5/72, 939-41)
Finance magazine devoted entire issue to “Corporate Continuity in Space: The Case for NASA’s Future.” Preface noted that in 1960s, NASA had “achieved its mem date to the moon and back with time to spare. For the Seventies and beyond, its new goals are a balanced mix of manned aeronautical work in near-earth orbit and unmanned research flights into deep space. While NASA administrator James C. Fletcher works with Congress to implement more stable funding concepts, the agency and its industrial contractors continue to provide security and scientific benefits for an earth-bound society while pushing forward the frontiers of aerospace technology.” {Finance, 4/72)
United Nations Legal Subcommittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space ended four-week session in Geneva with agreement on some articles in Soviet draft treaty to ensure free access to moon. Subcommittee had agreed to uphold right to explore and use moon and right of lunar explorers to use facilities placed on moon by another country in distress situations. U.S.S.R. had refused to accept U.S. proposals that treaty apply to other celestial bodies and that every country give 60-day notice before launching space mission. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had expressed reservations on draft convention introduced by France and Canada that would compel publication of launch information. (NYT, 5/6/72, 3:9)	_
Apollo 16 lunar module (lm) pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was admitted to Patrick Air Force Base Hospital for treatment of bacterial pneumonia. Duke’s illness was not expected to have serious impact on training preparations for Apollo 16 launch, scheduled for March 17. (msc Release 72-02)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on Apollo 15 astronauts’ carrying unauthorized postal covers on mission: It was to crew’s credit that they withdrew from plan to profit from venture. “But recognition of their original mis judgment . . . does not completely erase the taint of commercialization in an otherwise heroic venture.” (P Bull, 7/13/72)
Soviet scientists writing in magazine Zemlya I Vsellennaya had suggested that canals on Mars were optical illusions created by dark features of Mars surface relief, Tass reported. Scientists—using data from U.S. Mariner 9 and U.S.S.R. Mars 2 and 3 spacecraft (all three launched in May 1971 and still in orbit around Mars)—had said large-scale pictures of Mars showed no signs of canals, but showed planet was pockmarked with craters. They had concluded Mars surface relief was about 300 million yrs old and that craters were destroyed twice as fast as those of moon because Mars atmosphere encouraged erosion, (fbis-Sov, 7/5/72, L4)
Sir James M. Lighthill, Research Professor of Royal Society of London, was presented in Moscow with two capsules containing lunar rock samples brought from moon by U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (launched Sept. 12, 1970). In making presentation Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy of Sciences expressed hope that gift would “facilitate a further development of contacts between Soviet and British scientists.” (SF, 12/72, 459)
l/g John W. O’Neil, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command since 1969, would retire from Air Force Sept. 1, AFSC Newsreview reported. President Nixon had nominated as successor to Gen. O’Neil, m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who had also been nominated for promotion to grade of lieutenant general, (afsc Newsreview, 7/72, 1) August 1:	Launch of first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, Erts 1, and selection of prime contractor—North American Rockwell Corp.— for space shuttle system demonstrated “how we have begun to turn the space program . . . around, how we are returning to the home seas of space after 12 years of strenuous and highly successful effort to explore the Moon,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to NASA staff. NASA would continue new direction with 1973 Skylab launch, joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, and first orbital flight of space shuttle in 1978. Additionally NASA would explore solar system with improved unmanned spacecraft, build and orbit improved unmanned observatories, and accelerate efforts to develop “basic new technology for the most promising space missions of the Eighties and Nineties. We will . . . maintain a balanced national space effort with our main area of concentration shifted from the Moon to Earth orbit.” (NASA Activities, 8/25/72, 160-1)
Two press briefings were held at nasa Hq., Apollo 16 Mission Director’s press briefing and press conference on medical aspects of Apollo 15 and 16. In first, press was told hypergolic loading of propellants had begun and countdown demonstration test with fueled spacecraft would begin March 29. msc was continuing simulations, and prime recovery ship would leave San Diego March 23 and Pearl Harbor April 8 to take position. Launch preparations were proceeding on schedule toward liftoff at 12:45 pm est April 16. Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee said one purpose of microbial ecology evaluation device (meed; experiment to carry fungi and bacteria) on Apollo 16 was to prepare for future Skylab missions. In Skylab “we are going to have some evas and some of these bacteria, fungi, are on the suit before they go out. So the idea is to find out is there anything when we bring those suits back in and stow them for long periods of time like we are going to have on Skylab, do we have anything that we should be considering or concerned about as far as mutants and so forth.” Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover had been improved with new seatbelts that could be hung up out of way when not in use and with extra circuit breaker to permit deployment of TV after third extravehicular activity period, lrv would not cover as much distance on Apollo 16 as on Apollo 15. “We are planning 25.2 kilometers [15.7 miles] . . . because that gets us to our primary objectives,” not including 10% wander factor for missing craters. (Transcript) In second briefing, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, explained medical problems and procedures on Apollo 15 and changes for Apollo 16. Major concerns on Apollo 15 were cardiac arrhythmia—irregular heart rhythm—and fluid-electrolyte imbalance, with severe loss of potassium. Cardiac arrhythmia occurred occasionally in normal persons and frequently in college students, apparently as a result of fatigue from all-night studying, adrenalin increase from apprehension about grades, drug effect from drinking coffee to stay awake, and heavy workload. Fatigue, adrenalin increase, drug effect, and heavy workload also acted on astronauts. Fluid-electrolyte imbalance was dependent upon intake in food and drink and output in breath, sweat, and body wastes. In space, balance was affected by weightlessness, acceleration, 100%-oxygen atmosphere, abnormal work-rest cycle, and sustained work loads. Countermeasures that could be taken were better control of intake, supplementing electrolytes with intravenous fluids, coordinating exercise, providing lower body negative pressure, and optimizing work-rest cycles. Medical objectives for Apollo 16 were essentially same as for Apollo 15: to ensure crew safety medically, to improve probability of mission success by providing necessary medical information, and to detect and understand changes incident to space flight and learn more about effects of space flight on man. To improve medical wellbeing of Apollo 16 astronauts, 72-hr preflight controlled-diet period would determine amount of potassium needed by each crew member. Since potassium could not be preloaded, small amounts of extra potassium would be given in daily diet in flight to ensure adequacy. In addition to regular preflight cardiovascular examination, x-rays of astronauts’ hearts would be taken before and after mission to determine whether heart size decreased during flight. Skylab equipment would be used in flight for electroencephalogram, electrocardiogram, and electro-oculogram. Other inflight medical changes were daily sample of improved electrocardiogram data, option to alter bioharness wearing schedule, expansion of crew status report, high-potassium diets with potassium-enriched beverages and snack supplements, measurement of food and fluid intake and urine and fecal output, return to earth of urine and fecal samples for analysis, and provision of anti-arrhythmic drugs lidocaine, procainamide, and atropine. Dr. Berry also announced that Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who had been removed from Aurora 7 mission (May 24, 1962) and NASA flight status 10 yrs ago because of possible heart malfunction, had been returned to NASA and Federal Aviation Administration flight status. Evidence of atrial fibrillation found in 1959 and treated until 1969 had disappeared and tests completed recently had shown “perfectly normal cardiac function and cardiac anatomy.” First space flight for which Slayton could be eligible would be proposed joint mission with U.S.S.R. (Transcript)
NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences approval of recommendations of Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine was announced by NASA. Group—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, and Soviet Academician Dr. 0. G. Gazenko—had met at Manned Spacecraft Center May 12-18 to continue exchange of experiences in manned space flight begun at first meeting in Moscow in October 1971. NASA had presented pre- and postflight medical requirements and flight crew health stabilization program for Apollo 16 (launched April 16), mission’s preliminary physiological results, and glossary of space medicine for mutual understanding of technical and scientific exchanges. U.S.S.R. had detailed medical findings from June 6-30, 1971, Soyuz 11—Salyut 1 mission, in which three cosmonauts died; pre- and postflight clinical-physiological examination procedures for cosmonauts; and theoretical aspects of predicting physiological responses of crew during flight. Soyuz-Salyut data had indicated no deterioration of crew’s physiological status or performance efficiency before accident. Inflight data were similar to data from previous Soyuz missions and to Apollo data and were consistent with findings by both countries that general adaptive process occurred during weightlessness. U.S.S.R. had confirmed cosmonauts’ deaths were due to hypoxia and gaseous embolism (dysbarism), caused by rapid decompression of landing capsule some half hour before return to earth. Review and evaluation of 24-day Soviet mission had indicated no need to modify medical aspects of Skylab plans. Joint Working Group had agreed to develop common medical examination procedures to compare U.S. and Soviet pre- and postflight data on crew body functions and increase information on physiological responses to space flight. Group would exchange correspondence on orthostatic tolerance (cardiovascular response), vestibular measurements, exercise-working capacity, and biochemical examination of body fluids and would discuss these areas in depth at Moscow meeting early in 1973, (nasa Release 72-157; Text)
President Nixon issued memorandum disapproving H.R. 56, bill to establish National Environmental Data System and create environmental centers in each state: “While both these titles sound desirable in theory, they would in reality lead to the duplication of information or would produce results unrelated to real needs and wasteful of talent, resources, and the taxpayers’ money.” {PD, 10/30/72, 1549) October 22:	Construction at United Nations Hq. in New York of “Hall of Fame for all spacemen—those who already have voyaged, or someday will voyage, in outer space” was proposed by Parade magazine. Hall would “underscore our need for international cooperation in space.” Magazine said U.N. Secretary General Kurt M. Waldheim had endorsed proposal because “it is a practice of most of the astronauts to visit the U.N. when they return from their moon flights.” {Parade, 10/22/72, 7)
Vice Chairman Kuo Mo-jo of Standing Committee of National People’s Congress of People’s Republic of China told visiting French delegation to Peking that U.S.S.R. had begun underground tests of explosive devices in 250- to 300-megaton range Nov. 25. Tests, southeast of Ural Mountains, would continue to Dec. 30. He noted concomitance of European security talks in Helsinki, Finland, and of Dec. 6 Apollo 17 launch. Kuo said both Apollo 17 and Soviet nuclear tests showed technological supremacy with equal military potentialities. (Comparet, Agence France-Presse, Atlanta JC, 12/10/72, Bl)
Impact of large meteorite on moon’s far side had provided first evidence suggesting moon still had molten core, Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo seismic experiments, said in press interview at Univ. of Texas. Data were preliminary and fragmentary but “I hope we’ll be able to confirm or reject this core hypothesis in a month or so.” Impact had been recorded July 17 by all four seismometers left on moon by Apollo astronauts but had not been discovered until recently because of delays in examining telemetry reports from instruments. Meteorite’s size had not yet been determined but it “probably was larger than the ‘whopper’ recorded in May.” Meteorite which impacted moon May 13 had been largest since seismometers began functioning in 1969. Seismic signals from July 17 impact had had “funny focusing effect that could be explained by a core.” (Rossiter, W Star & News, 11/10/72, A3)
Meteorite crashed into moon near Apollo 14 Fra Mauro landing site with force estimated to be equivalent to 8900 kilonewtons (1000 tons of tnt)—100 times larger than impact of Saturn V S—IVB stage, larger than any previous seismic event recorded on moon, and large enough to record reflections from lunar core if it existed. Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo passive seismic experiirients, said meteorite must have heen about 3 m (10 ft) in diameter and probably created new crater as large as a football field. Signal recorded by four Apollo seismometers on moon was so strong that Apollo 14 seismometers were knocked completely off-scale for 16 min. Total signal lasted more than three hours and signals that might correspond to rain of debris thrown out by impact were recorded for about one minute, (msc Release 72-105)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden participated in pregame pageant at 1972 Orange Bowl Classic football game in Miami. Pageant, “The First Decade,” was dedicated to U.S. space program. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35) January 2:	Research in U.S. was shifting from pure to practical, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. “Changes that stress practicality have already been made to parts of U.S. science, but they’re scarcely detectable against the $16 billion the federal government spends every year to support U.S. science and technology. One of the few programs of any size begun by the Nixon administration is a $49 million project at the National Science Foundation code-named rann—for Research Applied to National Needs, rann supports a host of small programs aimed at improving things like subways, cancer treatment, earthquake forecasts and sewers.” Changes within NASA required “little new money, but they serve to spotlight the emphasis the Nixon administration places on the practical goals of science. In the last six months NASA has taken on study projects from the Departments of Commerce, Interior, and Transportation— none of which involves space exploration. The space agency also has a contract from the National Science Foundation to investigate the use of solar cells (used on most unmanned spacecraft) to electrify homes and buildings. It has another contract from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to look into ways an apartment complex might recycle its sewage and water the way future astronauts will do inside their spacecraft.” (W Post, 1/3/72, Al) 9-12 in experiments, demonstrations, or activities to be performed by astronauts during 1973 Skylab missions. NASA would select 25 proposals on basis of compatibility with Skylab requirements. Selectees and their teachers would attend Skylab Educational Conference and award presentation at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time. NASA would build required hardware in consultation with students. Regional and national selectees would be announced in April, (nasa Release 72-1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to New York Times, criticized interpretation of shuttle economics in Jan. 25 Times article: “nasa has a good record on cost estimating, as demonstrated by bringing in the Apollo program below the original estimates. Even if a contingency amount of $1 billion should be required to overcome unforeseen problems beyond those provided in the $5.5 billion estimates, the combined total for development and initial investment will be substantially below the $10 billion to $14 billion estimate in the Times.” (NYT, 2/7/72)
Legislation to rename Jet Propulsion Laboratory as H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory effective Jan. 4 [see Oct. 21] had set off negative reaction, Los Angeles Times reported. “General feeling” among JPL scientists and engineers was that Laboratory and its work should not be involved with politics. Protest petition had been signed by 210 students of California Institute of Technology, which operated Laboratory for NASA. Cal Tech officials were surprised and concerned at not having been consulted about change and planned to talk to Government officials in Washington, D.C. {LA Times, 11/5/72) * Spokesman for Cape Kennedy local of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees said Boeing Co. officials had defied union demands to submit wage dispute to Federal arbitrators. Attorney Bernard Mamet said 60 members of local had vowed to walk out by Dec, 5 if their request was denied. He said Boeing had halted negotiations in eight-month dispute and had refused to resume talks before Nov. 14. Boeing technical writers were asking at least partial restoration of April 1971 wage cut. Dispute had raised “slim threat” of walkout on eve of Apollo 17 launch, Orlando Sentinel said later. Sympathy strike by other locals of union could cause “serious problems.” (0 Sen, 11/8/72) November 6:	NASA selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for two unmanned Viking spacecraft in summer 1976 was announced by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs, in telephone interview. NASA also released Mariner 9 photos of sites-— two at edge of Nix. Olympics slopes, another near slopes of three smaller volcanoes north of canyons along Martian equator, fourth on desert plain, and fifth in region of flattened craters at edge of highland terrain. Observations from Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had shown sites were low, relatively warm regions, possibly moist, where life form was most likely to be discovered. Prime objective of Viking missions was to determine if Mars harbored life or potential for life. In choosing sites, project scientists had eliminated nearly one third of Mars because of high elevations. In mountainous regions, Viking parachutes would not have sufficient atmosphere to brake spacecraft descent. Scientists also had rejected areas where surface appeared too soft for spacecraft landing, too hard for retrieval of soil samples, or so steep that spacecraft might tip over on landing. Attention had centered November 6:	Selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for mass's two unmanned Viking spacecraft in 1976 was announced. The map showing the sites was based on photos televised from Mariner 9, launched May 30, 1971, and in orbit around Mars since Nov. 13, 1972. All the sites were fairly smooth areas near scientifically interesting geological features and were in regions of the planet where warmer temperatures and greater likelihood of water increased chances of finding evidence of life. The first map of the entire globe of Mars, prepared by the VS. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9, was published Nov. 27. on broad Mars equatorial band with brightest sunlight and highest temperatures, which increased chance of finding water vapor in atmosphere and thus of finding biological activity. Landing zones were about 65 km (40 mi) wide and 650 km (400 mi) long. Precise sites would be selected after further analysis of Mariner 9 photos. U.S. and Soviet scientists 'would meet during winter to compare Mars landing targets. There was “no use in landing on top of each- other. We would also like to optimize the coverage of Mars.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/7/72, 61; NASA pio)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., completed 13 days of postflight debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center and prepared to spend first weekend in seven weeks with their families. (Reuters, NYT, 5/13/72, 33)
Geraldine Cobb, former NASA employee, had piloted twin engine Islander aircraft for average six hours daily during 15-day search for survivors of Lockheed Electra airliner that crashed in Peruvian jungle Dec. 24, 1971, with 92 aboard, Reuters reported. Miss Cobb, who had picked up only survivor of crash and had flown her to missionary settlement, had passed all NASA tests to become astronaut, Reuters said. She had been “No. 1 choice to be the first woman to fly an Apollo mission until the space program was cut back and it became clear that no woman would be selected by nasa.” (B Sun, 1/12/72, A2)
Columbia Broadcasting System said it had rejoined original TV pool arrangement to cover Apollo 17 launch Dec. 6. Under arrangement, National Broadcasting Co. would act as pool agent for itself, CBS, and American Broadcasting Co. in relaying close-up TV photos of launch from NASA cameras. (AP, W Post, 12/5/72, A3)
Documentary film “Moonwalk One” was reviewed by New York Post. Film traced Apollo 11 lunar landing and first moonwalk by Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong “from Stonehenge to Africa, Cape Kennedy to Houston, to the sun and its mighty flame-storms to camper-sightseers on the Florida shore, to the moon itself and the return.” It was “documentary so vast and so beautiful and fascinating that its opening outside the big commercial theaters is a shocking sin of omission.” Film, made by Francis Thompson Inc., was highlight of “New American Filmmakers Series” at Whitney Museum in New York. (Winsten, NY Post, 11/14/72) November 14^17:	Dept, of Transportation held conference at its Systems center in Cambridge, Mass., to discuss plans for stratospheric observations, laboratory experiments, and computer simulations in program to assess impact of supersonic air traffic on climate and life. Emphasis was on argument by Dr. Harold S. Johnston of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Dr. Paul J. Crutzen of Univ. of Stockholm that nitrogen oxides from supersonic transport exhaust could seriously deplete stratosphere ozone that absorbed much of harmful ultraviolet rays. Some scientists and engineers attending conference had agreed with theory but many had said it was essential to prove theory wrong. Dr. Harold F. Blum of State Univ. of New York at Albany had said that if additional UV got through stratosphere increase in skin cancer would occur, but he could not estimate amount of increase. Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, sst assessment program manager, said if chain reaction in which nitrogen oxides continuously removed ozone according to Johnston-Crutzen theory was very slow effect might escape notice. sst program studies would include use of high-flying U-2 and Concorde supersonic transport aircraft to make stratospheric observations and quick-freeze samples of air in stratosphere for laboratory analysis. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/72, 50; dot pio) November 15:	Apollo 17 astronauts began three-week preflight quarantine at Cape Kennedy while launch crews started final major rocket and spacecraft tests for scheduled Dec. 6 launch. Isolation was to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay mission. Week-long rocket and spacecraft tests would duplicate every phase of final countdown. Countdown would start Nov. 30. (AP, B Sun, 10/16/72, A9)
Apollo 15 Astronaut Alfred M. Worden—who had orbited moon alone in command module while Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin explored lunar surface during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission-—• read number of his space poems before meeting of Poetry Society of Texas. (W News, 2/18/72; Worden)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., were honored during Astronaut Day celebration in Chicago. They rode in tickertape parade, attended ceremonies at City Hall escorted by Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley, and visited Michael Reese Hospital. At hospital they met Dr. Samuel Natelson who had invented instruments and techniques by which astronauts’ body fluids were monitored by Manned Spacecraft Center Mission Control. (C Daily News, 5/17/72)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 16: While space program had been “worth the money,” it was “just a well that this is the next to last manned mission; the most promise henceforth will be in earth-orbital projects. The Soviets appear to be investing much more heavily in those than the United States.” (W Star, 4/15/72, A4) April 15—16:	Wallops Station held open house as part of joint program of Federal activities. Displays included moon rock and Apollo spacesuit. Television set was available for visitors to watch Apollo 16 launch on April 16. (Wallops Release 72-5) Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 175.9km (109.3-mi) apogee and 166.7-km (103.6-mi) perigee. Insertion into trajectory toward moon was achieved at 2:34 get in spite of minor anomalies—leak in instrument unit (iu) temperature control system’s gaseous nitrogen bottle pressure and malfunction of S—IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) helium regulators, which caused continuous venting. CSM separation from Lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:05 GET and docking with LM was shown on color TV for 18 min. First S-1VB APS burn was near nominal, but because of helium depletion and potential trajectory disturbances, second bum was not made and S-IVB lunar impact operations were terminated. Tracking of stage ended at 27:09 get when IU signal was lost. S-IVB impacted lunar surface at 75:08 get (4:02 pm EST April 19) at point estimated to be 1.8° north latitude and 23.3° west longitude. Impact was detected by seismometers at Apollo 12, 14, and 15 sites. Unexplained light-colored particles streaming from LM close-out panel during docking were reported by crew at 7:18 GET. Young and Duke entered lm, powered up, and found all systems normal. Grasslike particles, shown on cm TV, were later identified as shredded thermal paint, but degraded thermal protection was not expected to affect LM operations. First midcourse correction (MCC—1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Electrophoresis demonstration began on schedule at 25:05 get and appeared to be successful, from crew’s description of reaction of charged particles in liquid. Ultraviolet (uv) photographs of earth from 107 300 km (66 700 mi) and 216 600 km (134 600 mi) were taken as planned. Duke reported “spectacular” view of half earth from 201 000-km (125 000-mi) altitude when he could see sun shining on only half of planet. During MCC-2, made at 30:39 get, services propulsion system (sps) tank pressure anomaly that had occurred earlier in mission was tracked and minor leak in transducer reference cavity was located. Procedures were sent to crew to account for transducer reading. Visual light flash experiment was started about two hours late, at 49:10 get, because of problem in aligning spacecraft. Duke counted 70 white, instantaneous light flashes that left no after-glow, uv photography of earth at 327 800 km (203 700 mi) was completed as planned. Young and Duke entered lm at 53:50 get for two-hour checkout of LM systems. All system checks were nominal. Scientific instrument module (sim) door jettisoned at 69:59 get. csm—lm undocking and separation maneuver was conducted on schedule at 96:14 get. When Young and Duke came from behind moon in lm, Duke told Mission Control his helmet was full of orange juice. Duke’s microphone apparently had become entangled with tube through which he drank juice stored in his spacesuit. “Every time I turn my head I get orange juice. It’s delicious . . . hut it’s better in your mouth than floating around the cockpit. I’ve already had an orange shampoo.” When Mattingly came from behind moon in csm he reported he had not conducted circularization burn because of malfunction in SPS yaw gimbal servo loop. While flight controllers evaluated problem, LM-powered descent-initiate maneuver was delayed, and LM and CSM maneuvered into station-keeping mode prepared to dock or continue landing procedures. Analysis of problem identified malfunction in secondary circuit that would not preclude lunar landing. Second separation maneuver by CSM with RCS burn was performed and LM began descent to moon on 16th revolution. LM Orion touched down in moon’s Descartes region 230 m (755 ft) northwest of planned target point at 104:30 GET (9:23 pm EST April 20). “Wow, down. Old Orion is finally here, Houston. Fantastic,” Duke exclaimed. “All we’ve got to do is jump out the hatch and we’ve got plenty of rocks.” Duke and Young said site was rolling country surrounded by mountains and covered with big boulders. Sunlight was so bright it washed out moon’s colors and made lunar surface appear white. Since LM had stayed in lunar orbit six hours longer than planned it was powered down to conserve electrical power and first extravehicular activity (EVA-1) was rescheduled to follow sleep period. EVA-1 began at 119:05 get (11:59 am est April 21). Young climbed down ladder and stepped onto lunar surface. “Okay, Cayley Plains,” he said, “Apollo 16 is gonna change your image.” Duke followed and astronauts began deploying experiments. Because of problems with LM antenna astronauts’ first steps on moon—for first time—were not beamed back to earth. Once Young and Duke set up portable antenna, TV signal and communication with ground controllers were received clearly on earth. TV pictures showed bleak, pale surface resembling Apollo 15 site, with flat-topped Smoky Mountain to north and Stone Mountain to south. Astronauts said site was rockier, more hilly, and more cratered than previous landing sites. Soil was firm, with rocks scattered over 30% of the surface and small craters covering 70%. During deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) Young tripped over heat flow experiment (hfe) cable, pulling it from connector after Duke had drilled first bore hole. Mission Control later developed way to repair $1.2-million experiment, but procedure was not used because it would have been too complex and too time consuming and included some risk to other ALSEP components. U.S. flag and remaining ALSEP components were deployed successfully and functioned nominally. Crew deployed lrv and found ampere readings for battery No. 2 off-scale low and rear steering inoperable. About 40 min later, after loading, all meters and rear steering operated properly and LRV performed nominally throughout remainder of EVA. Young and Duke explored Flag, Spook, Plum, and Buster Craters and collected 20 kg (44 lbs) of samples, including number of white rocks. One crystalline rock coated with bluish glass appeared to have same texture as anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on Apollo 15 mission; another was pure white. Some were flecked with green and black glass, some were black and gray, and one weighed about 6% kg (14 lbs). EVA-1 terminated at 126:16 get after 7 hrs 11 min 11 sec. After resting inside LM and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:51 get (11:33 am est April 22). They explored Survey Ridge and Stone Mountain and said ridge was pockmarked with small, subdued craters, most about one meter {three feet) wide and some containing smaller craters within main crater. Area around South Ray Crater was strewn with sharp boulders and resembled crater in Nevada where astronauts had trained. Young and Duke turned on lrv TV so viewers could watch them walking and collecting samples high up on slope of Stone Mountain. They reported seeing more of previously discovered white soil under gray surface layers and said soil was very loosely consolidated. While ascending ridge and traversing very rocky terrain, LRV rear wheels failed to respond at full throttle, lrv continued to move, hut front wheels were digging in. Troubleshooting procedures identified mismatch of power mode switching. After change in switch configuration lrv worked properly. Astronauts took core samples and collected rocks that appeared to be volcanic, a greenish rock shaped like a snake’s head, and pure crystalline rocks. EVA was televised in color with lrv camera and was extended 20 min. During crew’s return to LM, 5-cm (2-in) portion of Young’s portable life support system (plss) antenna broke off, causing 15- to 18-db drop in signal strength. EVA—2 ended at 150:14 get after 7 hrs 23 min 26 sec. Third eva began 30 min early at 165:45 get (10:27 am est April 23)	to allow additional time near North Ray Crater and two other stations. Astronauts chipped off samples from enormous basalt rock the size of a house. All planned activities were accomplished, but astronauts had trouble configuring cosmic ray detector for stowage and return to earth, lrv covered 9% km (6 mi) and reached 17 km per hr (11 mph) going down 15° slope. TV coverage was excellent throughout eva. Total EVA-3 time was 5 hrs 40 min 14 sec—bringing total eva time to 20 hrs 14 min 54 sec and total distance traversed to 27.1 km (16.8 mi). While LM was on moon, Mattingly, orbiting moon in Casper, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. He radioed information to geologists at Mission Control to help them plan EVA—3 exploration of Stone Mountain and determine best way to approach North Ray Crater. He located radioactive hot spot on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms south of Apollo 14 landing site and gamma spectrometer identified thorium, potassium, and uranium. Mattingly also discovered, on far side of moon, volcanic lava flows that resembled maria flows and spilled out over northeast rim of crater high in mountains near lunar equator. Two areas resembled volcanic flows around Flagstaff, Ariz., where crew had trained. Many large basins on moon’s far side appeared to be covered with same kind of material that covered area around Apollo 16 site. Young and Duke depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 96.6 kg (213 lbs) of lunar samples at 175:44 get (8:26 pm est April 24). Liftoff was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully and LM crew transferred samples, film, and equipment to CSM. For first time docking was not seen on TV, because LM steerable antenna was inoperable. LM jettison was delayed one day so that astronauts could rest. After LM jettison at 195:12 GET, LM lost altitude and began tumbling, apparently because circuit breaker in attitude-and-translation-controller assembly’s primary guidance and navigation system had accidentally been left open. LM ascent stage remained in lunar orbit and was expected to impact lunar surface in about one year. Boom that carried instrument to measure atmosphere of moon was jettisoned because it would not retract and might have broken off. Orbit-shaping maneuvers were canceled to avoid firing of SPS because of degraded backup SPS thrust vector control. Scientific Subsatellite was launched at 196:14 get (4:56 est April 24)	into lunar orbit with 123.3-km (76.6-mi) apolune and 97.9-km (60.8-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 40-kg (90-lb) satellite 77 cm long and 36 cm in diameter (30 x 14 in) carried three experiments. Subsatellite extended three 1%-m (5-ft) booms, two with magnetometer sensors to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and third for stabilization. Spacecraft also carried particle shadows and boundary layer experiment to collect data on plasmas and solar flares and S-band transponder to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Expected lifetime was 6 to 9 mos—shorter than 12 mos planned because shaping burn to optimize orbit had not been performed—but Subsatellite crashed into moon May 29. Transearth injection maneuver at 200:33 get put CSM on trajectory for earth after 114 hrs 5 min (65 revolutions) in lunar orbit. April 25-27:	Good-quality TV pictures of receding moon from inside CM and of lunar surface from LRV on moon were transmitted between 227 and 229 get. At 243:35 get (3:43 pm est April 25) Mattingly left CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film cassettes from SIM on SM. Mattingly made two trips, during which he observed condition of instruments, reported that insulation paint near rocket nozzle was blistered, and deployed and exposed microbial ecological evaluation device (meed) experiment for 10 min. He reentered CSM after 1 hr 24 min. Scheduled TV press conference began at 268:13 GET and ended at 268:31 GET. Astronauts briefly described moon’s far side, including crater Guyot, which seemed to be so full of material that it overflowed and spilled down side of the crater. CM separated from SM at 290:08 GET, 15 min before entry interface at 121900-m (400 000-ft) altitude. Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and CM splashed down and flipped upside-down in mid-Pacific about 5 km (3 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 2:44 pm EST April 27, after 11-day 2-hr (265-hr 51-min) mission. After flipping spacecraft upright by inflating air bags, astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, left CM and were carried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for postflight examinations. After being declared in excellent condition, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. Young had lost 3% kg (7% lbs); Mattingly, 3 kg (6V2 lbs); and Duke, 2% kg (5% lbs), but all were “euphoric, hungry and thirsty, and walking well.” CM was retrieved and placed in dolly on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 16 objectives: to make selenologi-cal survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Descartes region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for lack of rate feedback in thrust vector control and yaw oscillations that delayed lunar landing, caused revision of lunar surface activities, and necessitated end of mission one day earlier than planned. All anomalies were quickly analyzed and resolved or compensated for by workaround procedures developed to permit mission to continue. Flight crew performance was excellent. Minor errors made by crew were attributed to fatigue and did not preclude mission success. Mission was officially judged a success. Accomplishments included largest payload (34 518 kg; 76100 lbs) placed in lunar orbit, first cosmic ray detector deployed on lunar surface, first use of far-UV camera on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (71 hrs 14 min), longest lunar surface EVA (20 hrs 15 min), and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth (96.6 kg; 213 lbs). In addition, astronauts returned 3793.5 m (12 446 ft) of exposed film used on lunar surface and in lunar orbit. Apollo 16 was 13th Apollo mission to date, 10th manned Apollo mission, and 5th successful manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 15 had been conducted July 26-Aug. 7, 1971. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-64K; NYT, 4/16-30/72; W Post, 4/16-28/72; W Star, 4/16-28/72; B Sun, 4/18/72, Al; AP, New Haven Register, 4/21/72) April 16:	Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko—first Soviet dignitary to accept invitation to watch Apollo launch—described his reaction to launch to press at Kennedy Space Center. “It was beautiful, it was poetry. It was a great impression.” Yevtushenko said he had been even more impressed on his midnight visit to the floodlit launch pad with astronaut David R. Scott, “It’s really a beautiful show, this white tender body of a rocket, supported by the clumsy but sometimes tender hands of the red gantry tower. I absolutely had the feeling of one big brother embracing his sister before a long way, a long road. It was wonderful. Silence, not people. No press. Nothing. The sky, the ground, the rocket. It was so beautiful.” (Witkin, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
Lombardo Mint’s Apollo 16 medal was among “most exciting” commemorative issues on mission offered, Baltimore Sun reported. Obverse featured lunar roving vehicle (lrv) patrolling Descartes region of moon, with view of earth on moon’s horizon and portraits of Apollo 16 crew on lower portion. Legend read: “April 16, 1972—The Descartes Region Mission—Thomas K. Mattingly, John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr.” Reverse pictured official Apollo 16 shoulder patch superimposed over lunar surface. (Gould, B Sun, 7/18/72)
President Nixon accepted resignation of John H. Chafee as Secretary of the Navy, effective at undetermined date. President also submitted to Congress nomination of r/a Allen L. Powell to succeed r/a Don A. Jones as Director of National Ocean Survey in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Dept, of Commerce, r/a Jones was retiring effective April 30. Senate confirmed nomination of Powell May 3. {PD, 4/10/72, 722, 725, 737; CR, 5/3/72, D484) April 4-6:	Moscow meeting of NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences delegations confirmed desirability of joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking test mission and established understanding on management and operation of mission to be conducted in 1975, subject to government approval. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, led U.S. delegation. Soviet delegation was headed by Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, Acting President of Soviet Academy. Parties agreed to use of U.S. Apollo spacecraft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft with systems developed by both sides, to specific documents for development of joint documentation, and to principles for preparatory and operational phases of mission. (Summary of results; NASA Release 5/24/72) April 5:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that LeRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information on the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be operated in about 6 months. Results . . . indicate that we may expect to better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given to industry on a continuing hasis. . . . We can expect some of our improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before completion of our program.” NASA—aec Spade Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein testified: “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future. For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening—mandatory for certain military missions—and low recurring costs for multiple missions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For unmanned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications missions as communications satellites. In manned missions . . . overriding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor systems were needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy missions to far planets. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski reported that satellite network included 10 electronic ground stations operated by NASA, supplemented by optical tracking network operated by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Electronic stations provided worldwide system that tracked each satellite, determined status of onboard systems, commanded satellite functions, and acquired data. Optical stations, which included laser capabilities at selected sites, provided specialized services in precision orbital tracking. (Transcript)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, was promoted by Air Force to rank of brigadier general. At 42 he was youngest officer of flag rank in any U.S. service and third astronaut to attain flag rank. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been promoted to rear admiral by Navy in December 1971 and James A. McDivitt to brigadier general by Air Force in March. Stafford had been Apollo 10 commander and Gemini 6 pilot. (nasa Release 72-235)
Leading figures in Federal Government monopoly suit against International Business Machines Corp. would visit Kennedy Space Center during Apollo 17 mission to examine computer operations, Washington Post reported. U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein, with lawyers from IBM and Dept, of Justice, would fly from New York. Similar trip had been proposed for April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission but NASA had opposed visit on grounds that it could lead to breach or relaxation of security and safety regulations. Visit was to educate court on nature of IBM equipment used during launch. (Mintz, W Post, 11/23/72, A29)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) press conference was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Participants were Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director; Glynn S. Lunney, astp Director for U.S.; Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Intercosmos Council of Soviet Academy of Sciences; and Konstantin D. Bushuyev, astp Director for U.S.S.R. Lunney said that during series of meetings that had begun July 6, U.S. and U.S.S.R. had discussed and agreed on “the technical content of three very important project level documents”: project technical proposal that described mission and hardware elements, organizational plan that described how countries would work together in controlling project before and during flight, and schedule of activities. Officials had also concluded “technically detailed documents describing the agreements that we’ve reached on various systems,” such as docking aids, docking targets, control systems, and docking mechanism. Further technical discussions would be held in U.S.S.R. in fall. Preliminary plans called for launch of Apollo spacecraft carrying three astronauts 7% hrs after launch of Soyuz with two cosmonauts. Second Soyuz would be ready as backup if Apollo could not be launched during one of three launch opportunities. On Apollo’s 14th revolution spacecraft would rendezvous and dock, using U.S.-built docking mechanism on Apollo. After docking, two astronauts would pass through airlock into Soyuz and spend several hours with cosmonauts before returning to Apollo for night. Next day one astronaut and one cosmonaut would exchange places for whole day. After returning to own spacecraft, crews would undock vehicles and complete separate missions. Apollo would probably remain in orbit nine more days and Soyuz about one more day. Docking would be televised. Bushuyev praised “friendly atmosphere” and “wonderful conditions” of meetings and said friendliness was “the greatest achievement and the most important assurance for the success in our future work. The difficult tasks that we are called upon to solve . . . would be impossible unless these conditions existed. We are on the first stage of a very long and difficult journey. I believe that the most important thing that we succeeded in achieving so far is the following: We succeeded in identifying and solving those basic and important problems without the solution of which further work . . . would be impossible. These various problems which we have now solved will permit us to start the planning, design, and actual construction and manufacture of the various assemblies . . . necessary for the realization of our project.” (Transcript; nytns, W Star, 7/18/72, A4)
Newspapers continued editorial comment on decision to develop space New York Times: “The space shuttle is far less expensive than the Apollo project, and, fortunately, is not being launched in the atmosphere of Cold War hysteria that attended the birth of the lunar landing effort. On the contrary, NASA has already stated publicly it would welcome cooperation on the space shuttle from other industrially developed nations, including the Soviet Union. The argument that the space shuttle is simply another SST boondoggle has little validity. The potential benefits are far greater, and the space shuttle presents none of the environmental problems that counted so heavily against the supersonic transport.” (NYT, 1/8/72, 28) Detroit News: “It is good that the $24 billion outlay on the Apollo moon program is not to he wasted by the United States dropping out of the space program. Mission Impossible became mission accomplished because there was a national commitment to beat the Russians to the moon. The fact that the race has been won, however, should not blind Americans that it was only the first, tentative step in unlocking the mysteries of space. If we don’t press on, others will.” (D News, 1/8/72)
Congressional restraints on sale of military aircraft and equipment to developing nations were “not working,” and had cost U.S. aerospace industry “more than $800 million and 70,000 to 90,000 jobs in the last two years,” Copley News Service reported. Denied credit purchases of jets and other modern aeronautical equipment, nations once dependent on U.S. had turned to United Kingdom, France, Italy, Scandinavian countries, and Japan. U.S.S.R. was “trying to push its way into the market, particularly in Latin America.” (San Diego Union, 4/9/72, 20) April 10:	Six-day countdown for Apollo 16 began at 8:30 am est at Kennedy Space Center. Spacecraft was scheduled for launch at 12:45 pm est April 16. (AP, NYT, 4/11/72, 15)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced completion of design certification reviews on Saturn boosters to be used on Skylab missions, dcrs on Skylab payload—including Orbital Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and Apollo Telescope Mount—would be completed within three months, (msfc Release 72—96)
Federal Electric Corp. had received 1-yr, $19.9-million extension of contract with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Contract was for instrumentation and communications support services to Kennedy Space Center for Apollo and Skylab launches. Extension brought total value of contract to $113.9 million. (Av Wk, 7/3/72, 20) July 4:	NASA released mid-year review of items of collateral space technology which had been adapted to improve quality of life on earth. Items included compact, automatic gas analyzer that measured air in lungs to monitor human pulmonary and cardiovascular activity; temperature-activated remote thermistor alarm that sounded at nurse’s station when infant’s breathing stopped in hospital room; electroencephalograph helmet to diagnose hearing defects in children; powered prosthetic hand; portable light indicator for blind persons; ear oximeter to measure oxygen content of blood by noting red and infrared light absorption; analyzer to record intensity of sleep; and computer motion pictures that projected three-dimensional image of heart areas for study by physicians. Items used in industry included compound to prevent fogging of lenses; low-voltage switching circuits; fire-retardant or nonflammable foams, paints, fabrics, and glass fiber laminates; rapid-scan infrared tire tester; land-surveying system using laser and telescope that viewed laser pulse above obstructions; and management system develJuly 4:	NASA’s mid-year review of collateral space technology benefits on the earth described a compact, fully automatic, mobile medical gas analyser (above). The analyser measured composition of air breathed in and exhaled from the lungs to monitor pulmonary and cardiovascular activity in patients, f tula stria! items included an uitrathin, two-volt switching circuit for buildings. Low-volt circuits were displayed at the Second Annual Urban Technology Conference in San Francisco July 24-26, oped by NASA to supply daily updated information in Apollo program. (NASA Release 72-132)
National Science Foundation issued Manpower and Financial Resources Allocated to Academic Science and Engineering Activities, 1965-71 (nsf 72-302). Universities and colleges employed 273 800 full- and part-time scientists and engineers in January 1971, 6% per year increase from January 1969. Annual increase rate had been 8% 19651969. Current and capital expenditures for science and engineering totaled $7.9 billion in 1970, 6% increase per year over 1968. Annual increase rate had been 15% 1964-1968. In constant dollar terms based on Gross National Product, 1968-1970 increase averaged only 1% per year, while 1964-1968 rate of growth averaged 12% per year. Annual growth rate of 6% in expenditures for scientific and engineering activities in current dollars during 1968—1970 was considerably lower than the 16% “nonscientific” activities in universities and colleges 1968-1970. (nsf Highlights, 3/20/72, 1) March 20-23:	New uses of electrical energy developed from NASA research were exhibited at Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers convention in New York. Exhibit included patient-assist devices for human rehabilitation, “life signs” monitoring systems for hospitals and nursing homes, powered prosthetic hand replacement, portable light indicator for blind persons, sight-switch-operated wheelchair, system for recording school attendance, private alarm systems, gas analysis system for checking room or container atmospheres, system of easily concealed circuitry for controlling lights and appliances, bacteria detection equipment, and long-range laser surveying system. (nasa Release 72—57) March 21:	President Nixon sent letter to Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director: “As we approach the final countdown for Apollo 16, I want you and all the men and women of Apollo to know how much this nation values your splendid efforts. The moon flight program has captured the imagination of our times as has no other human endeavor. You and your team have, in fact, written the first chapter in the history of man’s exploration of space, and all future achievements must credit all of you for having blazed the path. Countless people throughout the world will soon be sharing with you the excitement of Apollo 16’s voyage, and I know I speak for all of them in conveying to you my warmest best wishes for a safe and successful flight. Good luck!” Dr. Petrone later sent copy of President’s letter to Apollo team. (Petrone letter)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., blamed pressures of public life following participation in first lunar landing July 20, 1969, for mental condition that had forced him to seek psychiatric help. In interview published by Los Angeles Times, Aldrin—who had announced retirement as Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., effective March 1—said he was writing book about “personal experiences.” {LA Times, 2/27/72, Al)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 17 crew at Kennedy Space Center to extend best wishes on eve of Apollo 17 mission. (PD, 12/11/72, 1735)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of U.S. Air Force. First Secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington had been sworn in Sept. 18, 1947, effective date of transfer of Army air activities to Dept, of the Air Force established by Armed Forces Unification Act of July 26, 1947. Publications during September commemorated Silver Anniversary. Airman editorial noted it has been more than 50 yrs since advent of military aviation “and it is virtually impossible to divide the technological achievements and amazing advances over that span of years into categories like ‘pre-autonomy’ or ‘post-autonomy.’ ” It was spirit that counted—“that indomitable, driving, probing, questioning, seeking perseverance, and sheer genius that has taken man from Kittyhawk to the moon in what is really an incredibly short period of time.” Air Force System Command’s Newsreview traced historical highlights of its bases and organizations. Arnold Engineering Development Center (aedc) near Tullahoma, Tenn., had been established in 1953 at recommendation of aeronautical scientist Dr. Theodore von Karman. Center currently consisted of 40 test units that provided “simulated flight-test capability ranging in speed to more than 20 times the speed of sound and to altitudes around 1,000 miles [1600 kilometers].” Center’s replacement value was $840 million. Patrick Air Force Base, Fla,, had grown with space program. Launch of V—2 from Eastern Test Range at Patrick in 1950 “was the first step to the moon. That goal, now accomplished five times, leaves the future of space exploration on the threshold of a dream.” Future of the Air Force was discussed by Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) in Armed Forces Journal issue dedicated to Air Force Silver Anniversary. “It would be very easy ... to take off on rhetorical flights of overcoming the unlimited challenges of aerospace. The challenges do exist; and they could conceivably mean that the future of the Air Force will include the use of remotely piloted vehicles, hypersonic aircraft, and the laser. But if these, and anything else man can envision and produce, do exist in the future, they will only be the means for Air Force people to do their basic job of providing this country with the aerospace power required for defense and security. As in the past 25 years, success in the future depends heavily on the dedication and quality of Air Force people.” (Airman, 9/72, 25; AFSC Newsreview, 9/72, 6, 9; AFJ, 9/72; Dept of AF, A Chronology of American Air Space Events, 1/3/61)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans participated in final prelaunch test aboard spacecraft. Astronauts wore spacesuits for simulated liftoff of Saturn V rocket. Following test, launch crew began to ready command module “America” and lunar module “Challenger” for start of actual countdown scheduled for Nov. 30. (AT, B Sun, 11/22/72, A5)
Two proposed flight plans, both with nighttime launch, for December Apollo 17 mission were being studied by Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston Post reported. Proposed launch times—selected for optimum sun angle during lunar landing and surface activities—were 8:39 pm Est Dec. 6, with lunar landing at 1:47 am est Dec. 11, and 8:48 pm est Dec 6, with lunar landing at 1:47 pm est Dec. 11. Nighttime liftoff would he first in U.S. manned program. (Maloney, H Post, 5/15/72)	_
Display of sculpture “Scott and Irwin on the Moon” by Red Grooms opened at Guggenheim Museum in New York. Diorama showing moon, Apollo 15 lunar roving vehicle Rover and huge figure of astronaut had been commissioned as part of NASA-National Gallery of Art “Eyewitness to Space” program but Grooms had paid all of his own expenses. Washington Post art critic Paul Richard later said work managed “to capture something of the scale, something of the heroism and the hubris, of man’s exploration of the moon.” It should “move to some public place, the National Portrait Gallery, perhaps, after it leaves the Guggenheim on Feb. 27.” (W Post, 1/19/72, Bl)
New York Times editorial praised Apollo program in which U.S. had “attained one of its finest hours.” Astronauts had gone to moon in “spirit of peace and selflessness.” They had been “seeking knowledge, not gold or slaves or other wealth. They went there consciously as representatives of all mankind, not as imperialists seeking to bring the moon under the Stars and Stripes. What they learned has been made available to all peoples and all nations without any request for a quid pro quo. In the atmosphere created by Project Apollo—with its constant reminder that what united men is stronger than what divides them—it was easier to reduce cold war tensions, to end the original space race, and to begin genuine international collaboration in cosmic exploration. Project Apollo has helped consecrate the moon and space to the cause of peace and cooperation among all men. This has been a glorious adventure in whose successful outcome the people of America and of the world can properly take pride.” (NYT, 12/17/72)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Manned Spacecraft Center atmospheric composition and photography experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) June 22:	Press conference on preliminary results of Apollo 16 experiments was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Fairouk El-Baz of photo-geology team described metric camera photo of old, three-ring basin about 960 km (600 mi) in diameter on far side of moon. Eastern part of ring coincided with “what the Soviets had called some 10 years ago right after the Luna 3 photographs . . . the Soviet Mountains.” NASA had concluded from Lunar Orbiter and Apollo 8 photos that formation was not mountains but “the coincidence of very bright rays from two relatively young craters,” and U.S.S.R. had conceded to elimination of Soviet Mountains from lunar dictionary. Apollo 16 photos showed, however, that “what we have here is really the Soviet Mountains rediscovered, so to speak, that is part of a middle ring of a very old basin.” Dr. EI-Baz said that, pending approval of International Astronomical Union, large basin would be named Arabia in honor of Arab contributions to astronomy, eastern range of middle ring of basin would be called Soviet Mountains, and long western range of middle ring discovered by Apollo 16 would be called American Mountains. Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said May 13 meteorite impact on moon “may well turn out to be the most important single seismic event the Apollo Network will record in its life unless the good fairy sends us another fragment of rock. It provided very important confirmation of the structure that we have proposed based on the S-IVB impact.” Seismometers had also recorded other meteorite impacts and dozens of moonquakes. “We’ve been able to establish at least the presence of 20 different moonquake source locations. They . . . have the familiar pattern which can be correlated with lunar tides and hence are triggered by lunar tides.” Most puzzling question was what energy source within moon caused moonquakes. “We don’t have the answer to that. We do have the puzzling fact that the two source zones we’ve located are nearly 900 kilometers [560 miles] deep . . . the depth at which our very tentative evidence places a reflector. . . . there seems something special about that depth. All of the Moon above that depth within our network area, at least, must be . . . solid. Very high frequency seismic waves can propagate through it. Such high frequencies are eliminated from terrestrial earthquake signals by a partially molten low velocity zone.” If part of moon were molten, “it’s either in very, very small isolated pockets or at greater depth than 1000 kilometers [620 miles].” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said about 90% of Apollo 16 lunar samples consisted of aluminum-and calcium-rich material. “The aluminum and calcium concentration . . . approach the composition of pure plagioclase ... a name component of . . . anorthosite. They are very typical of what one finds in the highlands anywhere on the moon where we have any chemical data. Now, the negative side of that conclusion is that these rocks are not as had been thought prior to the mission, a kind of volcanic rock that is rich in silica ... a viscous volcanic rock. It’s quite definite that the so-called Cayley formation ... is not a volcanic formation and I think we can generalize with some confidence that... it probably is not a volcanic formation in the other places on the moon where it has been identified or mapped in, either. There are a few rocks . . . which are distinctly different” from the rest in lower aluminum concentration, 15 to 18 percent, and higher magnesium-iron concentration with composition that could be that of volcanic rocks. They were also high in potassium and phosphorus. From Apollo data scientists had identified four major types of rocks: grey breccias that contained black and white clasts (rock fragments); black feldspar rock that appeared under microscope to be igneous because it was tough and dense; very white cataclasites of crushed plagioclase-rich material; and crystalline rocks. One rock in Apollo 16 samples, “rusty rock,” was covered by red, rust-like coating. Identification of rust, so far, was only visual; x-ray and mineralogical tests had not yet been made. “It may turn out to be ... a more exotic type of iron compound than simple rust. It’s quite definite that this ... is something that’s rusting; it’s something that took place on the Moon . . . not ... in the spacecraft on the way back or from handling the rock. The coatings are dispersed through the inside of the rock and too thick and too diverse to have been formed in the spacecraft.” (Transcript)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. space mission scheduled for 1975 would include 48-hr linkup of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and crew exchange, Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said in report released by Tass. Coyuz spacecraft, manned by two cosmonauts, would be launched first. “In seven and a half hours, Apollo spaceship manned by three astronauts will be launched from Cape Kennedy. In 24 hours, Apollo will approach the Soyuz ship and link up will be made. The system that will be formed will be operated as a single spacecraft. Within two days, spacemen will move from one ship to another, scientific and technical experiments will be made and there will be television transmissions to the earth. At the end of the third day, the spaceships will be undocked and will soon land on their respective territories.” Shatalov said he hoped manned Mars mission before end of 20th century would be international flight—“Possibly it will be the Soviet-American flight.” (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, L2)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate John A. Volpe to be U.S. Ambassador to Italy and Claude S. Brinegar to succeed Volpe as Secretary of Transportation. Nominations were sent to Senate Jan. 4. {PD, 12/11/72, 1735; 1/8/72, 12) December 8:	Soviet newspapers Pravda and Komsomolskaya carried detailed reports of Apollo 17 progress and photos of astronauts on second day of moon-landing mission. Pravda story ended: “We wish them success.” Komsomolskaya said mission was “one of the most daring measures ever carried out by mankind, and undoubtedly the most expensive experiment ever in the area of science and technology.” Washington Post Foreign Service said “new tone in newspaper coverage” reflected high-level decision to cover some U.S. news more sympathetically in “period of Soviet-American detente.” (Kaiser, W Post, 12/9/72, A3)
Appointment of Owen G. Morris as Manager, Apollo Spacecraft Program, was announced by Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Manned Spacecraft Center Director. Morris, former manager for lunar module in program office, succeeded b/g James A. McDivitt (usaf), who became Special Assistant to the Center Director for Organizational Affairs. Appointments were effective immediately, (msc Release 72-85)
Press conference on scientific results of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, project scientist, said Mars “used to he likened to earth in science fiction, and was compared to the moon after the first pictures from Mariner 4 in 1965. Now we are seeing that Mars has a character all its own. It is not earth-like or moon-like, it is Mars-like.” Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey said Mars could be divided into four major geological provinces: Nix Olympica-Tharis volcanic province with volcanoes up to 8 km (5 mi) high and 500 km (300 mi) in diameter; Ophir-Eos equatorial plateau region with faults and rifts 5 km (3 mi) deep; cratered and smooth terrains with large circular basins like lunar impact basins; and south polar cratered terrain covered with glacial sediment layers up to 100 m (330 ft) thick. Convincing evidence that water had played active role in evolution of Mars was shown in Mariner 9 photos of deep, winding channels that might have once been beds of fast-flowing streams. Masursky suggested two explanations for apparent heavy rains and floods on Mars in past: volcanic heat might have melted water ice stored below surface as permafrost or increased dosages of sunlight on polar caps every 50 000 yrs, because of axis wobbling, might have melted polar caps completely. Dr. Geoffrey A. Biggs of Jpl described north polar hood of variable clouds that appeared to have general west-to-east flow pattern, with some systems resembling small cyclones. Photos also showed “white cloud phenomenon”—brilliant white spots, believed to be water ice clouds, associated with volcanoes. “The clouds appear mostly in the afternoon, when warmer air is moving up the slopes and cooling as it goes.” Pictures of north polar area showed wavelike clouds “formed by a simple, harmonic movement of air, of winds up to 115 miles per hour [185 kilometers per hour] . . . very much like the cold fronts shown in earth atmosphere pictures.” (Summary statement and abstracts; Wilford, NYT, 6/15/72, 1; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 6/15/72)
New York Times editorial commented on space cooperation: “These past few years astronomy has probably advanced further than in any previous century since the invention of the telescope. Fantastic progress has been made through American and Soviet exploration of the moon, Mars and Venus.” Need was “to build on this new base of knowledge with a program of further manned and unmanned space exploration conducted under a system of international cooperation which combines the resources, manpower and knowledge of many nations. No generation has ever faced a nobler challenge than space now poses before all humanity.” (NYT, 4/16/72, 5:12)
Declining costs of food for space flights was cited by Manned Spacecraft Center Chief of Food and Nutrition, Dr. Malcolm C. Smith, in interview published by Los Angeles Times. Daily rations for each pre-Apollo astronaut in space cost about $300; first Apollo rations, $190; Apollo 15, $142; and Apollo 16, $75. Costs for packaging, inspection, and preparation accounted for major share of expense. Food itself was donated by manufacturers and producers. About 100 companies participated. (Voltz, LA Times, 2/28/72)
United Nations General Assembly’s First Committee concluded debate on peaceful uses of outer space and unanimously adopted resolution approving Committee report. Resolution noted progress in draft treaty on moon, welcomed progress in international cooperation in exploration of outer space, and approved of agreement between U.S. and U.S.S.R. on development of compatible docking equipment for carrying out joint scientific experiments. Draft resolution on preparation of principles for use of satellites for direct broadcasting was endorsed by 68 votes with 12 against and 18 abstentions. Among those against were U.S.S.R. and other nations that favored defeated Soviet draft convention that would ban unrestricted use of satellites for direct TV broadcasting to other states [see Oct. 12 and Nov. 9]. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/25/72, A6; UN Gen Assembly Documents A/8863, A/8864, 11/1/72; NYT, 11/10/72, 16)
Apollo 10 command module and mock-up of Apollo lunar roving vehicle were part of exhibition “Research and Development in the U.S.A.” that opened in Moscow. Exhibit had been in Ibilisi, capital of Soviet Georgia, earlier, in scheduled tour of six Soviet cities. (Reuters, NYT, 3/23/72, 6)
Approval by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences of report of May 8-12, 1972, joint meeting of experts on lunar cartography in Washington, D.C., was announced by NASA. Experts had exchanged documents on lunar coordinating systems and map making and agreed on joint development of principles for compiling lunar maps, on joint program to compile complete lunar map on scale of 1 to 5 000 000, and on development of common basic system of selendetic coordinates. Experts would exchange drafts and proposals for review, then meet to make recommendations for submission to cochairmen of Joint Working Group on the Exploration of Near-Earth Space, the Moon and the Planets, (nasa Release 72-186)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
Delegation from Federation of American Scientists (fas), nongovernment organization, left for People’s Republic of China to explore means of improving contacts between Chinese and American scientists. (Science, 5/19/72, 783) May 14:	Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp said in Washington Post article that NASA followed “cart-before-the-horse” or “rocket-before-payload policy” in figuring shuttle costs. Question to be debated was not shuttle transportation “but the basic purpose and worth of payloads.” NASA was “sorely perplexed as a federal agency whose basic mission was accomplished when men landed on the moon.” Skylab mission in 1973, “when a temporary, makeshift station is placed in orbit,” would end NASA manned space flight “unless the shuttle project goes ahead. In a sense, it’s a shuttle to nowhere unless a permanent space station is also approved. This project, last costed at $10 billion, was once the basic rationale of the shuttle, but its price tag scared off congressmen. Now NASA downplays the space station, but the Jan. 31, 1972, Mathe-matica study includes 62 shuttle trips to space stations in one scenario.” (W Post, 5/14/72, B3)
First successful experimental demonstration in U.S. of magnetic levitation system (maglev) was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. maglev—system for suspending vehicle above guideway with power supplied by supercooled magnets—would permit trains to travel at speeds up to 480 km per hr (300 mph) without physical contact with rails or guideway. Test was performed in Menlo Park, Calif., by Stanford Research Institute under contract to Dept, of Transportation, (dot Release 100-72) November 22:	Deputy Director James A. Lovell, Jr., of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Science and Applications Directorate announced intention to retire from space program to press at Msc. As astronaut he had spent more time in space than any other U.S. astronaut. Lovell had been Gemini 4 backup pilot, Gemini 7 pilot, Gemini 9 backup command pilot, Gemini 12 command pilot, Apollo 8 command module pilot, Apollo 11 backup command pilot, and Apollo 13 commander. Lovell told press he was examining offers from New York and Chicago business firms. “This is not something that I would choose to do under other circumstances but . . . there are not enough slots for us guys who want to remain in the operations end of space flight.” Lovell said he would remain with NASA until completion of Apollo 17 mission, (upi, W Post, 10/24/72, A5)
Newspaper editorials commented on successful launch of Apollo 17: New York Times: “It is still a breathtaking concept, though five teams of astronauts have successfully accomplished similar feats since Apollo 11 made its historic breakthrough in July 1969. The nearcatastrophe which forced abortion of the Apollo 13 mission provides a useful reminder of the dangers involved despite all the exquisitely painstaking care taken before blast-off.” Astronauts had “special qualities which set them apart. Some day . . . taking a rocket to the moon will be as common as taking a plane to London is today. But the Apollo pioneers who have blazed the way had to have a special degree of competence and courage to embark on this extraordinary journey.” {NYT, 12/7/72)
Apollo 16 astronauts were honored with luncheon and hour-long ceremony at Kennedy Space Center. Astronauts greeted KSC employees who had worked to make mission successful. (O Sen, 5/18/72; KSC pao)
Legal Subcommittee of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space began four-week session in Geneva to study Soviet draft treaty for cooperation in exploration and use of moon. Draft treaty had been submitted to U.N. in June 1971. At opening session U.S. representative Herbert K. Reis proposed that nations planning manned or unmanned lunar missions be required to notify U.N. in advance and that Soviet draft treaty be amended to permit use of military personnel or facilities on moon for peaceful purposes. (NYT, 4/11/72, 10)	_
NASA published Apollo 15 Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP—289) containing mission description, summary of scientific results, photographic summary, crew observations, findings from geologic investigation of landing site, findings from lunar sample examination, and results of specific experiments on July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. (Text)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union address before joint session of Congress and sent written message to Congress. He said in speech: “In reaching the moon, we demonstrated what miracles American technology is capable of achieving. Now the time has come to move more deliberately toward making full use of that technology here on earth, of harnessing the wonders of science to the service of man.” He would propose new “Federal partnership” in technological research and development “with Federal incentives to increase private research, federally supported research on projects ... to improve our everyday lives.” In written message President said dealings with U.S.S.R. had “advanced the prospects for limiting strategic armaments. We have moved toward greater cooperation in space research and toward improving our economic relationships.” President said he would request Dept, of Defense budget increase “to preserve the sufficiency of our strategic nuclear deterrent, including an allocation of over $900 million to improve our sea-based deterrent force.” He had instructed dod “to develop a program to build additional missile launching submarines, carrying a new and far more effective missile.” Space program had been reoriented to produce increased domestic benefits: “In recent years, America has focused a large share of the technological energy on projects for defense and for space. These projects have had great value. Defense technology has helped us preserve our freedom and protect the peace. Space technology has enabled us to share unparalleled adventures and to lift our sights beyond earth’s bounds. The daily life of the average man has also been improved by much of our defense and space research—for example, by work on radar, jet engines, nuclear reactors, communications and weather satellites, and computers. Defense and space projects have also enabled us to build and maintain our general technological capacity, which—as a result—can now be more readily applied to civilian purposes. “America must continue with strong and sensible programs of research and development for defense and for space. I have felt for some time, however, that we should also be doing more to apply our scientific and technological genius directly to domestic opportunities. Toward this end, I have already increased our civilian research and development budget by more than 40 percent since 1969 and have directed the National Science Foundation to give more attention to this area .... “I recently announced support for the development of a new earth orbital vehicle that promises to introduce a new era in space research.” Reusable space shuttle would lower cost and risk of space operations and open new opportunities in weather forecasting, communications, monitoring natural resources, and air traffic safety. “The space shuttle is a wise national investment.” Proposals included increase of $700 million in civilian R&D, 15% increase over previous year. And technically oriented agencies like NASA and Atomic Energy Commission would work more closely with agencies with primary social mission like Dept, of Transportation. {PD, 1/24/72, 74-92)
Future need for public administrators who understood science and technology was forecast by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in speech before American Society of Public Administrators in New York. Sociological and technological components of world problems raised problems to “new level of complexity.” Management and public administration teams were examining “successful conduct of the Apollo program—the most complicated and difficult technical task ever undertaken by man.” However, “in Apollo we were carrying out a highly complex, but basically technical program. Essentially we were dealing with machines, not people.” Asked if U.S. should use Apollo program approach to solve environmental problems, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman had told interviewer: “I don’t think that I would care to live in a country that solved its social problems in the same way we solved the Apollo problems.” Dr. Fletcher agreed “our Science-Administrator needs for the future should not he equated with needs for better technical program managers, although this too will become increasingly important. In developing and formulating wise and sound policies and programs to tackle our emerging problems, it will be essential to have individuals within all governmental levels who are capable of understanding the potentials of science and technology . . . and who are alert to their ultimate purposes and consequences. ... It is in this role that I conceive of the new Science-Administrator. (Text)
Press conference on overall aspects of May 24 U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement was held at Manned Spacecraft Center during meetings of NASA and Soviet working groups [see July 6-18]. Participants included Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Soviet Intercosmos Council; Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director; and Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs. Dr. Low said “great deal” had been accomplished in all areas covered by cooperation agreement. Working groups were meeting almost constantly. Nations had exchanged lunar samples from all flights through Apollo 15 and Luna 20 and were about to exchange samples on Apollo 16. Area of greatest interest was rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Talks on joint mission were “going extremely well.” Petrov said Soviet people had been informed of plans for joint space flight “at the same time as the American people”—when technical discussions were in progress. “Our press, just as your press, carried information on the discussions.” Asked if foreign press would be permitted to witness launch of Soviet Soyuz during joint mission, Petrov said both Apollo spacecraft and Soyuz launch would be conducted “under the same conditions as all previous launches.” Question on control of mission was deferred to conference on joint rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for July 17, but Dr. Low said “general principle” would be that, “while the Soviet cosmonauts are visiting in our Apollo command module, we will be in command; when we’re visiting in their Soyuz, they will be in command of that ship . . . and we will be under their command.” Petrov said he hoped, and was certain, “that this first test flight will not be the last one” and that theic ,,rould be possibility of space rescue flights if needed, “regardless of what country’s spacecraft are involved.” If test flight was successful, Dr. Low said, “our plans are to equip the Space Shuttle with this kind of a docking system. We don’t think that we will need a follow-on test but instead we will be flying operationally with compatible systems beyond that point.” Asked to comment on Soviet Venus probe Venus 8, launched March 27, Petrov said spacecraft should reach planet at month’s end. “That vehicle will release another one which should come down onto the surface of Venus.” Soviet scientists had done everything possible to guarantee mission’s success, “but what is not excluded is the possibility of a landing in such a position ... or place where transmission of information will not last for very long.” Probe was expected to provide data to increase understanding of planet’s surface and structure, “which is not only a question of increasing our knowledge but which can . . . clarify the origins and structure of . . . Earth.” Data already transmitted for Venus 8 had been “so new and so unexpected and so interesting.” (Transcript)
Hayden Planetarium in New York announced it was showing serigraphs created by photographer Len Gittleman from photos taken by panoramic camera on Apollo 15 spacecraft. (Am Mus-Hayden Planetarium Release) December 14:	President Nixon issued statement following liftoff from moon of Apollo 17 lunar module Challenger: “As the Challenger leaves the surface of the moon, we are conscious not of what we leave behind, but of what lies before us. The dreams that draw humanity forward seem always to be redeemed if we believe in them strongly enough, and pursue them with diligence and courage. Once we stood mystified by the stars; today we reach out to them. We do this not only because it is man’s destiny to dream the impossible, to dare the impossible, and to do the impossible, but also because in space, as on earth, there are new answers and new opportunities for the improvement and the enlargement of human existence. “This may be the last time this century that men will walk on the moon. But space exploration will continue, the benefits of space exploration will continue, the search for knowledge through the exploration of space will continue, and there will be new dreams to pursue based on what we have learned. So let us neither mistake the significance nor miss the majesty of what we have witnessed. Few events have ever marked so clearly the passage of history from one epoch to another. If we understand this about the last flight of Apollo, then truly we shall have touched a ‘many-splendored thing.’ ” {PD, 12/18/72, 1758-9)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics would sponsor U.S. aerospace industry trade exhibit in Moscow in early spring 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Exhibit would center on air traffic control equipment but probably would include other aviation and avionics gear. U.S.S.R. was expected to purchase $10 million to $20 million worth of equipment but total orders might exceed $1 billion. (Av Wk, 12/18/72, 30) December 19:	Following successful splashdown—after Dec. 7 launch on longest lunar mission—Apollo 17 astronauts were greeted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga by 12 Congressmen. President Nixon telephoned his personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said Apollo program results would “give us such scientific values that we will be required to have another lunar program before the end of the century.” (AP, NYT, 12/20/72, 30; PD, 12/25/72, 1789)
Soviet news agency Tass reported completion of Polar Morning—joint U.S.S.R. and France experiment at E. T. Krenkel Hydrometeorological Observatory in Arctic. During three-month expedition, series of meteorological rockets 'had carried Soviet and French payloads to altitudes between 90 and 180 km (56 and 112 mi) during period of transition from winter to summer and from polar night to polar day. Data were obtained on atmospheric temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud formations, corpuscular radiation, and solar activity. (FBIS-Sov, 6/16/72, LI) June 15:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Apollo 16 Astronauts Charles M. Duke, Jr., John W. Young, and Thomas K. Mattingly II met with President Nixon at White House to discuss April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission and joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Following discussion Dr. Fletcher and astronauts held press conference. Dr. Fletcher said President was “very pleased” with progress made toward joint mission. “The President particularly wanted to emphasize that . . . this is only the beginning of what he conceives as a long association with the Soviet Union in many other areas of space cooperation. ... we are busy working on other kinds of things that we can do together . . . perhaps through the turn of the century, doing things together for economic reasons and because he feels strongly that the international aspect of this is important in improving relationships. If we can do this together, we can do other things together.” President also emphasized worldwide space cooperation. As areas for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in future, Dr. Fletcher thought “the ones we can be sure of” were “the cooperative program on Mars [and] a new cooperative program on Venus, where we explore the upper atmosphere and the entire atmosphere and they explore the surface. We are going to be doing that together.” (Other nasa officials explained later these would be coordinated efforts rather than joint missions.) July meeting of principals at Manned Spacecraft Center would “iron out the management” of joint docking mission. Astronaut Young said that “real problem” was communication; “once we solve that problem we can prove that we can work together in a lot of other areas besides.” Dr. Fletcher said plans for joint astronaut and cosmonaut training had not been concluded, “but it is going to be absolutely essential that the cosmonauts come over here and train on our equipment and vice versa. That much has been agreed to.” Training program probably would start “within about a year.” Dr. Fletcher summed up progress made on joint mission since May 24 signing of cooperation agreement: “We have set up the agenda for the meeting which will primarily involve the management aspects. ... We also have, at home, worked out some of the details of the specifications . . . and now are waiting approval.” Perhaps most “spectacular” progress had been “great enthusiasm from Congress for the mission, particularly when we told them this was not going to cost any more money.” (Transcript; WSJ, 6/16/72)	.
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences met in closed session to hear testimony from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 15 astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin on Apollo 15 commercialism. Discussed were selling of stamp covers carried on mission and of replicas of statue “Fallen Astronaut” placed on moon during mission. Following meeting Committee Chairman, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), issued statement: “The testimony of NASA management and of the astronauts was forthright and complete. There is no doubt that certain provisions of NASA’s Standards of Conduct for NASA Employees were violated by the astronauts for which they have been punished. The question of whether or not they violated any law is being examined. No conclusions were reached by the Committee at this meeting and the Committee will decide at a later time what further action it will take.” (CR, 8/3/72, D869; Text)
Soviet scientists who had examined lunar samples brought to earth by Luna 16 and Apollo 11 had reported findings on lunar iron, Tass announced. Lunar iron was almost completely void of impurities and had not been affected by corrosion, in spite of its long presence on earth. Scientists maintained “that lunar vacuum and high temperature during the supposed eruptions of volcanoes themselves served as reducers of pure iron out of compounds.” (fbis-Sov, 8/15/72, L2)
Apollo Telescope Mount was shipped from Marshall Space Flight Center to Manned Spacecraft Center, where it would undergo alignment tests. The 11800-kg (24 000-lb) spacecraft, housing telescopes and other instruments for studying sun, would be launched on Skylab Orbital Workshop in April 1973. (msfc Release 72-77)
Houston Chronicle editorial commented on Apollo 17 mission and crew: “To some, the Moon trip is already looked upon as routine and there is less public anticipation than ever before. Nonetheless, there is no way to diminish our pride that these are Americans making this flight, that our nation has bridged space and that these men call the Houston area home.” (H Chron, 11/20/72) November 21-30:	NASA successfully launched European Space Research Organization’s Esro 4 by four-stage Scout-D launch vehicle from Western Test Range at 4:17 pst. Satellite entered orbit with 1187-km (737.6-mi) apogee, 253-km (157.2-mi) perigee, 99-min period, and 91.1° inclination. Primary NASA objectives were to place spacecraft—eighth in esro flight program on U.S. vehicles—in earth orbit that would permit investigations of phenomena in polar atmosphere and to provide tracking and telemetry support. By Nov. 30, flight data indicated objectives were met and mission was adjudged success. Esro 4 carried six experiments from four countries: study of positive ions in ionosphere (United Kingdom) ; study of composition and total mass density of natural gas in upper atmosphere and exosphere (West Germany) ; study of low-energy-particle precipitation in auroral zones (Sweden); investigation of polar-cap-absorption events (Netherlands) ; measurement of flux and energy spectrum of solar flare particles, trapped particles in lower radiation belt of earth, and galactic and nonsolar energetic particles (West Germany); space-flight qualification of infrared horizon-sensing instrument for altitude measurements of spinning satellites (Netherlands). European-designed and -built spacecraft weighed 114 kg (251 lbs) and was cylindrical, with body-mounted solar cells and four booms. esro would reimburse NASA for launch under December 1966 Memorandum of Understanding. NASA Office of Space Science directed project for nasa; Langley Research Center managed Scout program. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72—214)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 lunar probe completed 1810 orbits of moon and was operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft had conducted 516 radio communications sessions since launch Sept. 28, 1971, and had collected data on moon’s gravitational field. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 3/13/72, LI)
In interview published in Time magazine President Nixon discussed impact of his impending visit to People’s Republic of China: “. . . what really matters here is not the fact that the trip to China is announced” but results of trip. “Our people have become accustomed to the spectaculars. It is exciting. A trip to China is like going to the moon.” {Time, 1/3/72, 14—5)
Federal Aviation Administration announced publication of 1972 edition of National Aviation System (NAS) Ten Year Plan and Policy Summary. Summary detailed FAa’s long-range program for development of balanced airport-airways system to meet projected demand for air transportation through 1982. Plan objectives included: completion of semiautomation of en route air-traffic control facilities; provision of basic automation equipment for radar-equipped terminal facilities and automatic metering and spacing of approaches in medium- and high-density terminal areas; increase in instrument-landing-system (ils)-equipped runways and installation of improved ILS at high-density airports; introduction of microwave ILS; investigation of use of satellite technology for air-traffic control communications, navigation, and surveillance and implementation of satellite communications in oceanic areas; expansion of designated area navigation routes to shorten en route and terminal flight paths; and plans for landing facilities and systems for vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) aircraft. (faa Release 72-63) April 15:	Apollo 16 preflight briefing was held at Kennedy Space Center. Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager James A. McDivitt said Apollo 16 countdown was “probably the smoothest” to date. McDivitt announced that Apollo 16 would be last flight with which he would be associated: “I really don’t have any plans for the future because I’ve really been concentrating on Apollo 16, and while I made the decision that it would probably be a good time for me to leave the program, I have not had time to really sit down . . . [and] think through what my future would be.” Primary reason for leaving program after Apollo 16, rather than after Apollo 17, was so that if change meant move to new location McDivitt’s children could enter new schools at beginning of new school year. McDivitt was Air Force brigadier general and had been commander of Apollo 9 mission (March 3—13, 1969) and command pilot of Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) during seven years as NASA astronaut. (Transcript)
Tass reported Luna 19 achievements as Soviet lunar probe launched Sept. 28, 1971, neared end of its activity. During more than 4000 lunar orbits spacecraft had transmitted data in more than 1000 communication sessions. Experiment data had indicated presence of plasma produced in near-lunar space by interaction of “space irradiation and the lunar surface.” Luna 19 had photographed lunar area “to study individual parts of the lunar surface and possibilities for using orbital panoramas for the navigation of space apparatus.” Probe had recorded more than 10 increases in flux of solar cosmic ray protons, resulting from powerful solar flareups. During lifetime, Luna 19 onboard systems had functioned normally. Tass said two-year monitoring of space radiation by Luna 19 and predecessors Lunokhod 1 (lunar roving vehicle landed on moon by Luna 17), Verms 7 and 8, and Mars 2 and 3 would “make it possible to ascertain the energy spectrum, the charge components of cosmic rays, and the conditions of their propagation in the interplanetary medium.” (fbis-Sov, 10/4/72, LI)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced appointment of l/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of National Security Agency, effective Aug. 1. Gen. Phillips, assigned to NASA in 1964, had been Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. until Sept. 1, 1969, when he became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization. He would replace Adm. Noel A. M. Gayler (usn), who would become U.S. commander in chief in Pacific area. (W Star, 4/27/72, A2) April 28:	Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny sent message congratulating President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 16 mission and safe return of astronauts. He asked President to convey “best of wishes to the members of the spaceship crew, courageous cosmonauts John Young, Charles Duke and Thomas Mattingly.” (fbis-Sov, 4/28/72, G2)
After series of meetings in U.S. and abroad, esro decided to develop sortie laboratory to fly with NASA’s space shuttle in 1980s. President Nixon announced new policy making U.S. launch assistance available to interested countries and international organizations for satellites intended for peaceful purposes. Third Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in January was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 17 foreign countries. Participating Soviet scientists consulted with U.S. scientists, examined lunar samples, and helped select Apollo 14 samples to return to U.S.S.R. as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. exchange agreement. Apollo 15 lunar soil samples were exchanged for soil samples collected by U.S.S.R.’s Luna 20. Apollo 16 materials were distributed to scientists in 15 foreign countries, and Apollo 17 samples also would be distributed to other nations for analysis and display. NASA launched 29 sounding rockets in cooperative international program to test weather data systems for France, Japan, and U.S. Program was sponsored by United Nations World Meteorological Organization’s Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation, Since beginning of international program in 1962 with launch of U.K. satellite Ariel 1 (April 26) and Canadian satellite Alouette 1 (Sept. 29), number of foreign countries and international organizations with which NASA had participated in space activities had reached 134. Total of 55 foreign agreements included cooperative flight projects with 25 countries, earth resources survey with 39, lunar sample analysis with 20, tracking and data acquisition with 22, and reimbursable launchings with 4. Scientists from 85 countries and organizations had worked with NASA—80 in meteorological research, 41 in personnel exchanges, and 52 in other space projects. Total countries and organizations exchanging scientific and technical information with NASA reached 63; total sending visitors to NASA reached 126, and total cooperating in some form with NASA reached 94. (nasa Release, 12/27/72; A&A 1972; Fletcher, NASA Activities, 1/15/73, 2-3; nasa Int Aff)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, told press at Manned Spacecraft Center briefing Apollo 16 astronauts had returned from mission in excellent condition. “They could walk well. And there wasn’t any obvious effect ... on the ability to stand up well without having blood pressure drop. And . . . there was no motion sickness” even though astronauts had spent about 30 min in spacecraft in fairly rough sea after splashdown. All three astronauts had minor irritation around sensor attachments on the skin. All three had normal white blood cell counts rather than increased counts usually seen on previous missions. Their response to postflight tests showed they were in “better shape” than Apollo 15 crew had been. Cardiac silhouette size appeared to have decreased; only astronaut to have cardiac ar-rythmic contractions was Charles M. Duke, Jr., who had three. Data on potassium levels was not yet available. Astronauts would be on rigid diet and undergo extensive tests for three days so doctors could compare postflight medical measurements with those taken during three-day preflight controlled diet period. (Transcript)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Ronald E. Evans would receive promotion from commander to captain in Navy despite Government freeze on promotions, Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press in Washington, D.C. Exemption had been granted specifically for Evans. Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan had received promotion to captain in Navy for previous space exploits. (W Post, 12/16/72, A4)
Findings to date of investigations into Apollo 15 commercialism were released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and by NASA. Senate Committee reported on Aug. 3 closed hearing that received testimony from NASA management and Apollo 15 astronauts on commercialization of postal covers and replicas of “Fallen Astronaut” sculpture that was carried to moon during mission. Hearing had revealed “no basic new facts” on incidents, nasa had disciplined astronauts for carrying unauthorized covers. There was “no indication at this time that the Apollo 15 crew either profited or intended to profit from” sales of sculpture. Sale of sculpture by artist Paul Van Hoeydonck “appears to be a direct contradiction of the intent of the Apollo 15 astronauts.” Committee said Dept, of Justice had requested copy of hearing transcript and was reviewing situation for possible violation of Federal statutes. Committee said its continuing investigation had determined, after Aug. 3 hearing, “that several astronauts had accepted payment for autographing blocks of stamps. NASA was “continuing its investigation of this latest incident and is determining what management actions it will take as a result.” Committee expressed concern “with the adequacy of NASA management procedures which would permit such incidents to occur or create an atmosphere or an environment which might encourage misconduct.” It also was concerned with “awareness of responsible management personnel as to their responsibilities for the recognition of and need for initiation of timely and appropriate action on sensitive events coming to their attention.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, released report on Apollo 15 commercialism and disciplinary actions taken by NASA. Investigations and reviews had revealed weaknesses in NASA’s administrative procedures, management communication channels, and internal operating relationships. Actions were under way to remedy weaknesses, including revision of policy and procedures on articles to be carried on manned flight missions. No more than 12 personal items weighing no more than 0.2 kg (0.5 lb) would be carried by each flight astronaut. All personal items would be approved by NASA Administrator. Items that could be commercially exploited by recipients were prohibited. List of items would be publicized no later than 30 days after flight’s completion. Future missions would carry official flight kit containing items appropriate for official presentation by Government. Items would be approved by Administrator and announced before launch. Commercialism of flight kit was prohibited. NASA pao stated in response to inquiries about sale of autographs by astronauts, “nasa has determined . . . autographs were signed by the astronauts on their own time while not on duty, that no misuse of Government property or personnel was involved, but that a procedural infraction did occur in that no NASA management advice was sought prior to these actions.” NASA employees had been “personally admonished . . . for this infraction of NASA procedures” and facts had been reported to Dept, of Justice. (Texts; NASA pao)
nasa Associate Administrator Dale D. Myers—following detailed presentation on space shuttle decision announced by Administrator James C. Fletcher [see above]—moved to testimony on Apollo program, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. In new Apollo 16 lunar surface experiments, far-ultraviolet camera/spectograph would photograph celestial objects or areas emitting or absorbing energy from atomic hydrogen. Data would provide information on “composition, density, distribution, and motion of interplanetary, interstellar, and intergalactic gas clouds which will . . . enhance our understanding of the structure and evolution of the galaxy.” Data, recorded on film and returned from lunar surface by astronauts, would be “first attempt to evaluate the Moon as a platform from which to make future celestial observations.” Second new experiment, cosmic ray detector, would acquire data on origin and source mechanism of high-velocity cosmic rays and solar particles beyond effects of earth’s atmosphere and magnetic field. (Transcript) March 15:	NASA Associate Administrator jar Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, Administrator James C. Fletcher, and Deputy Administrator George M. Low (left to right) explained space shuttle plans at a press conference following the announcement that the shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rockets. In the artist’s drawing, the rockets are dropping away for recovery. NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 29th flight from Flight Research Center. Purpose of flight was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Fixed rakes and rotating survey probes were checked out and angle-of-attack calibrations were obtained at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude from mach 0.9 to 1.1. (nasa proj off)
Belgian artist Paul Van Hoeydonck had sculpted small statue “Fallen Astronaut” that was left on moon by Apollo 15 astronauts during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission, New York Times reported. Name of artist had not previously been disclosed, but Smithsonian Institution recently had asked Van Hoeydonck for replica. (NYT, 4/18/72, 51; Smithsonian nasm)
Director Glynn S. Lunney of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) briefed press at Manned Spacecraft Center on plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975 to be finalized at meetings to begin July 6 at MSC. Delegation of 25 Soviet engineers would discuss with NASA “precisely how we are going to do the mission, when we are going to do things and who is going to be doing things.” Groups would exchange documents proposing specific details of mission, including launch time, docking schedule, launch sequence, and communications. Spacecraft would be docked about 48 hrs and crews would make several exchange visits. Docking module would be used to transfer crews and as prebreathing chamber to protect crews from bends while changing from lower-pressured Apollo to higher-pressured Soyuz. Lunney said he expected U.S. crew or pool of crew candidates to be selected “within a year or so.” (AP, B Sun, 1/6/12)
First three of 749 F—15 Eagle air superiority fighter aircraft in Air Force program had done well in initial flight tests, according to Air Force sources quoted by New York Times. Two were undergoing tests at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., and third at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis. Aircraft was U.S. answer to Soviet MiG-23 Foxbat and Mikoyan Fearless, new Soviet air superiority fighter forecast for 1974 deployment. (Middleton, NYT, 11/25/72, 17) November 26:	Sign posted by Grumman Aerospace construction personnel on gantry work platform near Apollo 17 spacecraft said, “This may be our last but it will be our best,” United Press International reported. Grumman foreman had said sign was to inform Apollo crew that “they don’t have to worry about our letting down.” Jobs of 600 Grumman workers at Kennedy Space Center would terminate with completion of Apollo 17 mission. (W Post, 11/27/72, E6)
Apollo 16 astronauts attended state dinner at White House honoring Mexican President Luis Echeverria Alvarez. (PD, 6/19/72, 1060)
Science article commented on renaming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory in honor of retiring California Congressman: Rep. H. Allen Smith’s closest association with aerospace had come in late 1940s when he was security manager for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. “During his years in the House, Smith distinguished himself as a quiet, unwavering conservative dedicated to economy in government.” He had voted against supersonic transport “and on at least three occasions opposed the space authorization bill, the ultimate wellspring of JPL’s money.” No one had asked JPL, California Institute of Technology, or NASA what Ihey thought of redesignation. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had approved but “was not in a position to object gracefully.” Rep. Miller, too, was retiring and House Committee on Public Works had decided to affix his name to Federal building in Oakland, Calif. Article suggested solution might be “for JPL to acknowledge its new name with a small sign behind a fast-growing evergreen and let time take its course.” (Gillette, Science, 12/15/72, 1178) December 16—January 22, 1973: West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 3:25 PST by four-stage, solid-fuel Scout D vehicle. Spacecraft was placed in planned orbit with apogee of 864.4 km (537.1 mi); perigee, 218.1 km (135.5 mi) • period, 95.47 min; and inclination, 96.95°. Primary objective was to place 127-kg (277-lb) payload in nearpolar orbit to measure main aeronomic parameters of upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation in wavelength band of main absorption. By Jan. 22, 1973, all five experiments were performing satisfactorily and spacecraft housekeeping operations were normal, except that problem with synchronization of data rate to spin rate might degrade data from NASA’s neutral atmosphere temperature experiment Satellite, cylinder 71 cm high and 91 cm in diameter (28 by 36 in) with four telemetry antennas, would contribute to understanding of thermal, chemical, and dynamic processes governing atmospheric behavior. Instruments included mass spectrometer, retarding potential analyzer, impedance probe, extreme-ultraviolet spectrometer, and NASA’s neutral atmosphere experiment. December 16:	Apollo 17 surface science press briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center as astronauts headed toward home from moon. Stanford Univ. seismologist Dr. Robert L. Kovach described results to date from lunar seismic profiling experiment. Experiment had recorded impact of lunar module (lm) on lunar surface 9 km (5.6 mi) southwest of landing site “right on target where we wanted it.” Kinetic energy at impact was comparable to “1 ton of tnt going off.” Signal was “very clearly recorded on the geophone array and we’ve acquired an extremely important data point; . . . we’re effectively getting a depth sample down to 3 to 4 kilometers [1.9 to 2.5 miles] in the Moon. And ... we should get some very important information about the underlying highland type materials.” Data point was “in critical distance range to answer one of the mysteries . . . of the shallow Lunar interior. We’ve been very much concerned about the enormous change in physical properties by terrestrial standards, . . . velocity changes by enormous percentage over a very small pressure range.” Data point should provide “answers as to just how these properties are changing.” First two explosive charges deployed had not shown significant differences in subsurface of Apollo 17 landing site and those of Apollo 15 and 16 but Apollo 17 site appeared to be “underlined by definitely more competent materials and they quite probably could be volcanic flows.” Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said Apollo 17 data, when compared with previous data, suggested possibility of new interpretation of lunar structure. “We do find evidence for lunar crust as we did in the past, but we may have to thin it considerably.” Velocity of seismic waves in crustal material and velocity of material underlying crust might also have to be lowered. “We’re not dealing with pure anorthosite anymore. We’re dealing perhaps with gabbros . . . and so we have ... to review all of the data and to reconsider our interpretations some, not just the seismologist, but the geochemist and geologist, as well.” Dr. Marcus E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for heat flow experiment, said Apollo 17 experiment had “more than doubled” lunar heat flow data to date. “We’ve got a very successful emplacement in the operation of our instrument. It has been perfect.” Lunar surface temperature recorded Dec. 14 had been about 360 K (189°F). At about 15 cm (6 in), it had dropped to 280 K (45°F). At about 65 cm (26 in) temperature dropped to 254 K (—2°F). “Below that depth, the temperature begins to increase again. It’s about 257 degrees [3°F] at the bottom of the probes.” Data indicated that heat flow at Apollo 17 site would resemble that observed at 15 cm (6 in). If so, it would “give support to the kind of growing model of a warmer interior to the Moon” and “would require that there be a total gradient abundance of radioactive isotopes in the Moon as compared to Earth. So, there would be implication here for fundamental difference in composition, between the Moon and the Earth.” Dr. Langseth also reported data from traverse gravimeter experiment had supported thesis that “high gravity anomalies associated with the mare basin—the so called mascons”—probably had been created by slab of basalt or lavas which had flooded into previously excavated basins. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas, principal lunar geology investigator, said Apollo 17 had provided “most exciting few days of my scientific career. This mission is truly the fitting climax to the whole Apollo program. The landing site held great promise that we were going to get a good chance to unravel much of the earlier lunar history as well as the sample and study of what appeared to be very young vulcanism .... And I think this promise was fulfilled.” Orange materials at Shorty Crater had been “a spectacular plus.” Scientists hoped “returned material will tell us that that was young vulcanism in volcanic alteration of Shorty Crater. There’s still a possibility it could be an impact crater, however.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., discussed Dr. Latham’s suggestion that lunar crust might be thinner than originally expected: “I will certainly defend the proposition that the crust is made of a very aluminum plagioclase-rich rocks, . . . anorthosite gabbro or gabbroic anorthosite, . . . far from a basalt. I think that the chemistry of the surface rocks, . . . and the returned rocks bear this out and if the crust is thin, it reduces the likelihood that it is any different composition than what we see at the surface.” (Transcript)
Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the last Apollo mission: A lot was riding on Apollo 17 “in its attempt to unlock the moon’s most ancient secrets and thereby perhaps the earth’s. Those three astronauts, with their record-size cargo of instruments, have the trickiest landing and the hardest lunar tasks in this whole program ahead of them.” (W Star & News, 12/5/72, A12)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
NASA announced that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission would be designated Apollo Soyuz Test Project (astp) . (pao memo)
NASA released Physics of the Solar System (NASA SP—300), edited by Dr. S.	Ichtiaque Rasool of Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Book was based on lectures given at Fourth Summer Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics at Stony Brook, N.Y., June 17-July 15, 1970. It covered broad range of topics in solar physics, planetary structure and atmospheres, and origin and evolution of solar system. (Text) July 1:	Proposal to produce rare bloodclot-dissolving enzyme urokinase aboard Apollo spacecraft during 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission would be made to NASA by university-industry scientific team, Washington Post reported. Scientists from Abbott Laboratories, General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., and Univ. of California at Los Angeles had suggested use of device developed by UCLA biophysicist Alexander Kolin that separated the one kidney cell out of every 19 that made urokinase. Device had been used successfully on earth, but team believed urokinase-producing cells could be isolated more effectively in space, where gravity did not hinder separation. Cells would be separated aboard spacecraft, ampuled, frozen, and brought back to earth, where enzyme would be produced by pharmaceutical plant. If successful, method could reduce high cost of urokinase to $50 per dose. National Heart and Lung Institute had treated 236 victims of pulmonary embolism with enzyme at more than $1000 per patient. (O’Toole, W Post, 7/1/72, A3)
Former astronaut James A. McDivitt—Special Assistant to Manned Spacecraft Center Director for Organizational Affairs since May—announced his resignation from NASA and Air Force, effective Sept. 1, when he would become Senior Vice President of Consumer Power Co. in Jackson, Mich. He would be on terminal leave from July 1 until Sept. 1. McDivitt, Air Force brigadier general, had commanded Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) and Apollo 9 (March 3-13, 1969) and had left Astronaut Office in June 1969 to become Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA Release 72-131)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1970, 1971, 1972 (nsf 71-35). Federal obligations for research and development (r&d) in 1970 totaled $15.3 billion excluding plant; slight rise to $15.4 billion was expected for 1971. Figure was decrease of 5% in constant dollars. Basic research obligations were expected to rise from $2.1 billion in 1970 to $2.2 billion for 1971 and $2.4 billion for 1972. Federal support for basic research declined in 1970 but was expected to reach new record highs for 1971 and 1972. Bulk of Federal basic research, 81%, was funded by NASA; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; National Science Foundation; Atomic Energy Commission; and Dept, of Defense. NASA had led in basic research support since 1961, with 29% of total in 1971. Applied research obligations totaled $3.5 billion in 1970 and were expected to rise to $3.8 billion for 1971, increase of 8%. Total was expected to reach $4.2 billion in 1972—all-time high in current dollars. dod, hew, and NASA continued to dominate Federal applied research effort and would account for 78% in 1971. Obligations for development totaled $9.7 billion in 1970 and would decline 3%, to $9.4 billion, in 1971. In 1972, Federal development total was scheduled to rise to $10.0 billion, or 1966 level, dod, nasa, and AEC were most prominent in Federal development effort in 1960-1972, accounting for 92% in 1971. dod funded 63%; nasa share had declined since 1965 to expected 19% for 1971. Although total Federal R&D obligations were expected to increase 9% from 1970 to 1972, nasa and aec decrease continued. NASA estimate for 1972, however, was smallest reduction since downward trend began in 1967. Report noted increases in key programs—Skylab, space shuttle, Viking Mars explorations, and unmanned missions to outer planets—had almost offset decreases in Apollo program. (Text)
Prospects of U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts “chummily tooling around” in orbit had “hardly raised a ripple when it was announced at the Moscow Meetings,” author Robert Sherrod commented in New York Times article. But attempts of President John F. Kennedy to “cooperate with the Soviets in space nine years ago” had failed. Failure showed “differing methods of Kennedy the idealist and Nixon the pragmatist.” President Nixon had “smoothed the way” with seven meetings between U.S. and Soviet engineers, beginning with April 24, 1970, meeting between then NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov. President Kennedy’s attitude toward space program had been “ambivalent” until Sept. 20, 1963, when he proposed “joint expedition to the moon” in speech before United Nations. Proposal had come as surprise and had “staggered” anti-Soviet space supporters in Congress, who proceeded to pare NASA budget. House had voted 125 to 110 against using NASA funds for joint lunar landing with Communist country. Kennedy had “forgotten that politics is the art of the possible, forgotten that a leader should never surprise his own close support,” Sherrod said. “In the sunnier climate of 1972, Richard Nixon duly observed the axiom and the rule.” (NYT, 6/17/72)
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
Public attitude toward space program in late 1960s was described by Washington communications consultant Julian Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in Washington Post article. “There was a mixed feeling of pride and guilt . . . during those years.” Program had moved forward as “almost a solitary symbol of something that was working. But the question of its rightful place in the scheme of things always hung over it.” While “a cynic would conclude that the American people had turned from social problems,” realist “might conclude that what we were hearing in the late 1960s were the first real rumblings against large federal programs. The space program, meanwhile, had gained its momentum while this disillusionment was setting in. We got to the moon, it seemed, almost without anyone knowing it. The program had the velocity—and there was no turning back.” (W Post, 12/8/72, A26)
Advanced technology aircraft to evolve from increased NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Dept, of Defense use of research and experimental aircraft were described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright. “nasa, in coordination with DOD and DOT, plans a program to design and manufacture two STOL transports. Although these aircraft probably will be smaller than anticipated production models, they will suit the needs of developing promising stol augmented-lift concepts, control systems, and crosswind landing gear. They will be able to operate within acceptable noise limits to and from stol strips about 2000 ft [610 m] long.” Joint NASA-Army plan “should lead to advanced helicopter and tilt-rotor research vehicles. Although oriented primarily toward military applications, the research results will apply to commercial vtol transports.” Advanced subsonic transports of the 1980s “will incorporate most of the applicable advanced technology . . . with significant gains in productivity. A longer range, higher capacity SST [supersonic transport] would fill a need on the transatlantic routes and the longer routes across the Pacific. And no forecaster can discount the possibility of a hypersonic transport (hst) for the 1990s.” (A&A, 1/72, 30-4) February 1:	NASA released preliminary timeline for Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 16 would be launched from Kennedy Space Center at 12:54 pm est April 16—with lunar module landing on moon at 3:41 pm est April 20 and lifting off moon at 4:39 pm est April 23. Returning command module would splash down at 3:30 pm est April 28. (ksc Release)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 16 mission now in progress: “It will take many months and even years before the full harvest of Apollo 16’s scientific contribution is in. But even now there is much material for scientists to analyze. It is information made available by the superb television pictures received here on earth, by the verbal descriptions of the astronauts and by the data radioed back to this planet from the various automatic sensors ... on the lunar surface.” Preliminary conclusion was “that in some important ways the moon is now even more mysterious, even harder to understand, than it was before Apollo 16 took off. The additional knowledge of lunar conditions available from last weekend’s exploration indicates that the reality of the moon’s origin and history is even more complex than previous theories had assumed.” (NYT, 4/24/72, 34)
Sixty-ninth anniversary of first flight by Wright brothers was celebrated in Kitty Hawk, N.C., as Apollo 17 astronauts headed home from sixth manned landing on the moon. (AP, NYT, 12/17/72, 42)
Apollo 17 astronauts began final week of training at Kennedy Space Center for Dec. 6 mission. NASA spokesman said countdown test begun Nov. 15 had proceeded so smoothly that launch pad technicians had “only to monitor the systems.” Other technicians installed batteries and water in lunar landing vehicle and checked backup flight systems. (Wil-ford, NYT, 11/28/72)
Astronauts Philip K. Chapman and Anthony W. England announced their resignations from NASA. Dr. Chapman, Apollo 14 mission scientist, had accepted position as Principal Research Scientist for Avco Research Laboratories in Everett, Mass., and would also work as senior research associate in Measurement Systems Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His resignation was effective immediately. Dr. England, Apollo 13 and Apollo 16 mission scientist, would accept position with U.S. Geological Survey Regional Geophysics Group in Denver, Colo., Aug. 14. He would assist in developing techniques using radar from aircraft and spacecraft to learn about surface and subsurface structure of earth and other planets. (NASA Release 72-142)
Dept, of Justice Criminal Div. was studying report submitted to it by NASA and transcript of Aug. 3 closed hearing by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Houston Chronicle reported. Study was to determine' whether Apollo 15 astronauts had violated any Federal law in carrying unauthorized stamp covers to moon. Senate Committee spokesman had told Chronicle Committee had no plans for open hearing on incident. (H Chron, 8/25/72)
NASA test pilot Gary E. Krier flew modified F-8 jet fighter equipped with digital-fly-by-wire control system from Flight Research Center in first flight test of aircraft that was completely dependent on electronic control system. Aircraft had no mechanical backup control system. Purpose of flight, limited to maximum speed of 680 km per hr (425 mph) and maximum altitude of 6000 m (20 000 ft), was to check out aircraft’s primary and secondary flight control system. Fly-by-wire system with digital computer and inertial measuring unit had been developed originally for Apollo lunar module and was designated for future use in space shuttle to ensure smoother flight. (nasa Release 72—112)
Apollo 17 spacecraft atop Saturn V booster, scheduled for launch toward moon Dec. 6, was rolled to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at Kennedy Space Center. Roll-out was watched by about 5000 persons, including Apollo 17 astronauts. (Benedict, M Her, 8/29/72)
New York Times editorial commented on results of Third Lunar Science Conference at Manned Spacecraft Center [see Jan. 10-13]: “Science fiction writers predicted long ago that the moon would be colonized; some even projected a future ‘revolution’ by lunar settlers against domination from the earth. Though such writers could skip over the many difficulties and high costs required by any genuine settlement attempt, there is now increasing evidence that the moon may not be quite so inhospitable as scientists once believed. The possibility that on this, too, the science fiction writers may have been prophets no longer seems as fantastic as it did before the first men walked on the moon.” (NYT, 1/21/72, 46)
National Science Foundation released Scientists, Engineers, and Physicians from Abroad: Trends Through Fiscal Year 1970. Immigrant scientists and engineers admitted to U.S. in FY 1970 totaled 13 300— one third more than in 1969 and two and one half times 1965 number. Increases over 1965 level had occurred under October 1965 amendments to immigration law. More than 50% of immigrant scientists and engineers in 1970 had last lived in Asia. In 1965, only 10% of smaller total had been from Asia. Total of 2900 Indian scientists and engineers in 1970 had been largest number admitted from any one country over last 20 yrs. (Text) January 7:	Launch of Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission, scheduled for March 17, was postponed by NASA because of problems with suit fitting, lunar module (lm) battery, and command module (cm) docking-ring jettison device. Apollo 16 would be launched April 16— with lm landing on moon April 20 and lifting off moon April 23— and would return to earth April 28. (nasa Release 72-8; AP, B Sun, 1/8/72, A5)	_
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in Christmas message to NASA staff: “We are nearing the end of a historic and decisive year for NASA. We have completed the first great era of space exploration and use and begun a promising new one, with more emphasis this time on use. Well done, Apollo! Well begun, Shuttle!” (Text)
Hall of Science, visited by some 5 million persons during 1964-65 World’s Fair in Flushing, N.Y., was reopened with exhibits including NASA satellite and Apollo mockup. Hall had been revived and remodeled as free scientific exhibition for public under grants from Rockefeller and Ford Foundations. (Andelman, NYT, 11/2/72; NY Visitors Bur) November 20:	Apollo 17 crew underwent preliminary medical checks and men were reported in good shape, while final test countdown for mission, begun Nov. 14, proceeded smoothly at Kennedy Space Center. Crew was not present as propellants were pumped into Saturn V rocket, to avoid risk. They planned to participate in dry run Nov. 21 after flammable oxygen and hydrogen had been drained from rocket. (UPI, NYT, 11/21/72, 46)
The UFO Experience: A Scientific Inquiry by Northwestern Univ. astrophysicist Dr. J. Allen Hynek was reviewed in Science by Dr. Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology Div. of Geological and Planetary Sciences: Book was “more than just an attempt to justify scientific interest in ufo [unidentified flying object] phenomena.” Dr. Hynek had criticized 1968 report of Univ. of Colorado physicist Dr, Edward U. Condon and group that said further study of UFOs could not be justified “in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.” Air Force, which sponsored Condon study, had terminated ufo Project Blue Book investigation following Condon report recommendation. Hynek book was “Hynek’s version of what the Condon report should have been.” Book discussed 80 ufo sightings, drawn mainly from Project Blue Book files, many unexplained by Condon. Book advocated “sufficient scientific respectability for the UFO subject to permit modest federal research funds to be awarded to it and new data to be gathered without fear of ridicule.” Dr. Hynek had “won reprieve for UFO’s with his . . . provocative unexplained reports and his articulate challenge to his colleagues to tolerate the study of something they cannot understand.” (Science, 8/25/72, 688-9) August 26:	Work reductions in manned space flight area announced by NASA Aug. 22 would eliminate about 1400 contract support personnel positions at Manned Spaceflight Center, Los Angeles Times reported. Kennedy Space Center was expected to dismiss about 500 workers after December launch of Apollo 17, and another 2000 technicians and engineers at end of Skylab program. Reductions necessitated by budget restrictions would force closing of KSC flight crew training after Apollo 17, reduction in force at White Sands Missile Range, and eventual'closing of Space Environmental Simulation Laboratory, astronauts underwater training facilities, and altitude test chamber at msc. “Even distribution of moon rocks . . . for display purposes” would be curtailed. (Chriss, LA Times, 8/26/72)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan piloted lunar landing training vehicle on last flight before vehicle’s retirement. First flight had been Oct. 8, 1968. All prime and backup commanders of lunar landing missions had practiced lunar module landings in lltv at Ellington Air Force Base, Tex. (msc Roundup, 12/8/72, 1)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
Federal Aviation Administration announced award of contracts totaling approximately $3 million to six companies for first phase of five-year program to develop microwave landing system (mls) for civil and military use [see Jan. 17]. Companies were Airborne Instrument Laboratory, Bendix Corp., Texas Instruments Inc., Raytheon Co., Hazeltine Corp., and ITT Gilfillan, Inc. (faa Release 72-18) January 28:	Preliminary description of Apollo 15 lunar samples was presented by Apollo 15 Preliminary Examination Team in Science. More than 350 individual samples weighing total of 77 kg (170 lbs) had been collected from 10 areas in Hadley region during July 26Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Samples were mare basalts and breccias with variety of premare igneous rocks. “The bulk chemical compositions and textures of these rocks confirm the previous conclusions that the lunar maria consist of a series of extrusive volcanic rocks that are rich in iron and poor in sodium. The breccias contain abundant clasts of anorthositic fragments along with clasts of basaltic rocks much richer in plagioclase than the mare basalts. These two rock types also occur as common components in soil samples from this site. The rocks and soils from both the front and mare region exhibit a variety of shock characteristics that can best be ascribed to ray material from the craters Aristillus or Autolycus.” (Science, 1/28/72, 363—74)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II began three-week preflight quarantine at Kennedy Space .Center to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay launch toward moon, scheduled for April 16. (AP, B Sun, 3/28/72, A6)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., parachuted safely from NASA T-38 jet aircraft just before it crashed near Bergstrom Air Force Base, Tex. Cause of crash was being investigated. Conrad was on routine flight from Dobbins AFB, Ga., to Ellington AFB, Tex. (UPI, W News, 5/11/72, 20)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
Montana State Low Income Organization, activist group, had sent box of rocks to President Nixon to protest Apollo 16 mission, upi reported. Group had said purpose of mission appeared to be merely collection of rocks; Montana rocks were free and represented areas in state where social problems needed Government attention. (NYT, 4/23/72, 60)
Apollo 16 Subsatellite for study of particles and fields apparently crashed onto lunar surface at about 4:00 pm EST after 425 revolutions of moon. Radio contact with satellite, launched from Apollo 16 orbiting moon April 24, was not reestablished when it should have reappeared on moon’s near side on 426th revolution. Last tracking data, from 416th revolution, showed Apollo 16 Subsatellite in orbit with 4.8-km (3-mi) perilune on moon’s far side near point 10.2° north latitude and 111.9° east longitude. Subsatellite had been designed for 12-mo lifetime, but had been placed in orbit closer to moon than desired because of problems with Apollo 16 command module engine, (nasa Release 72-115)
Swiss Transport Museum inaugurated its Air and Space Wing in Lucerne with ceremonies attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. (Swiss Transport Museum)
Report of Soviet progress in space presented at annual meeting of Soviet Academy of Sciences appeared in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Academician M. D. Millionschikov said 1971 had been year of achievement in space. Creation of “the world’s first manned orbital scientific station, Salyut, was a major event. . . . Exploration of the moon and the planets with the help of automatic space vehicles has continued. Recently, a magnificent space experiment was completed—the Luna-20 automatic station’s delivery to earth of soil samples from the almost inaccessible' lunar mountain region. Two automatic ‘Mars’ stations were created. . . . Separating from the Mars-2 station, a capsule landed a pennant. . . and the Mars-3 descent vehicle made the first soft landing on the surface of Mars. In addition to the scientific exploration of space, broad plans were elaborated for utilizing satellites for extra-atmosphere astronomy. Work began on the utilization of satellites for exploring natural resources in the interests of the national economy including geological survey work, agriculture, forestry, water economy, fishing, the hydro-meteorological service, and geodesy.” (fbis—Sov, 3/13/72, L2)	_
Manned Spacecraft Center announced appointment of Astronaut David R. Scott as Technical Assistant to Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program, effective immediately. Scott, recently reprimanded for carrying unauthorized postal covers to moon on Apollo 15 mission, succeeded Ronald W. Kubicki, who had been named Manager for Command, Service and Lunar Modules, (msc Release 72-162)
Jan. 25 fuel leak in Apollo 16 spacecraft had added extra $200 000 to cost of mission, Washington Post reported. Most of money went to pay overtime to technicians who had worked two weekends bringing vehicle with csm/lm from launch pad to Vehicle Assembly Building (vab), where command module had been partly disassembled, and returning spacecraft to pad after repair work on launch vehicle and command module had been completed. (W Post, 4/16/72, A3)
NASA released specifications of Apollo 17 lunar roving vehicle (lrv) to be carried to moon on final Apollo mission Dec. 6. Following scheduled Dec. 11 lunar landing, lrv would travel about 37 km (23 mi), about 10 km (6 mi) farther than previous lrvs, and would have loaded earth weight of 725 kg (1600 lbs), increase of about 27 kg (60 lbs) over lrvs used during Apollo 14 and 15. Apollo 17 lrv would carry traverse gravimeter to measure variations in subsurface structure and provide data on whether Taurus mountains had deep roots or were deposits on uniform subsurface. Surface electrical properties experiment would measure physical properties of lunar interior to 1-km (0.6-mi) depth. Experiment, connected to LRV navigational system by cable, also would indicate subsurface electrical and mechanical properties, extent of subsurface layering, and degree of energy scattering at landing site, and possible existence of underground water. First direct LRV linking with experiment would enable scientists on earth to correlate its specific location with experiment data, (nasa Special Release)
Sophisticated TV systems were being used by some of world’s largest telescopes to record planetary atmospheres, faint galaxies, and quasistellar objects, Science reported. Astronomers had been criticized for being less receptive to new technologies than other physical scientists. “At a time when automation of many stages of data-taking is standard procedure . . . automation of large telescopes is just becoming fashionable.” (Metz, Science, 3/31/72, 1448-9) During March: nasa released Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant and Scientific Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1971-1973: Annual Report to the National Science Foundation. Report, for inclusion in government-wide survey published by nsf for Congress, White House, Government agencies, and scientific community, showed distribution of nasa funds based on FY 1973 budget estimates. It reflected nasa’s total direct obligations incurred in FY 1971 and budget estimates for FY 1972 and FY 1973. In FY 1973 nasa would fund approximately 19% of Federal Government’s total research and development effort and provide 23% of funds for research, alone. When Dept, of Defense was excluded from computation, nasa was expected to conduct 36% of total civilian R&D effort. Total research in FY 1973 was expected to show 4% increase over FY 1971. For first time since FY 1962 research would represent over 50% of nasa funding for Research and Development. Increase in research resulted in decreased funding for development, with impending completion of Apollo and Sky lab development; decrease was offset to a degree by funds applied to begin space shuttle development. Analysis of funding showed decline in engineering funds of about 7% of total, with increases in physical and life sciences. Reduction in engineering reflected anticipated completion of Apollo. High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program effected increase in astronomy, and Viking program, increase in chemistry and biology. (Text)
New York Times editorial praised “encouraging response” of public and major corporations that would enable Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library to reopen Jan. 17 after shutdown for lack of operating funds [see Jan. 3]. “But it is evident that the fate of the privately financed research divisions has merely been deferred— unless continuous and long-range efforts are made to put this vital facility on a sound financial footing.” (NYT, 1/10/72, 32) January 10—13:	Third Annual Lunar Science Conference held by NASA and Lunar Science Institute at Manned Spacecraft Center was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 16 foreign countries. Foreign visitors included Soviet scientists Y. I. Belyayev, M. S. Chupakhin, and K. P. Florenskiy, who participated in conference, consulted with U.S. scientists, looked at lunar samples stored at msc, and helped select samples to return to their colleagues in U.S.S.R. NASA provided three grams (one tenth ounce) of lunar material collected on Apollo 14 mission as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for exchange of samples. Samples included chip from widely studied crystalline rock, small piece of 9-kg (20-lb) boulder, and core samples soils, and polished thin sections. Conference papers dealt with scientific results of Apollo lunar landing missions, analysis of Soviet Luna 16 samples, and results of study of lunar surface by U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1. Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden discussed their observations of lunar surface made from lunar orbit during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Dr. N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight Center representative of Apollo Soil Mechanics Investigation Science Team, discussed mechanical properties of lunar soil. Washington Post later compared conference with First Lunar Science Conference in 1970, when “there were few facts available and many theories.” At third conference, “situation seemed to have reversed.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said, “You’re not throwing facts out into a vacuum any more.” Among facts stated at conference were: moon once had strong magnetic field, of which remnants remained to suggest moon once had metallic core up to 280 km (175 mi) thick; lunar crust was 65 km (40 mi) deep and layered; existence of extinct plutonium 244 in Apollo 14 samples indicated plutonium had been trapped when lunar crust solidified shortly after origin of solar system; and Copernicus Crater had been gouged 850 to 950 million yrs ago, making process one of more recent major lunar events. Dr. James R. Arnold of Univ. of California at San Diego reported that moon’s radioactive elements were concentrated in two broad plains, Ocean of Storms and Sea of Rains. “As we go away from this region ... we drop to quite low levels of radioactivity.” Scientists agreed that these radiation emissions should not prove hazardous to astronauts who might visit for short period. Dr. Isidore Adler, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, reported that map of lunar surface chemistry produced from Apollo 15 x-ray data indicated highlands of moon contained more aluminum than did plains. Finding supported hypothesis that moon’s early crust was rich in feldspar. Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ., Apollo Program chief seismic investigator, debated presence of volcanoes on moon with Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Dr. Latham said that while main episode of lunar vulcanism seemed to have ceased 3 billion yrs ago, “it’s by no means certain that we do not have continuing vulcanism on a very minor scale on the moon.” Dr. Gold continued to support theory that moon was dead, rigid body with basins of compacted dust. Dr. Leon T. Silver of California Institute of Technology proposed theory of “parentless lead” on moon to explain presence in some lunar locations of more lead than could have been produced by decay of radioactive uranium. In moon’s extreme vacuum it was possible for vaporized lead to travel great distances from its parent, uranium. Dr. Silver said other materials could be distributed over lunar surface in same way, all of which could confuse analysis of moon’s age. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory discussed tiny piece of green glass among Apollo 14 samples that scientists had nick-named “Genesis bean.” Bean and other glass fragments were almost identical chemically to rare meteorites, Howardites. Evidence suggested green glass had originated on moon and not from meteorite impacts on earth and thus might be some of earliest material of solar system. Consensus of conference on bulk composition of moon was summarized by Dr. Gast: feldspar-rich highland material with anorthosite as one prevalant component, basalts (solidified lava, low in radioactive elements and relatively young) in plains and basins, and KREEP (highly radioactive material rich in potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus). Conference closed with discussion of geologic setting of Apollo 16 Descartes landing site and plans for mission’s extravehicular activity. Soviet scientists returned to U.S.S.R. Jan. 23 with lunar samples for Soviet Academy of Sciences, (msc Release 72-06; NASA Release 72—18; Marshall Star, 1/12/72, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/14/72, 22; NASA Trans Sect) January 11:	Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was released from Patrick Air Force Base Hospital where he had been treated for bacterial pneumonia since Jan. 4. (AP, B Sun, 1/11/72)
Dr. Nicholas C. Costes of Marshall Space Flight Center Space Sciences Laboratory received Norman Medal, highest award of American Society of Civil Engineers, at asce annual meeting in Houston. Award was for paper “Apollo 11: Soil Mechanics Results,” published by asce in 1970. (Marshall Star, 10/18/72, 1)
President Nixon announced decision U.S. should develop space shuttle system. In statement re'eased from San Clemente. Calif., following 45-min meeting with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, President said: “I have decided today that the United States should proceed at once with the development of an entirely new type of space transportation system designed to help transform the space frontier of the 1970’s into familiar territory, easily accessible for human endeavor in the 1980’s and 1990’s. “This system will center on a space vehicle that can shuttle repeatedly from earth to orbit and hack. It will revolutionize transportation into near space, by routinizing it. It will take the astronomical costs out of astronautics. In short, it will go a long way toward delivering the rich benefits of practical space utilization and the valuable spinoffs from space efForts into the daily lives of Americans and all people. “The new year 1972 is a year of conclusion for America’s current series of manned flights to the moon. Much is expected from the two remaining Apollo missions—in fact, their scientific results should exceed the return from all the earlier flights together. Urns they will place a fitting capstone on this vastly successful undertaking. But they also hring us to an important decision point—-a point of assessing what our space horizons are as Apollo ends, and of determining where we go from here. “In the scientific arena, the past decade of experience has taught us that spacecraft are an irreplaceable tool for learning about our near earth space environment, the moon, and the planets, besides being an important aid to our studies of the sun and stars. In utilizing space to meet needs on earth, we have seen the tremendous potential of satellites for intercontinental communications and worldwide weather forecasting. We are gaining the capability to use satellites as tools in global monitoring and management of natural /resources, in agricultural January 5; President Nixon and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher examined a model of the reusable space shuttle at San Clemente, Calif,, following the President’s announcement that the United States would proceed with shuttle development. applications, and in pollution control. We can foresee their use in guiding airliners across the oceans and in bringing televised education to wide areas of the world. “However, all these possibilities, and countless others with direct and dramatic bearing on human betterment, can never be more than fractionally realized so long as every single trip from earth to orbit remains a matter of special effort and staggering expense. This is why commitment to the space shuttle program is the right next step for America to take, in moving out from our present beachhead in the sky to achieve a real working presence in space—because the space shuttle will give us routine access to space by sharply reducing costs in dollars and preparation time.” It was significant, President said, “that this major new national enterprise will engage the best efforts of thousands of highly skilled workers and hundreds of contractor firms over the next several years. The amazing ‘technology explosion’ that has swept this country in the years since we ventured into space should remind us that robust activity in the aerospace industry is healthy for every one—not just in jobs and income, but in the extension of our capabilities in every direction. The continued pre-eminence of America and American industry in the aerospace field will be an important part of the shuttle’s ‘payload.’ ” Shuttle program would “give more people access to the liberating perspectives of space, even as it extends our ability to cope with physical challenges of earth and broadens our opportunities for international cooperation in low-cost, multi-purpose space missions.” President quoted Oliver Wendell Holmes: “We must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it, but we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.” President concluded, “So with man’s epic voyage into space—a voyage the United States of America has led and still shall lead.” (PD, 1/10/72, 27-8; Transcript of Fletcher, Low press conference, 1/5/72)
