A real estate boom apparently would replace the space boom with the end of the Skylab program at Cape Canaveral, the Atlantic Journal Constitution said. Layoffs following Skylab’s end would reduce aerospace employment on the Cape to its lowest point in a decade; a total work force of less than 10 000 had been projected for December 1974. But unlike the cutbacks in 1969 and 1970, there was no panic. An influx of retirees from the North and from southern Florida had caused a shortage of homes. Unemployment in Brevard County was down to 4.2%; the area had once led the nation with more than 8% unemployed. (Hesser, Atlanta JC, 12/2/73) ences—discussed vestibular disturbances and the characteristics of human blood circulation under space flight conditions and developed recommendations for using common biomedical procedures. The Soviet delegation reported on pre- and postflight cardiovascular evaluations with lpwer-body negative pressure during the Soyuz 12 mission (launched Sept. 27). The report would permit the first direct comparison of Apollo, Skylab, and Soyuz data. The Soviet delegation visited JSC Mission Operations Control to observe facilities for monitoring the health of Skylab crews, Skylab one-g trainers, and the Skylab mobile laboratories. The Group’s recommendations would be forwarded to the NASA Administrator and the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences for confirmation, (nasa Release 73-273)
President Nixon entertained Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt at the White House. Members of Congress and the Secretaries of Labor, Transportation, and Commerce also were among the guests at an entertainment starring singer Sammy Davis, Jr. {PD, 3/5/73, 223; W Post, 3/5/73,
June 10-20:	NASA launched Explorer 49 (rae-b; RAE 2) Radio Astronomy Explorer by a long-tank, thrust-augmented, Thor-Delta launch vehicle from Eastern Test Range at 10:14 am edt into a transfer trajectory for the moon. The second of two approved RAE missions and the last scheduled U.S. mission to the moon, Explorer 49 was to measure galactic and solar radio noise at frequencies below ionospheric cutoffs and outside terrestrial background interference, using the moon for occul-tation, focusing, or aperture-blocking for increased resolution and discrimination. At 17 min after launch, the spacecraft separated from the launch vehicle’s 3rd stage. One midcourse correction was made at 11:28 am edt June 11; the planned second correction was not required. During the transfer trajectory, data acquisition from telemetry systems was excellent. The lunar orbit insertion motor was fired at 3:21 am edt June 15, putting the spacecraft into lunar orbit with 1334-km (828.9-mi) apolune, 1123-km (697.8-mi) perilune, 241-min period, and 61.3° inclination. On June 18 the lunar insertion motor was jettisoned and the hydrazine-fueled velocity-control propulsion system placed Explorer 49 in a lower, near-circular orbit with a 1063-km (660.5-mi) apolune, 1052-km (653.7mi) perilune, 221.2-min period, and 38.7° inclination. On June 20 a 37-m (l20-ft) dipole antenna was extended by ground control and the, dipole experiment turned on. After a two-week calibration, the dipole would be retracted and the orbit adjusted as needed. The two main V antennas, joined in an X shape, would then be deployed to 183 m (600 ft). After another week, the V antennas would be deployed to their full 229-m (750-ft) length to achieve the mission’s gravity-gradient, three-axis-stabilization mode. The 200-kg (442-lb) spacecraft was the first known to use boron filament for the inertial booms that helped stabilize it during the lunar trajectory. Explorer 38 (RAE 1)—the first successful radio astronomy satellite, launched July 4, 1968—had measured galactic radio sources and traced the movement of sporadic radio outbursts from the sun beyond the orbit of Mercury for four years. Explorer 38’s receivers, however, had been saturated 25%-40% of the observing time by interference from the earth’s radio noise. Explorer 49, in lunar orbit, would be shielded from terrestrial noise as it orbited the moon’s far side. The rae project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. GSFC designed, constructed, and tested the spacecraft and provided the scientific instrumentation. GSFC was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle and the operation of the worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn). Launch services were provided by ksc. (nasa prog off; nasa Release 73-105; gsfc SSR, 6/30/73)
The retirement of G. Merritt Preston as Manager of the Kennedy Space Center Shuttle Projects Office effective June 30 was announced by Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ICSC Director. Preston, during 34 years of Government service, had been Assistant Chief of Operations for Project Mercury, Deputy Director of Launch Operations at ksc, icsc Director of Design Engineering, and KSC Director of Center Planning. He had received NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal in 1963 for his Mercury work, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals for Apollo work, and the Spirit of St. Louis Award of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in 1969 for meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics, (icsc Release 85-73)
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
The anti-environmental backlash was in full swing, the Wall Street Journal said. Environmentalists were being blamed for the energy crisis, lingering unemployment, high prices, high taxes, food shortages, and the falling birth rate. Several state legislatures had killed ecology-oriented bills they would have passed a session or two before, “and a few others have voted actually to relax environmental-protection laws enacted in the heyday of concern.” Environmental groups were encountering serious fund-raising problems. “Inevitably, businessmen, union officials and others who have felt the lash of environmental power in recent years will now be tempted to hit back hard.” This could be a risky, “almost fatal” calculation. While the environmentalists might no longer win all the battles, “chances are, too, that sooner or later a fresh disaster—a new oil spill, a heavy smog—will rebuild environmentalists’ strength.” (Otten, WSJ, 8/2/73) August 3:	A New York Times editorial commented on the Aug. 2 discovery of an oxidizer leak that threatened the safety of the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14): “Even though it finally proved unnecessary to order three men back to earth immediately, two points did emerge with special clarity from this short-lived scare situation. First, not all difficulties that can arise in manned space missions can be repaired by men on a troubled vehicle.” Second, “and more fundamental, this latest incident again brings into sharp focus the need for standby rescue rockets for manned space ventures. The lack of rescue vehicles in the past has come in for justified and severe criticism. This time NASA has demonstrated that it has learned the lessons of history.” An Apollo spacecraft was being readied as a rescue vehicle for the Skylab 3 crew if a new emergency arose. “Men in space are no longer forced to be so self-sufficient and independent of help from earth as was the case not long ago, especially during the Apollo voyages to the moon.” (NYT, 8/3/73, 30)
The U.K. Trades Union Congress announced that it was asking its 9.5 million members to boycott French products for a week in protest against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific. (W Post, 6/28/73, B19) June 27-28:	Pioneer 11, launched by NASA April 5 toward a December 1974 rendezvous with the planet Jupiter, became the second spacecraft to cross the orbit of Mars. By June 28 the probe was 76 781 000 km (47 711 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at 108 000 km (67 110 mi) per hr. The earth had passed between the spacecraft and the sun, permitting scientists to look for the earth’s magnetic tail, the extension of the magnetic field blown away from the earth by the solar wind. Data had suggested a malfunction in the spacecraft radio transmitter but were insufficient to identify the problem. The backup traveling-wave tube was being used. Flight controllers had fired the thrusters on Pioneer 10—twin probe launched March 2, 1972, toward December 1973 meeting with Jupiter— on June 21 to trim its course slightly and ensure passage behind Jupiter’s 1 moon Io. Pioneer 10, traveling at 43 470 km (27 000 mi) per hr, was 533 540 000 km (331 542 000 mi) from the earth. It had crossed the orbit of Mars in 1972 and finished crossing the Asteroid Belt in February, (nasa Release 72-122) June 28:	NASA held three Skylab 1-2 postflight reviews at Johnson Space At a summary review of the May 14-June 22 mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that Skylab 1—2 had accomplished the intent of its 48 experiments—6 earth resources, 15 medical, 5 astronomical, 17 scientific and technological, and 5 student-proposed. Space station operation experience had been gained and there were no constraints on continuing the Skylab program as originally planned. More data had been handled in real time than ever before and gave “no reason to believe that all of the things that we had previously said we accomplished in flight are not going to give us creditable scientific data for analysis by scientists.” Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, earth resources experiment package project scientist, said during an erep review that the erep experiments had gathered good data for 145 principal investigators on 13 km (8 mi) of magnetic tape. Data were collected over six foreign countries—Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Venezuela. There were 186 individual task sites covered, including the Puerto Rican trench, the Gulf of Mexico, the Wabash River area, and the Amazon River basin. During a review of the Skylab 2 crew health, Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said medical experiments on the Workshop had yielded very interesting results. All three crew members had stayed within their preflight baseline levels on the bicycle ergometer study. In the motion-sensitivity study—with two crew members participating—the preflight threshold level (the point at which motion sickness symptoms would begin) of science pilot Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin was 121/2 rpm in the rotating chair, at which speed he could perform 50 head movements. Pilot Paul J. Weitz had a preflight threshold of 15 rpm and 40 to 50 head movements. Both men could do 150 head movements in flight at preflight speeds without symptoms. During tests immediately following splashdown both men had experienced vestibular disturbances with even the slightest head movement. The symptoms had disappeared within two days and both crewmen had performed at preflight speeds on the third day following recovery, completing 150 head movements without symptoms. (Transcripts)
U.S. Patent 3 715 962 was awarded to Dr. Edward F. Yost, Jr., Professor of Engineering at Long Island Univ., for a multispectral aerial photography system. The equipment, used on Apollo 9 and 12 (launched March 3, 1969, and Nov. 14, 1969) and on Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972), was able to detect water, soil, and agricultural conditions with greater subtlety than previously possible. (Jones, NYT, 2/17/73, 41; Pat Off pio)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
A New York Times editorial noted that “works aimed at exploring the planets by instruments of the most diverse sort” continued activity after the close of manned exploration of the moon. It commented on the discovery by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists that the Venus equatorial area was dominated by huge craters [see Aug. 5]. (NYT, 8/8/73, 32) Mars 7, which would reach its destination in mid-March 1974, was similar in design and mission to Mars 6. Both spacecraft—intended for exploration of Mars, near-Mars space, and the interplanetary medium— carried Soviet- and French-built scientific equipment. All four Mars probes would carry out research in combination. Tass said Mars 4 would perform experiments using instruments on Mars 6 while Mars 5 would work in conjunction with Mars 7. On Aug. 10, at 4:00 am Baykonur time (7:00 pm edt, Aug. 9), Mars 4 was 6 432 000 km (3 997 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 5, 5 067 000 km (3 148 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 6, 1535 000 km (954 000 mi) from the earth; and Mars 7, 102 000 km (63 000 mi) from the earth. Tass reported that all spacecraft were proceeding according to their programs. A midcourse correction of the Mars 6 trajectory Aug. 13 and of the Mars 7 trajectory Aug. 16 put the flight paths “within the pre-set limits.” Tass said onboard systems of all four probes were functioning normally and measurements were being made of physical characteristics of interplanetary space, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; fbis-Sov, 8/10/73, LI; 8/16/73, LI; 8/17/73, LI; SBD, 8/13/73, 217) August 9:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of identical, parallel, $800 000, 17-mo contracts to Itek Corp. Optical Systems Div. and Perkin-Elmer Corp. for competing preliminary designs and program definition of the Large Space Telescope (lst). The large, multipurpose, orbiting, optical astronomical facility would be launched by the space shuttle, which also would return it to the earth for major maintenance and refurbishment. The LST would use a 3-m (10-ft) primary mirror and—because of its size, quality, and location above the earth’s atmosphere—would be able to resolve objects 10 times smaller and 100 times fainter than those observed by ground telescope, (msfc Release 73—110)
The American Museum-Hay den Planetarium in New York commemorated the fourth anniversary of the July 20, 1969, first manned lunar landing, by Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969). The Planetarium exhibited the Goddard Memorial Collection of autographed pencil portraits of outstanding contributors to the U.S. space effort by artist William J. Numeroff and showed “The Salvage of Skylab I,” films and narration of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ repair in space of Skylab 1 spacecraft anomalies [see May 14-June 23]. Participants in the program included Skylab 2 backup commander Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart; Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of the U.S. rocket pioneer; and author Arthur C. Clarke. (American Museum Release; pio)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt arrived in Pakistan to discuss the U.S. space program with Pakistani President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and present a Pakistani flag they had taken to the moon during their Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. (upi, W Post, 6/20/73, A18)
Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was critically burned when a BT— 13 aircraft he was landing incurred engine failure near Galveston, Tex. Doctors reported later that Haise, who had walked away from the accident, had suffered second degree burns over 50% of his body and his condition was “critical but stable.” (W Star-News, 8/23/73, A3)
U.S.S.R. ground control, during a communications session with Lunokhod 2 to check onboard systems, found a temperature of 90 K (— 297°F) at the end of a rod containing magnetometer sensors. It was the lowest temperature recorded near the lunar surface. Lunokhod 2, inactivated Jan. 23 for the lunar night after it had explored the lunar surface for seven days, had been launched aboard Luna 21 Jan. 8 and landed on the moon Jan. 16. It would begin its second lunar day of exploration Feb. 9. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 2/13/73, LI)
After a 35-yr local dispute, the “Great White Sands Missile Range Lost Gold Treasure Affair” had “blossomed into a national mystery,” the New York Times reported. Attorney F. Lee Bailey recently had been engaged by 50 unidentified claimants who sought prospecting rights to gold bars and treasure said to be buried on the missile range and to be worth up to $1.5 billion. In 1963 the Army, insisting there was no treasure, had banned prospectors from the range because of danger from exploding target-practice shells. Rep. Harold L. Runnels (D-N. Mex.) had proposed a joint Federal-state search for the treasure, said to have originated in various ways. (Sterba, NYT, 10/13/73, 37) October 14:	Doctors in Galveston, Tex., had pronounced the condition of Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., “good and stable” following skin grafts for bums he received in an Aug. 22 aircraft accident, United Press International reported. Haise had been burned over 55% of his body and had suffered a lung ailment following the crash of a World War II training aircraft he had been piloting for an air show group, (upi, M Her, 10/14/73)
United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. announced a $42million cooperative program with nine electric utility companies to develop a 26 000-kw fuel cell as a new way to generate electricity. The utility companies had provisionally ordered 56 cells for possible delivery by 1978 and had options on 112 more. Orders totaled more than $250 million. The program did not include Government support, but Pratt & Whitney was discussing the program with Federal energy officials and “would welcome government participation,” Pratt & Whitney President Bruce N. Torell told a New York press conference. A fuel ceil produced electrical power directly from fuel through a chemical reaction. It could be an efficient system for generating electrical power with little pollution. Pratt & Whitney had produced small cells for nasa’s Apollo and Skylab spacecraft and for the space shuttle. It had also tested larger units for home use. {WSJ, 12/20/73, 24; P&w Pio)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) introduced S. 734 for himself and Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) and Sen. Lawton M. Chiles, Jr. (D-Fla.), “to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to establish a Man in Space National Historic Site at Cape Kennedy.” The bill would establish a site on the area comprising Launch Complexes 5 and 6, which had been used for the Redstone, Jupiter C, Juno I and II, and Mercury-Redstone launches, as well as Little Joe II in support of the Apollo program. (CR, 2/1/73, S1798; Draft icsc Hist Note, 2/72) February 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA’s outlook for the future in a letter to the NASA staff: “I regret that we have not been able to stabilize NASA’s budget at about the $3.4 billion level . . . and that our reduced program workload necessitates a further reduction in . . . NASA employees. I am pleased, though, that we can proceed with most of our mainline programs and schedules for this decade with little change.” With the May launch of Skylab “we should be able to give the world a very impressive demonstration of the tremendous new capabilities we now have for using manned and unmanned spacecraft in Earth orbit. I believe that Skylab will awaken public interest throughout the world in the usefulness of scientific and practical observations to be made from Earth orbit, and in the ‘space manufacturing’ experiments. I am also confident that the reports from Pioneer 10 as it swings past Jupiter in December will stimulate strong public interest in expanded programs to explore the planets. Our joint flight with the Russians in 1975 will stress the potential of large-scale international cooperation in space. The Viking Lander on Mars may produce the first evidence of life in the universe beyond the confines of our home planet Earth; and it may suggest to Americans the real potential of space exploration as a continuing and expanding activity during our third century as an independent and democratic nation.” Dr. Fletcher forecast a favorable NASA future: “With another year of excellent performance in 1973 like we had in 1972, and continued strong bi-partisan support in Congress, this forecast is bound to become a reality.” (NASA Activities, 2/15/73, 26-8)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Assistant Secretary of Labor for Labor-Management Willie J. Usery, Jr., to be Federal Mediation and Conciliation Director. Before joining the Dept, of Labor, Usery had been special representative of the International Assn, of Machinists at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Test Facility, iam representative on the President’s Missile Sites Labor Committee at Kennedy Space Center and at Marshall Space Flight Center, and coordinator for union activities at Manned Spacecraft Center. He had helped to form the Cape Kennedy Labor-Management Relations Council in 1967 and had become its first Chairman in 1968. The nomination was confirmed March 29. (PD, 2/19/73, 154, 156; Usery Off) February 16:	Scientists at the State Univ. of New York had concluded the orange soil found on moon by Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Harrison H. Schmitt was billions of years older than first thought, the New York Times reported. The discovery had originally led the scientific community to believe the moon might have been volcanically active into geologically recent times, but Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer, Professor of Earth and Space Sciences at State Univ., had said, “It can now be reasonably stated that volcanism . . . ended about three billion years ago.” The team had tested the orange soil sample by potassium-argon dating. By measuring atomic properties, the soil had been found to be 3.71 billion yrs old. It was not known whether soil was of volcanic origin. (Rensberger, NYT, 2/16/73, 46)
NASA and Soviet space officials had agreed to permit representatives of the U.S. and U.S.S.R. to observe and advise in Apollo and Soyuz flight control rooms during orbital phase of July 1975 joint mission, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. No agreement had been reached to permit U.S. observers at the Soviet launch site during liftoff of Soyuz spacecraft. [See March 15-30.] (Av Wk, 1/1/73, 13)
The Skylab 3 astronauts rested aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans following their splashdown [see July 28—Sept. 25], Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, told the press at Johnson Space Center that their 59-day mission had proved man’s usefulness in earth orbit as the Apollo missions had proved his use of the moon. “In the 15 years since its founding, nasa has successfully placed more than 250 payloads in earth orbit. Of all these, the mission that we completed today will perhaps prove to be the most fruitful of all.” Skylab 3 had proved “how great an advantage it is to have the human mind on the scene to make judgments, to observe, to respond to unexpected developments, and to effect corrective measures. All these were demonstrated on Skylab.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said the Skylab 3 astronauts had surpassed their scientific objectives by 150%. “The mission can only be described in superlatives.” (O’Toole, W Post, 9/26/73, 1A; AP, B Sun, 9/26/75)
Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39—site of the July 16, 1969, launch of Apollo 11, the first manned spacecraft to land on the moon— was entered in the National Register of Historic Places of the Dept, of the Interior’s National Park Service. The complex, built between November 1962 and October 1968, was first used for the Nov. 9, 1967, launch of the unmanned Apollo 4, the first Apollo launch, and was still in use for Skylab launches, (icsc Hist Off)
A Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the supersonic transport effort: Environmental and economic problems and order cancellations had created a bleak outlook for the French and British Concorde. The modest budget request for research into the environmental impact of the U.S. SST by the Nixon Administration was realistic and should be approved by Congress “for the nation’s protection.” But the Administration should be “resigned to its defeat of 1971 in the building of an SST prototype.” (W Star & News, 2/8/73, A10) February 9:	Aspects of President Nixon’s FY 1974 budget requests were discussed in a Science article: The space program seemed “alive and well as it makes the transition into the post-Apollo era, despite recent fears . . . that its activities might be cut back severely.” NASA officials seemed confident the space shuttle would be built. The President had supported the project “although his new budget message contained no mention of the space program” and, “in Congress, it has survived handily all past attempts to kill it. The fact that the project helps sustain an aerospace industry that has suffered grievously from layoffs is a point lost on no one. And then too, NASA has going for it the fact that, both in Apollo and in the unmanned programs, it has generally met its goals and stayed within its budget.” Evidence existed “that the President does indeed look to a possible revival” of the supersonic transport “but not until later in the 1970’s. The new NASA budget contains $28 million—more than twice as much as last year’s budget—for research and development on supersonic technology. The work focuses on problems of noise, pollution, and efficiency of configuration.” (Carter, Science, 2/9/73, 551-2)
A series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches at White Sands Missile Range during the manned Skylab 2 mission scheduled for May would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment used in two experiments on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), Marshall Space Flight Center announced, calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions. The rockets would acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with. Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that aboard the atm. Black Brant VCs would be used for all the launches. Taking part in the program, managed by MSFC, were Goddard Space Flight Center, Ames Research Center, the Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (msfc Release 73-42)
Novelist Joseph McElroy described his personal impression of the Apollo 17 launch in a New York Times essay: “My main image was the Saturn rocket destroying itself stage by stage, separating behind the spacecraft, which was then alone, coasting a trajectory whose essence was to get away and not come back, escape the dialectical symmetries of up down, out hack, growth and decay—and instead burst through into speeds and distances not just greater but other; yet also, yes, to come back changed, to save the earth, prove to Earthling ecologues it had been worth all that liquid oxygen and hydrogen in a few minutes of early burn.” (NYT, Bk Rev, 1/28/73, 27)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. would lay off 1000 employees to reduce operating expenses, the New York Times reported. The expense paring had been ordered by Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements to increase operating efficiency after the controversy over increasing costs of the Crumman-produced F-14 fighter aircraft. (Andelman, NYT, 3/28/73, P28) March 28—29:	Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: The Office of Space Science had assumed total responsibility for collecting, handling, and analyzing data from the Apollo program, and “we plan to devote the next several years to their detailed analysis and interpretation. Our objective is a better understanding of the origin, history and present environment of the Moon, and the definition of goals and objectives of possible future flight programs. These studies will also use the data from the still-continuing flight program of the Soviet Union.” The French-built laser reflector on the Soviet lunar roving vehicle Lunokhod 2 deposited on the moon by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), “in addition to the three carried by Apollos 11, 14, and 15, provides another control point for lunar mapping studies and other scientific objectives. The close cooperation between the French and Soviets in putting the device on the Moon and between the Americans and French in securing early observations is a striking example of the possibilities for effective scientific cooperation in space among the nations of the world.” Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972) was “very much a pathfinder as it goes to Jupiter. We know Jupiter has intense radiation fields. We plan for Pioneer 10 to pass by Jupiter about three-and-a-half Jupiter radii from the planet. We think that Pioneer 10 at that distance . . . will be able to survive as it goes through those radiation belts. If by chance it does not, then we would probably retarget Pioneer G so that it stayed farther out.” If Pioneer 10 survived the radiation belts, “we would probably target Pioneer G closer so that we could get a better look at Jupiter and get more information about the intensity of the radiation belts as we get closer to Jupiter.” (Transcript) March 28-30:	A symposium on federally sponsored university research in transportation noise was conducted at Stanford Univ. by the Dept, of Transportation in cooperation with NASA and the National Science Foundation. Papers presented by university researchers and representatives of Government agencies covered jet noise, combustion noise, noise from moving bodies, sound propagation through ducts, rotor noise, high-intensity sound, tire noise, and economic and community aspects of noise, (dot Release 15-73; dot pio) March 29:	usns Vanguard, 181-m (595-ft) nasa tracking ship, left Port Canaveral, Fla., for Mar Del Plata, Argentina, to support Skylab missions scheduled to begin in May. Vanguard would be a link in NASA’s worldwide tracking network relaying two-way information between a spacecraft and mission control at Johnson Space Center in Houston via Goddard Space Flight Center. En route Vanguard would record tracking data for the Pioneer G launch scheduled for April 5. (gfsc Release; Skylab prog off)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, outlined Apollo program achievements in a speech before the National Security Industrial Assn, in Los Angeles. The Apollo program had reasserted U.S. technological leadership, exploded theory that only a controlled economy and Communist society could succeed with large scientific and technological undertakings such as space exploration, demonstrated “that we could respond effectively to a totalitarian challenge without resorting to totalitarian methods,” and produced the kind of Government-industry cooperation on large-scale research and development programs needed to make the American system work and keep it competitive with any other systems in the world. Apollo had reinforced “Can Do attitude that has made America great,” met national security requirements in 1960s for rapid progress in manned space flight technology and wide experience in the field, obtained valuable scientific knowledge obtainable no other way, “discovered” planet Earth on the way to the moon, forced creation of new technology “as no peacetime enterprise in history has done—or could do up to now,” contributed spiritually to lives of all Americans, “and stayed within estimated cost bounds.” The program had cost $25 billion, or $11 per person per year from 1961 through 1972. “Who or what could have produced more security, more economic benefits, more pride in achievement, more confidence in our future as a free people—for $11 per year?” (NASA Activities, 2/15/73, 29—30)
The last lunar sample containment bag from Apollo 17, the last Apollo mission to the moon (Dec. 7-19, 1972), was logged into the processing cabinets at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at Johnson Spacecraft Center. (Apollo Sample Analysis Planning Team, Science, 8/17/73, 615)
An Apollo 17 post-mission press conference—the last press conference of the Apollo program—was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Geologist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt said the orange soil discovered at Shorty Crater in the moon’s Taurus-Littrow valley was “extremely young material,” less than 10 million yrs old, that probably had been formed by “local volcanic vent.” The discovery meant “that the moon is still active enough to produce volcanic rock.” With data from Apollo 17 and previous Apollo missions, “we now have the capability ... to get a first order understanding of the evolutionary sequence of the Moon and . . . recent history of the Sun from the soil, and maybe an increased understanding of the Sun itself.” Significance of Apollo lunar discoveries to mankind was that we could “hope to get insight . . . primarily for our children and their children” into the distribution of elements on the Earth and what processes effected that distribution for use in the future. Two revolutions in earth science during the decade had been “knowledge we’ve gained from the Moon” and “insight that terrestrial geologists have gotten into the formation of ocean basins. The effect of those two revolutions, particularly when they’re integrated ... is going to be profound.” If man could “understand the evolutionary sequences through which Earth has progressed . . . we’re going to be able to understand how to utilize the resources of that Earth.” Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan said lunar study might “tell us something about the possibility of some ancient existence of some civilization . . . possibly within our own universe.” Cernan and Astronaut Ronald E. Evans said they planned to stay in the space program. Schmitt said he would “stay in government service” but “I’m not sure what that service may be.” (Transcript; W Post, 1/6/73)
Dr. Charles Greeley Abbot, scientist, inventor, and fifth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, died in Washington, D.C., at the age of 101. He had been honored on his 100th birthday in 1972 by having a site on the moon named after him by the International Geophysical Union. Dr. Abbot, an astrophysicist, had specialized in solar energy. In 1938 he had patented a solar engine that focused sunlight, using mirrors and sapphire lenses, into a steel cylinder where superheated air performed the same function as expanding steam in a locomotive or turbine. He refined the engine in a later patent, but never found anyone to build a prototype. At his 100th birthday celebration he said, “The sun will be there long after we need it. I wish I had gotten to work on this sooner.” (Hailey, W Post, 12/18/73, Bll; A&A 1972) The Soviet news agency Tass announced the objectives of the mission were to observe stars in the ultraviolet range using a special system of telescopes, survey separate sections of the earth’s surface and obtain data “for the accomplishment of economic tasks,” continue comprehensive verification of onboard systems, and test manual and automatic controls and methods of autonomous navigation in various flight conditions. Western observers also expected the cosmonauts to study Comet Kohoutek as it approached the sun. The Western press reported that Soyuz 13 was the same kind of modified Soyuz capsule as would be used for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project scheduled for 1975. It would test a new navigational system that would increase the cosmonauts’ ability to fly the spacecraft themselves rather than relying on ground control, ensuring that the quality of the spacecraft support system would match that of the Apollo. During the fifth orbit the spacecraft moved into a higher orbit with parameters reported by Tass as 272-km (169-mi) apogee, 225-km (139.8-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. At 5:30 pm Moscow time (9:30 am est) Soyuz 13 had made 18 orbits of earth. The cosmonauts reported they had adjusted to weightlessness and were carrying out their scheduled scientific program. Tass reported Dec. 20 that the crew had harvested the first crop of nutritive protein mass in an onboard experimental biological system, Oasis 2. In a closed system of two kinds of microorganisms, the waste products from the synthesis of the first were used by the second to accumulate protein mass. During the eight-day mission, the cosmonauts also aimed the telescope at preset areas of the sky, photographing constellations; studied cerebral circulation under weightless conditions; studied natural resources on the earth; took x-ray photos of the sun; and photographed light effects before sunset and sunrise along the line of the terrestrial horizon to further development of autonomous navigation for future interplanetary journeys. Soyuz 13 landed successfully in a snowstorm and cyclonic winds at 11:50 am Moscow time (3:50 am est) Dec. 26, 200 km (125 mi) southwest of Karaganda in the Kazakhstan Steppe. A medical examination indicated the cosmonauts were in good health. Soyuz 13 was the second Soviet manned launch in 1973. Soyuz 12, during a successful two-day mission Sept. 27—29, had tested improved flight systems, tested manual and automatic control in various flight conditions, and obtained spectrographic data of separate sections of the earth. Soyuz 12 had been the first Soviet manned flight since the death of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 in June 1971. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12/21/73, Ul; 12/26/73, Ul; 12/27/73, Ul; Kaiser, W Post, 12/19/73, A26; Parks, B Sun, 12/19/73, Al; Wren, NYT, 12/21/73, 56; SBD, 12/21/73, 267)
President Nixon sent a $268.7-billion FY 1974 national budget request to Congress—an increase of $18.9 billion over FY 1973. The budget projection for the succeeding fiscal year was included for first time, with the FY 1975 budget estimated at $288 billion. The national total for FY 1974 included an R&D budget of $17.4 billion (an increase of $300 million), with $3.1 billion requested for civilian and military space programs. Emphasis was on practical, immediate results from R&D rather than expanding scientific knowledge, with reduced priority for space research. The total request for NASA new obligational authority of $3,016 billion (1.2% of the total U.S. budget) was $391 million less than the FY 1973 noa of $3,407 billion. FY 1973 funds of $91 million were to be carried over to FY 1974. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase $74 million, from $3,062 billion in FY 1973 to $3,136 billion. The FY 1973 increase of $11 million had been largely for space shuttle engine and airframe design and development. Of the FY 1974 budget request, $2,288 billion would go for R&D, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. In manned space flight, elimination of Apollo funding reflected successful completion of the Apollo program with the Apollo 17 mission. Manned space flight operations—including $233.8 million for Skylab; $90 million for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) ; $220.2 million for development, test, and mission operations; $21 million for space life sciences; and $15.5 million for mission systems and integration— would decrease from $879 million in FY 1973 to $580.5 million. The decrease reflected removal of space shuttle funding from the manned spacecraft operations category to separate program status. The FY 1974 budget request allocated $475 million to the space shuttle program for the orbiter, main engine, solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tanks, technology and related development, and vehicle and engine definition. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring the total for manned space flight (including the shuttle) to $1,057 billion, down $100 million from FY 1973. Funding for space science programs would decrease $95.2 million, from $679.2 million in FY 1973 to $584 million in FY 1974. The decrease reflected suspension of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program, in which two flights had originally been scheduled during 1976-1978. The physics and astronomy program would receive $95 million, down from $126.2 million; lunar and planetary exploration would receive $312 million, down from $331.9 million; and launch vehicle procurement would receive $177 million, down from $221 million. NASA’s space applications programs would receive $153 million (a decrease of $35.7 million), including $51 million for weather and climate research with satellites, meteorological soundings, experimental instruments and techniques, and for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $13.9 million for pollution monitoring, including $9 million for Nimbus-G oceanographic and air pollution observation satellite; $42.6 million for earth resources survey; $10.7 million for earth and ocean physics; $3.1 million for space processing; $22.1 million for communications, including a multi-use communications experiment satellite (ats-f) and a Canadian Cooperative Satellite (cas-c) ; $3 million for a multidisciplinary Earth Observing Satellite (eos) ; $4.5 million for shuttle experiment definition; and $2 million for application studies. The total requested for NASA’s aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $232.5 million in FY 1973 to $240 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $150.6 million in FY 1973 to $171 million, including $22 million for experimental engine programs, $9.3 million for flight experiment programs, and $30 million for system technology programs. Space research and technology would receive $65 million, and nuclear power and propulsion $4 million (a drop from $17.1 million). Tracking and data acquisition funding would rise from $248.3 million in FY 1973 to $250 million. The Dept, of Defense FY 1974 budget of $85 billion was at an1 all-time high,	$4.1	billion above the	FY 1973 budget	authority, but was 28.4% of	total Federal outlays for	FY 1974 (a	percentage decrease from 29.0% in FY 1973 and the lowest proportion since 1950) and 6.0% of the	gross	national product	(the lowest	GNP	percentage in 24 yrs, down	from	6.2% in FY 1973). The dod	total	included $8.7 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (rdt&e), a $600 million increase over FY 1973. Of the requested rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, the first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, a prototype satellite to demonstrate precise navigation capabilities, continued flight experiment programs, and technology programs in advanced navigation, guidance, sensors, cooling, reentry, and propulsion—would receive $604.6 million (up $169.9 million). Military sciences would receive $509.8 million (up $13.7 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,787 billion (down $86 million), and missiles rdt&e $2,245 billion (up $143 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile system ($1,712 billion, up $917 million), new Air Force F—4J jet fighter aircraft ($131 million), CVN-70 aircraft carrier ($657 million, up $358 million) and F-15 air superiority fighter ($1,148 billion, up $240 million). Decreases of $198 million in funding for the Safeguard antiballistic missile system, $208 million for the Poseidon missile, and $64 million for the short-range attack missile (sram) reflected a modernization program, as dod continued the transition from combat support in Southeast Asia to strengthening baseline forces. The Dept, of Transportation budget request of $9,025 billion was a decrease of $2,302 billion from FY 1973. dot funding would continue a 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration funding of $2,126 billion would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect the upper atmosphere, and design a safer and more productive airport system. The Atomic Energy Commission FY 1974 budget request of $3,066 billion, up $382 million over FY 1973, would cover production of nuclear materials to make electricity and for use in nuclear weapons and as nuclear reactor fuel, research into availability of source materials, operation safety, and development of techniques for long-term storage of radioactive waste. The National Science Foundation FY 1974 budget request of $582.6 million was down $63.1 million from FY 1973, but r&d funding would increase from $510.3 million in FY 1973 to $554.1 million. Programs would emphasize research into domestic problems, problems of long-range national interest, and effects of R&D on the economy. Priorities would include development of solar power as an energy source and of tunneling technology for urban use under the Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program and development of a very-large-array radioastronomy facility. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in the Dept, of Commerce) budget request of $343.0 million, down from $366.7 million in FY 1973, would permit continued improvements in weather monitoring, prediction, and warning; continuation of its polar orbiting satellite system and implementation of a two-geostationary satellite system in the weather satellite program; major hurricane modification research; and expansion of research on marine ecosystems analysis to determine effects of ocean dumping. The Environmental Protection Agency budget request of $148.7 million was down from $173.1 million in FY 1973. (omb, Budget of the US Govt, FY 1974; US Budget in Brief; Special Analysis; nasa budget briefing transcript; DOD Release 44-73; AIAA Release 73—3; nsf Release 73-106)
The Senate confirmed the nomination of l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Director of the National Security Agency and former NASA Apollo Program Director, to be an Air Force general. Gen. Phillips became Commander of the Air Force Systems Command. (CR, 8/1/73, S15382; dod Release 368—73)
Experiments by international groups using the intersecting storage rings of the European Nuclear Research Center (cern) on the Swiss-French border had shown that protons grow when accelerated to great energy, the New York Times reported. New questions were raised as to what would happen within the nucleus of an atom that was packed with protons and neutrons and subjected to high-energy acceleration. Experiments had indicated that the proton—once thought a homogenous building block of the atomic nucleus—harbored processes and forces yet to be discovered. (Sullivan, NYT, 3/9/73, 1) March 11:	The U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 2 began its third working day on the moon. The roving vehicle was 400 m (1300 ft) above its landing site at the upper rim of the 3.5-billion-yr-old-crater. Lunokhod 2’s primary task during its third working day would be to study the crater thoroughly. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/13/83, LI) *	The book 13: The Flight That Failed—an account of the aborted Apollo 13 mission (launched April 11, 1970) by Henry S. F. Cooper, Jr.— was reviewed by Joseph McElroy in the New York Times Book Review: In a spacecraft so full of safety valves and designed redundancies “it had seemed incredible that two of three fuel cells from the two liquid oxygen tanks in the service module could go dead. . . . But to lose two fuel cells and then eventually two oxygen tanks? Not possible.” Command module pilot John L. Swigert, Jr., had said after the mission that if anyone had thrown at the crew a simulation of what actually happened “they’d have thought it unrealistic.” To have had less than this confidence, McElroy said, would have been unrealistic. The care and skill with which the many teams of NASA technicians work, plus the computers whose development may be “the main reason NASA could achieve a moon landing so soon” had created “an efficiency as unprecedented as the Apollo 13 disaster was implausible to the engineers at Houston Mission Control.” Cooper’s “plain, detailed picture of the teams at their consoles and in discussion and over the intercom ‘loop’ and under the adroit supervision of Eugene Krantz, a flight director who was unquestionably an executive hero of Apollo 13, gives their work a fascinating muscle and texture that might surprise those inclined to think this side of NASA boring.” (NYT Book Review, 3/11/73, 4-5) March 12:	Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on the status of space science programs and plans during hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The largest and most significant current project is Viking, a program to continue the exploration of Mars with two automated spacecraft during the 1975-76 opportunity.” A Mariner spacecraft would be launched in October or November toward Venus. “As the Mariner passes close to Venus its path will be bent and it will be accelerated toward . . . Mercury. If all goes well, we will make our deepest penetration toward the sun and get our first view of the sun-scorched Mercury. Pioneer G is ready for shipment to Cape Kennedy. It will be launched in April 1973 and will follow Pioneer 10 [launched March 2, 1972] through the asteroid belt to explore Jupiter. “We are proceeding with the development of the two Mariner spacecraft planned for launch to Jupiter and Saturn in 1977. The experiments and experiment teams have been selected. We are proceeding also with spacecraft design and will be purchasing some of the subsystems—those common to Viking—in Fiscal Year 1974. The use of common subsystems and leftover Viking hardware is helping us to minimize costs on this project. The major manned mission of 1973 is . . . Skylab, which will have many scientific experiments aboard. The most important and the largest ... is the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), which contains five major experiments using eight scientific instruments, all devoted to observing and studying the sun. This complex assembly of solar instruments is designed to be man-operated in a manner similar to a ground-based observatory. The atm is now assembled as part of Skylab, awaiting launch in May 1973. An international campaign of solar observations in 15 countries . . . will be run simultaneously with ATM; a number of sounding-rocket payloads will be launched to help calibrate the instruments on atm and to make complementary observations.” Oso 7, in orbit, “made many unique observations during the August 1972 period of intense solar activity and made the first observations of gamma rays in solar flares, oso-i is planned to be launched late in 1974. It will carry several major experiments to make detailed measurements of the process that transports energy from the sun’s surface to its intensely hot corona. The broad international participation in oso-i is exemplified by a major French instrument and by a group of over 40 guest investigators from the U.S., France, Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the U.S.S.R.” Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on special applications programs: “The Earth and Ocean Physics Applications Program (eopap) is an interrelated series of projects directed to the solution of important problems in earth and ocean dynamics that can best be addressed by the application of space techniques. Major areas of eopap are (a) global monitoring, reporting and forecasting of ocean-surface conditions and (b) monitoring of motions of the whole earth and its crust to obtain a better understanding of the processes that produce earthquakes, with the expectation that this will lead to the development of techniques for predicting the occurrence, magnitude and location of earthquakes.” The second special program underway, the space-processing applications program, was “organized to exploit the unique environment of space flight, weightlessness and unlimited vacuum, for research and technological developments in material sciences and processing with the specific goal of inventing, developing and commercializing new products and manufacturing techniques for use on earth or in space.” NASA’s role was “that of an initiator of new technology and, following a suitable ‘incubation period,’ a supplier of supporting services to a developing area of commercial endeavor.” (Transcript)
Man’s ability to survive in space was discussed in New York Times and Washington Post articles. Of 33 astronauts who had made Apollo flights, 11 had suffered from motion sickness for the first few days in space. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), the aborted moon landing mission, had indicated that men in danger would have a tough time surviving in space. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had lost 6 kg (14 lbs) during the six-day mission. John L. Swigert, Jr., had been so overcome by fatigue near the end of the flight that he made several errors in checking reentry procedures. Fatigue might also have contributed to the deaths of the Soviet Soyuz 11 (June 6-30, 1971) cosmonauts. Calcium loss in weightlessness, the most serious of potential medical problems, could lead to thinning of the bones and subsequent bone breaks after long periods in space. Other health problems included increased heart rates, weight loss, decreased oxygen consumption, reduced blood pressure, and the reduced flow of blood to the brain and kidneys. Psychological effects, as well as these problems, would be studied on Skylab missions. Were windows necessary? Should doors be doorshaped or would circular holes be sufficient? Would the crew tolerate sleeping upright in sleeping bags attached to the walls? (Schmeck, NYT, 5/14/73, 24; O’Toole, W Post, 5/14/73, A12)
U.S.S.R. scientists had named a newly discovered mineral “armstrongite” after the U.S. astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set foot on the moon, the Associated Press reported. The mineral, belonging to the zirconium-silicate compounds, had been found by a joint SovietMongolian expedition in the Gobi Desert. A sample of the mineral had been sent to Armstrong. (AP, NYT, 4/29/73, 53) April 29:	Los Angeles International Airport banned all landings and takeoffs over populated areas between 11 pm and 6 am and became the first U.S. airport with regular two-way traffic in the same airspace. The measures had been taken in response to community protests over aircraft noise. Federal Aviation Administration air controllers would regulate the two-way traffic, called nose-to-nose operations, and had said there would be no safety problem. (Lindsey, NYT, 4/29/73, 58) April 29-May 2:	The First International Conference on Offshore Airport Technology was sponsored by the New York Section of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Federal Aviation Administration in Bethesda, Md. Director W. D. Brinckloe of the Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Graduate Center for Public Works spoke on the multipurpose use potential of offshore airports: “Experience suggests that what should be planned is a terminal, mating all possible transportation modes, and complete with all the facilities and services needed to make the Terminal City thrive.” Multiple use of the island airport “should be given equal attention with more conventional aspects of airport design and ocean construction. In the end, it may be the element that makes the project economically feasible.” (aiaa Release, 3/1/73; Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former NASA Administrator, cited technological advances in power systems by the space program in a speech on the national energy crisis before the Morgan Guaranty International Council in San Francisco: “As we meet here today five small isotope generators on the moon are powering unmanned research stations there. Such technological advances by the U.S. aerospace industry promise to have major future impacts on world power systems, from fuel cells and the safe handling of hydrogen in the Apollo program to high temperature military jet engine technology for gas turbines and semiconductor technology for high voltage DC transmission.” (Text)
Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, joined nasa as a consultant to the Administrator. (nasa Ann, 9/10/73) August 14:	An Apollo command module atop its Saturn IB launch vehicle was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center. Vehicle readiness had been ordered by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider for a possible rescue mission of Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28) when two of the four quadrants of the service module’s reaction control system, used for maneuvering the command and service module, failed and raised doubts about the ability of the CM to return safely to earth. If a rescue system were not ordered, the vehicle would carry Skylab 4 astronauts—Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—to a Nov. 9 rendezvous with the Skylab Orbital Workshop. (Marshall Star, 8/15/73, 1; Thomas, Today, 8/14/73)
Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr.—Apollo 13 lunar module pilot, Apollo 8 and 11 backup pilot, and Apollo 16 backup commander—had been named Technical Assistant to the Manager, Orbiter Projects Office, at Johnson Space Center, jsc announced. Haise, who had logged 142 hrs 54 min in space, would be responsible for assisting Manager Aaron Cohen in the overall management of the space shuttle orbiter development, (jsc Release 73-41)
Petrographic and chemical description of Apollo 16 lunar samples was given in a Science article by the Apollo 16 Preliminary Examination Team. Preliminary characterization of samples had “substantiated the inference that the luna terra are commonly underlain by plagioclase-rich or anorthositic rocks. No evidence has been found for volcanic rocks underlying the regolith in the Apollo 16 region. In their place, we have found anorthositic rocks that are thoroughly modified by crushing and partial melting.” Anorthositic rocks varied texturally and chemically, Occurrence of deep-seated or plutonic rocks in place of volcanic or pyroclastic materials suggested that “the inference from physiographic evidence that the latter materials are widespread in terra regions may be incorrect.” Other conclusions of the preliminary examination were: (1) Combination of data from the Descartes region and data from the orbital x-ray fluorescence experiment indicated that “some backside, highland regions are underlain by materials that consist of more than 80 percent plagioclase.” (2) Soil or upper regolith between North Ray and South Ray had not been completely homogenized since formation of the craters. (3) Chemistry of the soil indicated that rocks rich in potassium, uranium, and thorium—similar to those at the Fra Mauro site—were relatively abundant in the Descartes region. (4) Potassium-uranium ratio of the lunar crust was similar to that of icreep basalts. (5) The carbon content of the premare lunar crust was “even lower than that of the mare volcanic rock.” (Science, 1/5/73, 23-24)
The 16th Annual Goddard Memorial Dinner was held in Washington, D.C., with Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt among the honored guests. The Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. The citation read: “To the Honorable George M. Low who has held key positions in the space program since its beginning, and has played a vital role in putting men into space and later, on the moon. Among Dr. Low’s outstanding contributions was, as acting NASA Administrator in 1971, the negotiation of the space agreement with the Soviet Union which provided the foundation for the Apollo/Soyuz flight in 1975 and other joint space endeavors.” The National Space Club Press Award was presented to Ralph Morse of Life magazine for “his ingenuity in photographically interpreting the dynamics of the United States Space Program and for his resourcefulness in portraying the human experience in its larger dimension.” The Astronautics Engineer Award went to Wilfred E. Scull of Goddard Space Flight Center for “outstanding leadership—from decision to fruition—of the Earth Resources Technology Satellite Project.” The Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to The General Electric Co. for “outstanding accomplishment” as prime contractor to nasa for the Earth Resources Technology Satellite and ground data handling system. (Program)
Flight Research Center announced the award of a cost-reimbursable $51 600 000 contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology to provide software for an improved control system for NASA’s digital fly-by-wire experimental aircraft. The system would advance digital fly-by-wire technology by replacing the single-channel digital system undergoing flight tests with a dual system that used hardware developed originally for the Apollo program. (frc Release 15-73)
An era of global scarcity had begun, a Science editorial noted. “The advanced countries are vulnerable in one or more respects.” Japan had been enjoying a boom but needed to import raw materials, fossil fuels, and food. In Mexico people lived under conditions like those of 100 yrs ago, “with a disregard for sanitation,” but with “Coca Cola signs and transistor radios everywhere.” Much of the world was aware of U.S. living standard and gadgets. “They yearn for both, while the population explosion continues. We are soon going to witness dramatic and miserable confrontations of aspirations, expectations, and limitations.” (Abelson, Science, 7/27/73, 303) July 28-September 25:	The Skylab 3 Apollo spacecraft carrying a threeman crew was launched into near-earth orbit, rendezvoused with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), and docked with the space laboratory for the second manned mission in the Skylab program. A series of problems threatened to disrupt the mission, but corrective actions and workarounds permitted it to proceed successfully, setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Sept. 25. The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee at 10 min 2 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the csm separated from the stage as planned. The galactic x-ray mapping experiment mounted in the instrument unit (iu) was deployed. At 5 hrs 19 min 53 sec after launch the S—IVB/iu deorbit maneuver was commanded, and the stage impacted the predicted Pacific Ocean area after planned maneuvers. During CSM maneuvers to rendezvous with the Workshop, a leak was detected in the CSM reaction control system (rcs) quad B thruster, one of four assemblies of rockets used to stabilize the spacecraft or to change its velocity and also used as a backup for bringing the CSM back from orbit. Analysis indicated the oxidizer valve was stuck open or partially open. Quad B was isolated; analysis showed that all deorbit mission rules could be satisfied. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 3:38 pm edt on the fifth orbit. Rendezvous, fly-around, and docking were covered by 23 min of TV. The crew entered the multiple docking adapter (mda) at 4:00 pm edt and began Workshop activation, but activation was curtailed because the crew quickly began to feel motion sickness. Lousma was experiencing nausea and Bean and Garriott were uncomfortable. Bean said he and Garriott tended “to be fairly careful of how we move. And since we are moving rather slowly, then it’s taking a little bit longer than we’d planned.” Motion sickness continued the second day, July 29, and the astronauts were taking scopolamine-dexedrine tablets. Bean communicated, “We feel okay, except in the stomach. . . . And our thinking is that we’re not going to be able to work much faster than we are right now. . . . There’s a desire to maybe take a break for an hour or two and get in the bunk and stay still for a while.” Flight Director Neil B. Hutchinson told the press at JSC that extravehicular activity (eva) to install a new sun shield and retrieve and install Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) film probably would be delayed from July 31 to Aug. 1 at the earliest. Four to five hours of work were carried over from July 28 and 29. Still suffering from motion sickness, the astronauts continued Workshop activation July 30 (Mission Day 3). The first EVA was delayed to Aug. 2 and later rescheduled to Aug. 4 to ensure the astronauts’ complete recovery. Activation was completed July 31 (MD-4) and research began as the crew improved slightly. Bean told ground control: “We’re getting better; it’s just taking a little longer than we thought. . . . Everybody feels pretty good between meals. Then mealtime comes, and we’re caught ... in the squeeze. We’re trying to decide whether we ought to eat all we have to ... to keep our strength up, or eat about what we want to, which isn’t very much.” A TV broadcast from the space station July 31 showed minnows for a biomedical experiment swimming in their plastic aquarium in tight spirals and sometimes apparently trying to swim toward the surface, but with their heads pointed straight down. Garriott said, “Apparently they can’t make up their minds which way is up and down, either.” He also turned a spider named Arabella loose in a plastic cage to observe her web-spinning abilities in zero-g conditions. Later in the mission Garriott reported baby minnows hatched in space performed in water “as if they’d already adapted while they were still in the egg.” They “felt right accustomed to zero-g.” August 1-September 24:	Bean told ground controllers after breakfast Aug. 1 (MD—5) : “This is the first morning we’ve been up here . . . that after a meal everybody felt good. Everybody feels real good right now. Best since we’ve been here.” During live TV the astronauts ate a hearty lunch to music. Bean demonstrated his proficiency in eating while hanging upside down. A medical briefing below at Johnson Space Center suggested that moving quickly from the confined cm to the large Workshop might have contributed to the motion sickness. The milder nausea experienced on the May 25—June 22 Skylab 2 mission could have been caused by a more gradual transition into the Workshop. “I think that it is merely a matter of room in which you can exercise your vestibular mechanisms, and that the workshop simply presents more of that space. . . . perhaps it was too much too soon.” On Aug. 2 a master alarm buzzer awakened the astronauts at 6:45 am EDT. Pressure and temperature were falling rapidly in the CSM reaction control system quad D because of an oxidizer leak. Because of quad B’s July 28 leak, only A and C of the four quads remained fully operational. The quad D leak lasted two hours, losing an estimated 5 kg (12 lbs) of nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer. Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney said at a morning press briefing that the spacecraft was flyable with the loss of the two quads but “it would be flown in a mode which is not entirely standard.” The main concern was “that we have had two problems which are related, at least they seem to be related.” A flaw common to the whole RCS could necessitate the crew’s immediate return to the earth or accelerated preparation of the Skylab 4 spacecraft to make it available as a rescue vehicle should the CSM become unusable. Full activation of Skylab-rescue-vehicle preparation was authorized. Launch and checkout crews began working a 24-hr-day, 7-day-week schedule, preparing two additional couches and other equipment for installation. Earliest possible date for a rescue mission was established as Sept. 5. The EVA rescheduled for Aug. 4 was again postponed, for 24 to 48 hours to free the crew for system checks, to free ground controllers to troubleshoot the problem, and to give time to work out EVA procedures for the new spacecraft configuration. While reentry procedures were being rewritten for the new configuration, the astronauts continued scientific experiments. By the afternoon of Aug. 2 Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, was able to tell the astronauts that troubleshooting the RCS had indicated no apparent generic problem, but two unique quad failures, and there was now confidence that the two remaining quads would ensure attitude control should immediate reentry become necessary. “We’re proceeding ... as if we’re going to have a normal mission.” Astronaut Bean replied: “Fine. You just said the right words. . . . we’re pretty happy with the way things are going, at the moment . . . and we agree 100 percent with what you just announced. . . . everybody’s happy up here.” On Aug. 3 Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a JSC press briefing that continuing investigation indicated the two quad failures were unrelated and reexamination of reentry capabilities showed three ways of returning to the earth: using the primary service propulsion system, using the RCS with the two operational quads, and using the hybrid RCS in the cm. “We’re feeling considerably better than . . . yesterday morning.” A slowdown was ordered in the emergency rescue preparations. The Apollo cm would be outfitted in a Skylab 4 configuration, with three astronaut couches rather than the five needed for a rescue mission. The slowdown would delay rescue readiness until Sept. 10. Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma conducted their first full day of experiments and prepared for an earth resources experiment package pass. Garriott held the TV camera at the window to telecast a good view of the U.S. from North Dakota to North Carolina. Later the first of 26 erep passes was made, to gather data for oil exploration, ocean temperatures, mapping, land use surveys, crop inventories, and pollution studies. A master alarm sounded in the CSM Aug. 4, later attributed to a short-circuit in Skylab’s solar telescope system. The short knocked out one of the two TV systems in the atm but did not afFect Skylab’s main power system. Ground crews investigated problems in the primary and secondary coolant systems Aug. 5. One had been slowly leaking since the Skylab 1 launch May 14 and was expected to become inoperative in 16 to 20 days. The secondary loop was thought to have a small leak, begun during the Skylab 2 mission and giving the loop a predicted 60-day lifetime. Possibly additional coolant would have to be carried up by the next manned mission, Skylab 4, but Program Director Schneider said there was “no immediate danger to the crew.” By Aug. 6 evaluations showed that only the primary loop was leaking; the second was sound and could operate for the rest of Skylab 3 as well as for Skylab 4. Flight surgeon Paul Buchanan’s nightly bulletin said Aug. 5 that the crew “continues to report good health and optimistic outlook” and had asked about an increase in their menus “to match their growing appetites.” Fluid intake and output was “optimal.” The first EVA was performed Aug. 6. Garriott and Lousma stepped outside the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm edt to install the 3.6- by 7.3-m (12- by 24-ft), paper-thin, aluminized Mylar awning over the Workshop to reflect the sun’s rays away from the spacecraft skin, damaged when the meteoroid shield was torn ofF during the May launch. Garriott, standing in the Skylab’s open hatch, pieced together the two 16.8-m (55-ft) poles from metal sections and handed them to Lousma. Lousma attached them to a bracket to form a “V” over the Workshop. The sunshade was slowly pulled up by a system of pulleys. One rope kept twisting around the poles and the sunshade folds did not straighten immediately, but after four hours—twice the time expected—the sunshade was successfully deployed. Workshop temperatures were lowered before the EVA ended. Astronaut Bean said Garriott and Lousma worked “at a slow and steady pace” and were not tired. Lousma retrieved and replaced film in four ATM experiments, installed two new cameras, removed a door latch from an atm experiment, and fixed the particle-collection experiment to the rim of the atm. Lousma also inspected the two leaking quads in the CSM RCS and looked for coolant leaks. He noted some evidence of micrometeorite pitting but no clues to causes of the malfunctions. The astronauts completed the eva at 8:01 pm edt, after 6 hrs 31 min, surpassing the 3-hr 30-min record set June 7 by Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin. Garriott, first solar physicist in space, focused the atm cameras on the sun Aug. 7 for the first time during the mission. TV audiences watched him work at the ATM panel. By Aug. 8 Dr. Lawrence F. Dietlein, jsc Deputy Director for Life Sciences, reported the astronauts were “in excellent spirits and have no health problems.” They had completely recovered from motion sickness. Their weights had stabilized after a loss of 1.8 to 2.3 kg (4 to 5 lbs) each. Data obtained on the rotating chair indicated their sensitivity to motion had lifted. Since deployment of the sunshade, temperatures in the Workshop had dropped to 296 K (74°F). The crew photographed a coronal transient with the ATM camera two hours Aug. 10. It was the first time a transient—protons and free electrons expelled violently from the sun’s limb at a speed of about 312 km (194 mi) per sec, a phenomenon that occurred two or three times a year—had been observed at that range and time resolution. Program Director Schneider announced Aug. 14 that Skylab 3 would continue its full 59-day mission. From analyses of the CSM and Workshop, he had “concluded that there is no imminent need for rescue, and ... we have made the decision to proceed with a normal test flow on an accelerated basis at Cape Kennedy.” Skylab 4 was being prepared for a normal mission but would be available for a rescue mission if necessary. The earliest launch date could be Sept. 25. Schneider said, “We’re reasonably confident that [csm] 117 is a good vehicle.” “Looks like they got a renewed burst of confidence down there,” Bean said when told of the decision. “We feel that way up here.” JSC announced Aug. 21 that the astronauts would install a new “six-pack” of gyroscopes during an Aug. 24 EVA, to replace faulty ones. The six-pack had been carried up on the Skylab 3 cm. Meanwhile the crew continued with experiments, requesting more work Aug. 14 because all had spare time and “you just can’t sleep 8 hours up here.” They photographed tropical storm Brenda Aug. 19 as it moved across theYucatan Peninsula toward the Gulf of Mexico. On Aug. 21 Astronaut Bean discovered and photographed through ATM telescopes what Skylab principal investigator Dr. Robert MacQueen called “certainly one of the biggest solar events” seen on the Skylab missions. Bean said the complex series of events on the solar limb looked “like a big bubble” sitting on the edge of the disc. He observed it with the white light coronagraph and x-ray instruments and reported it to be three fourths the size of the sun. NASA scientists alerted other facilities to make observations from ground instruments and other satellites. Dr. MacQueen said the event might have been caused by an explosion on the back side of the sun. “It was a beautiful event.” The crew “did a fine job.” Schneider announced Aug. 23 (MD—27) that the Skylab 3 crew had been given permission to continue the mission for another seven days. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, told the press that he saw nothing in the medical data thus far “that would indicate that we could not press on with the mission, and ... we feel we can go the full 59 days as planned.” EVA—2 began at 12:24 pm edt Aug. 24 with am depressurization by Lousma and Garriott. Lousma completed installation of the six redesigned gyros mounted inside the spacecraft by connecting cables to a computer system outside, and the new gyro system was put into operation. The astronauts installed a sail sample on a hand rail to test durability, replaced ATM film, retrieved and stored cassettes from one experiment, and removed the aperture door ramp latch from two ATM experiments, concluding EVA-2 at 4:31 pm EDT, after 4 hrs 30 min. At 8:01 am edt Aug. 25 (MD—29) the Skylab 3 astronauts surpassed the single-mission endurance mark of 28 days 50 min set in June by Skylab 2. They had completed 404 earth orbits and had traveled 18.5 million km (11.5 million mi). And at 6:11 am edt Sept. 5 (MD-40) Astronaut Bean surpassed the space flight record for one man of 49 days 3 hrs 38 min 36 sec, set in June by Charles Conrad, Jr., on Skylab 2. EVA-3 began at 7:18 am edt Sept. 22. Bean and Garriott moved through space to retrieve and replace atm film and retrieve experiments and parasol samples. EVA operations ended at 9:59 am edt, after 2 hrs 41 min. During the mission, spiders Arabella and Anita first spun webs in corners of their cage, without the normal circular pattern. Each day, however, each improved web formation, adding more radials, adjusting to weightlessness. Garriott said of Arabella Aug. 9 that “she learned very rapidly in zero-g without the benefit of any previous experience.” She “figured out a very nice solution to the problems of zero gravity.” Later ground controllers told Garriott to share his filet mignon with the spiders to keep them alive for the entire mission. Anita, however, was found dead Sept. 16, possibly from inadequate diet. The astronauts righted the cm and remained inside until the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans maneuvered alongside and a crane lifted the cm aboard. Immediate medical examinations found the crew in excellent spirits and surprisingly good condition. Blood pressures and heart rates were within normal range. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for physical checks and would fly to Houston Sept. 26. They would be quarantined for one week. The Skylab 3 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing unmanned Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. Despite mission problems, 150% of scheduled atm observing time was accomplished and erep sensors were operated on 39 Z-axis local vertical data runs and 5 solar inertial data runs, completing 218 of the 386 earth resources task sites. All medical experiments were successfully carried out. All but one of the corollary experiments achieved or exceeded objectives. Of 13 student experiments, 9 were completed. Added unscheduled tests and experiments had significantly increased the data yield above premission planning and Skylab was left in an excellent position to complete the final SL-4 mission. Skylab 3 was officially adjudged a success Oct. 11. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 59 days 11 hrs 9 min; the longest cumulative time in space for one man, 69 days for Bean (who had spent 10 days on the Nov. 14-24, 1969, Apollo 12 mission) ; the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 41 000 000 km (25 500 000 mi) ; the longest EVA, 6 hrs 31 min on Aug. 6; and the longest cumulative orbital EVA time, for one astronaut, 13 hrs 40 min for Garriott. In the first mission to man the Orbital Workshop May 15-June 22, Skylab 2 astronauts had conducted medical, solar, and earth resources experiments for 28 days, as well as repairing the Workshop to salvage the mission. The Workshop would be operated unmanned until the November Skylab 4 launch for a third and final mission. (NASA prog off; jsc pao press briefing transcripts, 7/28/73-9/25/73; NYT, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Post, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Star-News, 7/28/73-9/27/73; B Sun, 8/16/73, A5; 8/20/73, A3) July 28:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment to a 120.2-km (74.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed successfully but the experiment data were saturated and not useful, (gsfc proj off) July 29:	Fifteenth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The act provided for the establishment of NASA, which officially came into being Oct. 1, 1958. (nasa Release 73-134) July 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, praised NASA’s successful efforts to save the Skylab 1—2 mission during testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Science hearing to review the Skylab Investigation Report [see July 13]: “We were able to save Skylab because of the tremendous depth and breadth of the NASA team and the dedication and skills of thousands of people on that team. There certainly isn’t another country that could have reacted as we did. I doubt whether there is another team within this country that could have reacted in this manner. Our team could do it because of years of training, working hard on highly exacting projects, and working as a team to drive toward a technical objective. The performance of the team on the ground, and of course the magnificent performance, skill and courage of the astronauts, saved Skylab. I would hope that this is remembered as the real story of Skylab, not the failure which caused it to happen.” NASA was “taking all the steps we know how to prevent a future failure due to similar causes in other programs.” Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center testified that, throughout six years of reviews and certifications, “the principal attention devoted to the meteoroid shield was that of achieving a satisfactory deployment. Never did the matter of aerodynamic loads on the shield or aeroelastic interactions between the shield and its external pressure environment during launch receive the attention and understanding during the design and review process which in retrospect it deserved.” The omission had not been surprising. “From the beginning, a basic design concept and requirement was that the shield be tight to the tank.” The question of whether the shield would remain tight against the tank under the dynamics of flight through the atmosphere “was simply not considered in any coordinated manner.” Possibly contributing to the oversight “was the basic view of the meteoroid shield as a piece of structure.” No full-time subsystem engineer had been assigned to the shield. “While it is recognized that one cannot have a full-time engineer on every piece of equipment, it is . . . possible that the complex interactions and integration of aerodynamics, structure, rigging procedures, ordnance, deployment mechanisms, and thermal requirements of the meteoroid shield would have been enhanced by such an arrangement,” (Testimony)
The countdown for the twice-delayed launch of the Skylab 4 mission [see Nov. 6, 12, and 13] proceeded smoothly toward Nov. 16 launch. The Apollo spacecraft’s electrical system was activated and the 1st stage of the Saturn IB launch vehicle was loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue inspected the spacecraft and received final briefings on the Apollo systems and the solar telescopes in the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14). (icsc press briefing transcript, 11/14/73; Wilford, NYT, 11/15/73, 6)
Appointment of David R. Scott, former astronaut, as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center was announced by frc. Scott had flown on Gemini 8 (March 16—17, 1966) and Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) missions and was commander of Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, he had served as Technical Assistant to the Apollo Program Manager and as Special Assistant for Mission Operations and Government Furnished Equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Office at Manned Spacecraft Center (which became Johnson Space Center Feb. 17). He held two nasa Distinguished Service Medals, the nasa Exceptional Service Medal, two Air Force Distinguished Service Medals, the Air Force Distinguished Flying Cross, the David C. Schilling Trophy of the Air Force, and the Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1971. (frc Release 21—73)
A New York Times editorial commented on the research recession caused by changing priorities of the Federal Government and insufficient budget appropriations in Federal research programs: “The brilliant record of American scientists . . . testifies to the quality of the national research enterprise. But how long can such top quality survive in the face of the present economic stringency and the threat of even worse times ahead?” (NYT, 1/5/73, 28) January 7:	Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had announced his decision to leave NASA and retire from the Navy effective March 1 to accept a position with private industry, Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Lovell, who had been Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC since May 1971, would become Senior Executive Vice President of Bay Houston Towing Co. Lovell was a veteran of four space flights including Gemini 7 (launched Dec. 4, 1965) ; Gemini 12 (launched Nov. 11, 1966) ; Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968), the first mission to circle the moon; and Apollo 13 (launched April 11, 1970), the mission scheduled to make the second lunar landing but aborted after an onboard explosion. He held the record for total time in space— 715 hrs (30 days), (msc Release 73-01)
The U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and NASA had agreed to a joint exhibit of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at the 30th International Exposition at LeBourget Airport, Paris, May 24 to June 3, NASA announced. Each agency would exhibit actual size models of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in docked configuration, (nasa Release 73-28)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, Atomic Energy Commission Chairman, to be U.S. Representative to the Sept. 18-24 International Atomic Energy Agency General Conference in Vienna. Among five alternate representatives nominated was Apollo 8 Astronaut and former National Space Council Chairman William A. Anders. {PD, 9/17/73, 1128, 1132)
The U.S.S.R. iunar vehicle Lunokhod 2 had completed its mission, Tass announced. The New York Times later said there were indications that Lunokhod 2 had had an accident shortly after the start of its fifth lunar day, while heading toward the uplands east of Le Monnier Crater and that the vehicle’s operation had been terminated unexpectedly. Lunokhod 2 (landed on the lunar surface Jan. 16 by Luna 21, launched Jan. 8) had covered 37 km (23 mi) of complex terrain and withstood sharp temperature changes. It had taken the first measurements from the lunar surface of the luminosity of the lunar sky and had established that the moon was surrounded by a layer of dust particles in which the visible solar light and the reflected earth light were dispersed. Lunokhod 2 had taken 86 relief panoramas and 80 000 TV photos of the lunar surface during 60 communications sessions. It had also measured physical, mechanical, and chemical properties of the upper layer of lunar rock and had studied the characteristics of the corpuscular emission of solar and galactic origin. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/6/73, L5; NYT, 6/5/73, 18)
Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D-W. Va.), for Sen. Lloyd M. Bentsen (D-Tex.), introduced S.J.R. 37 to designate Manned Spacecraft Center the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President. The resolution text said President Johnson had been “one of the first of our National leaders to recognize the long-range benefits of an intensive space exploration effort.” During his presidency he had borne the “ultimate responsibility for the development of the Gemini and Apollo programs which resulted in man’s first landing on the moon.” (CR, 1/26/73, S1344)
North American Rockwell Corp. shareholders voted at annual meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., to change the company name to Rockwell International Corp. The new name dropped all reference to North American Aviation, Inc., a household word in the U.S. and a contractor for the development of the Apollo spacecraft before its 1967 merger with the smaller Rockwell Standard Corp. The company’s Aerospace Group would become North American Aerospace Group. Changes would be effective Feb. 16. (NR Release NR-6; LA Times, 2/16/73; Ertel, Morse, The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology, nasa SP-4009)
U.S. Embassy officials in Moscow presented to U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny, on behalf of President Nixon, a lunar sample brought from the moon by the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 7 mission. Podgorny said in accepting the sample that preparations were “successfully continuing” for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. He wished “all success” to the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to work in the Orbital Workshop launched May 14). (W Star-News, 8/2/73, A2)
Reaction of writers Norman Mailer and Katherine Anne Porter to space flight and to nighttime launch of Apollo 17 were reported in the Christian Science Monitor. Authors had witnessed the Dec. 6, 1972, launch and participated in a space seminar during the “Voyage beyond Apollo” cruise of the S.S. Statendam, which left New York Dec. 4 for Cape Kennedy and the Caribbean. Mailer had said: “Moon colonies offer the possibility that we’ll be able to discover definitively and for the first time what we are doing wrong. Whether we thrive on the moon or fail we’re going to learn something that we’re not going to learn by staying here on earth. . . .” Part of “the fundamental impasse of 20th-century man and woman is that they cannot find communities which express their philosophical ideas, their social ideas, and their private ideas. In other words, the one thing that we can’t do any longer is verify what we think. We can have ideas. But we spend our lives just talking about them. “There are very few people who have a profound sense of commitment. One of the reasons that the astronauts have been so revered . . . is that they have this huge sense of commitment. . . . they are absolutely devoted to a living a life that they believe in utterly and are willing to go through great hardship for it. I think that until our society reaches the point where many more people live lives of such commitment it’s going to remain essentially unhealthy. . . . “The decision to go to the moon is such a declaration of intent. If nothing else, one has to risk dying on it. One has to recognize that one is taking a major step, and the idea of taking a major step brings out in, people at least for a short period . . . the best in them. Then, if there’s something really alive in the venture, they’re likely to keep changing their habits and go on to make more of themselves.” Miss Porter had said that, in almost anything men undertook together here on the earth, “in no time at all there’s a pull and haul for power. They’re betraying and tricking each other, getting in one another’s way. And yet when it comes to something they consider big enough and grand enough they do it in a grand way and they do it well, like the astronauts. . . . We’ve always built and saved a little more than we’ve been able to destroy, don’t you think?” (CSM, 1/3/73)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. A Black Brant IVB, launched from Wallops Island, carried an Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory and Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 603.5-km (375-mi) altitude to flight-test a modified version of the Black Brant IVB. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. A Black Brant VC, launched from White Sands Missile Range, carried a Harvard College Observatory experiment to a 268.8-km (167-mi) altitude to collect data on solar activity to collaborate with data collected by the Apollo Telescope Mount instruments aboard the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), now manned by the Skylab 3 crew (launched July 28). A capsule containing film was parachuted to the earth and recovered 160 km (100 mi) from the launch site. One detector failed but the experiment was 80% successful. The rocket performed satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; Reuters, B Sun, 8/10/73, A6) August 10:	NASA announced it had granted a five-year patent license to K-H Enterprises to manufacture and sell a burglar-intrusion detection system based on an Ames Research Center-developed capacitance pressure transducer. The transducer had been developed by ARC scientist Grant Koon to measure pressures on wind-tunnel models. In its application as an aircraft intrusion detection system, the transducer sensed the physical mass of an approaching person in the aircraft’s vicinity as a change in capacitance and activated an alarm, (nasa Release 73-148)
Appointment of Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.) as Program Director of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was announced by NASA. Lee, Apollo Mission Director for Apollo 12 through 17, would be responsible for direction of the U.S. astp effort, including management of the spacecraft and docking module, flight and crew operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, launch vehicle operations at Marshall Space Flight Center, and launch operations at Kennedy Space Center, (nasa Release 73-5)
The Apollo Honor Awards Ceremony at NASA Hq. celebrated the success of the Dec. 7—19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission and honored 47 persons for contributions to the success of the entire program. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a foreword to the ceremony that Apollo’s richest achievement might be the spiritual unity it provided “by enabling all Americans, and all the world watching our astronauts’ progress moonward, to discover the uniqueness of our beautiful yet fragile Earth as viewed from the perspective of the Moon. Unique in the solar system, it is the only home of the Family of Man; and seen from the perspective of the Moon, the common humanity that we all share becomes more evident than the temporal differences that keep us apart.” Dr. Fletcher and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Associate Administrator, presented awards, while Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt congratulated recipients. The NASA Distinguished Service Award was presented to Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, and Director Chester M. Lee of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Program, who had been Mission Director for Apollo 12 through 17. Exceptional Service Medals were presented to 21 employees; the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 14 scientists from Government, industry, and universities; and the Group Achievement Awards to 10 teams from industry and Government. The Distinguished Public Service Medal, NASA’s highest award to nonGovernment personnel, went to: Dr. B. Paul Blasingame, Delco Electronics Div., General Motors Corp.; Joseph F. Clayton, Aerospace Systems Div., Bendix Corp.; Clinton H. Grace, International Business Machines Corp.; Robert E. Greer, George W. Jeffs, and Joseph P. McNamara, Rockwell International Corp.; Thomas J. Kelly, Grumman Aerospace Corp.; H. Douglas Lowrey, Chrysler Corp. Space Div.; Richard H. Nelson, Boeing Co. Space Div. Aerospace Group; and Theodore D. Smith, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. (Program; nasa Release 73-60; RI pro)
NASA released a list of personal mementoes carried by Apollo 17 crew Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt on the Dec. 7-9, 1972, lunar mission. The crew had been permitted to carry 12 items each. Cernan had carried two Apollo 17 pins, a lunar module tie pin, wedding ring, moon flag pin, personal jewelry piece, $20 gold piece, religious memento, three Apollo 17 gold commemorative medals, and memento from Gemini 9 and Apollo 10. Evans had carried a wrist watch, wedding ring set, gold brooch set, ring, three wedding diamonds, a moonstone gem, identification bracelet, and three Apollo 17 gold commemorative medals. Schmitt had carried eight moon pins, turquoise beads, a family memento set, and two Apollo 17 silver commemorative medals. (NASA pao; W Post, 1/20/73, A7)
The U.S.S.R. had launched meteorological sounding rockets from the Soviet research ship Academician Korolev at the 180° meridian, Tass reported. The rockets had obtained data for a study of the interaction of the high-altitude atmosphere and the ocean on the frontier of the Eastern and Western Hemispheres. (fbis-Sov, 7/20/73, LI) July 6:	An automated water-sampling station developed at Langley Research Center for use in remote marshlands had been made available to the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the Langley Researcher reported. The prototype sampler could be deployed and retrieved by helicopter. (Langley Researcher, 7/6/73, 1) July 8:	Loading of the Apollo command and service module’s hypergolic propellants was completed at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the July 28 launch of Skylab 3. (icsc Release 163-73)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt attended an awards ceremony at Kennedy Space Center honoring icsc personnel and contractor employees for their contributions to the Apollo 17 mission (launched Dec. 7, 1972). (icsc Release 54-73)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt had arrived in Indonesia to present a moon rock to Indonesian President T. N. J. Suharto and lecture at the Indonesian Institute for Outer Space, the Associated Press reported. They were on an 11-country tour of Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and the Pacific. {Birmingham News, 6/25/73)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, accepted for NASA a Silver Plaque presented by the British Interplanetary Society at the opening of the 13th European Space Symposium in London. The plaque was awarded in recognition of the Apollo program’s “triumphant achievements” and to acknowledge “the dedicated service of many thousands of scientists and engineers which culminated in this great result.” (SF, 10/73, 396)
Mikhail D. Millionshchikov, Vice President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and a principal spokesman in Soviet scientific contacts with the West, died in Moscow at age 60. He had contributed significantly to the studies of the turbulent flow of liquids and gases, nuclear energy, and new techniques for direct energy conversion. On April 28, 1970, Academician Millionshchikov—as head of a 10-man Soviet delegation to a conference sponsored in Washington, D.C., by the Fund for Peace— had suggested U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space exploration. This proposal had been “the first public suggestion by a Soviet spokesman of this hope,” the New York Times reported later. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, also a conference participant, had proposed the next day that the two countries agree to exchange space engineers as a first step toward joint space cooperation. {NYT, 5/29/73, 32) May 28:	A New York Times editorial commented on the repair of Skylab 1, damaged on launch May 14: “Many people deserve credit for this remarkable turn of events. First there were the Houston ground controllers who maneuvered the crippled Skylab into an optimal position. ... A small but varied army of technicians hurriedly contrived not one but three possible ways of creating a parasol in space so as to replace the missing heat shield that had created the most trouble. Finally, the Sky-lab astronauts mastered their new tasks in an incredibily short time, reached orbit in the neighborhood of Skylab, surveyed the damage, and made the most essential ‘fix,’ the sunshade, which yesterday brought the station’s temperature down to tolerable levels.” It had been a grueling test for all concerned. “But for the moment, at least, the Skylab project has been truly resurrected from near-death.” (NYT, 5/28/73, 14)
The United Nations Working Group on Remote Sensing of Earth by Satellite reported the success of U.S. and Soviet programs in identifying soil types, mapping minerals, charting geological features, locating fish schools, and producing “highly accurate” maps in areas incompletely mapped by conventional methods. Data had come largely from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by nasa July 23, 1972. The Group suggested satellites might eventually detect underground water and record snowfalls. Valuable but incomplete information had been obtained about oceans. The Group urged priority research to develop methods of mixing carbon dioxide and ozone in the atmosphere, so satellites could monitor air pollution, and proposed putting a sensing system on the moon to monitor the earth’s atmosphere. {LA Times, 2/10/73; Atlanta JC, 2/22/73)
Establishment of the impact origin of Lonar Crater in Maharashtra, India, at less than 50 000 yrs ago was reported in Science by a team of U.S. and Indian geologists. Fission-track dating of shock-melted glass had also shown the preservation state to be in accord with such comparative youthfulness. As the only known terrestrial impact crater in basalt, Lonar Crater provided unique opportunities for comparison with lunar craters. Microbreccias and glass spherules from Lonar Crater had close analogs among Apollo lunar specimens. (Frederiksson et al., Science, 5/25/73, 862-4)
The skeleton crew at aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office at Jackass Flats, Nev., would be disbanded by late June, snso Nevada Operations Chief John P. Jewett was quoted as saying. The facility would be shut down June 30 following termination of the nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program [see Jan. 5]. More than $1.2 billion had been spent on program since its inception in 1959. (upi, Orlando Sentinel, 1/7/73)	! January 8-23:	The U.S.S.R. launched its Luna 21 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 11:55 am local time (1:55 am est). The “automatic station” was separated from the “satellite” in earth orbit and placed on a close to the planned trajectory for the moon. Tass said the purpose of the mission was to “further scientific studies of the moon and near-lunar space.” During the flight to the moon all systems were reported functioning normally. On Jan. 12 Luna 21 entered lunar orbit with 110-km (68.4-mi) apolune, 90-km (55.9-mi) perilune, 1-hr 58-min period, and 60° inclination. Orbital corrections were made Jan. 13 and 14 and on Jan. 14 the spacecraft was placed in an elliptical orbit with a low point of 16 km (10 mi) from the moon’s surface. Luna 21 softlanded on the eastern fringe of the Sea of Serenity Jan. 16 (Jan. 15 est) and released the 840-kg (1850-lb) self-propelled Lunokhod 2 vehicle to make scientific investigations of the moon’s surface. Lunokhod 2 resembled its predecessor, Lunokhod 1 (placed on the moon Nov. 17, 1970, by Luna 17). It carried flags, pennants with Lenin’s has relief, state coat of arms, and the inscription “50th Anniversary of the U.S.S.R.” and was equipped with a control system, radio and TV devices, and scientific instruments including a French-made laser reflector. The reflector was designed to measure the distance between the earth and the moon to within 20-30 cm (10-12 in). Between Jan. 16 and Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2, powered by solar batteries and controlled from the ground by a special crew, photographed the lunar soil, rocks, and panoramic moonscape; determined chemical composition of the surface layer; measured the glow of zodiacal light near sun; and looked for cosmic dust. A highly skilled ground crew maneuvered vehicle over the shortest and safest routes, orienting it to a complex relief map of route. Lunokhod 2 was turned to bypass obstacles without decreasing speed. On Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2 was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Luna 17 was the first unmanned spacecraft to land on the moon and deploy an automatic lunar explorer. The last mission in the series, the unmanned Luna 20 (launched Feb. 14, 1972), had landed on the moon and returned to earth with lunar samples, (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; Tass fbis-Sov, 1/8/73, LI; 1/15-19/73, LI; 1/22-23/73, LI; 1/26/73, 4; SBD, 1/9/73, 38; Shabad, NYT, 1/17/73, C14) January 8:	Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, nasa Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) Program Director, was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology as saying U.S.S.R. would use a U.S.-supplied very-high-frequency (vhf) transceiver on Soyuz spacecraft during rendezvous and docking maneuvers with Apollo spacecraft in July 1975 mission. Transceivers had been used in lunar modules for Apollo rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit. The U.S. also would build a receiver for Apollo spacecraft that could operate on Soviet communication frequencies and might lend to the U.S.S.R. equipment for use by cosmonauts and astronauts during joint portions of mission. Dr. Petrone had said NASA engineers, in discussions with Soviet engineers, had noted that necessity of concentrating on interpreter for exchange of technical information had made them more aware of technical problems than they would have been in direct English conversation. March meeting of U.S. and Soviet ASTP planners would consider flammability problems. (Av Wk, 1/8/73,
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)
A survey of knowledge about technology and research at the Univ. of Michigan by Chairman David Fradin of the Federation of Americans Suporting Science and Technology (fasst) was reported in Air Force Magazine. Of student respondents, 50% to 75% knew the Federal Government was the major source of research and development funds, that it took 6 to 10 yrs to research and develop a new product, that the U.S. had a positive balance of trade in high-technology and agriculture products, and that the trend in U.S. trade had been negative. More than 75% of respondents did not know the amount of Federal expenditure for defense or for human and physical resources, or that aerospace was the Nation’s largest manufacturing employer. Scientific effort was deemed unnecessary for national defense by 25% to 50%. From 50% to 75% felt the space program had helped U.S. technical growth, but that money spent in going to the moon had been wasted; they considered tangible space program benefits like new knowledge of the environment to be more important than aerospace leadership, national prestige, or keeping ahead of the U.S.S.R. (AF Mag, 7/73, 90-91)
nasa held two Skylab 2 press briefings at Johnson Space Center as the astronaut crew, orbiting the earth in the Orbital Workshop launched May 14, carried out experiments and solar photography. At an Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) briefing Dr. Robert Noyes of Harvard College Observatory said the experiment to look into the outer solar atmosphere “exceeds our wildest expectations. Every object that we’ve tried to look at, we’ve done successfully and we have seen . . . entirelynew and different phenomena.” For the first time there had been enough spatial resolution to see the fine structure. Data received by viewing the sun at different heights in the corona had established the existence of two fundamental structures—points of emission 12 900 km (8000 mi) in diameter and a cloud of relatively cool material emersed in the very hot corona. The structures should provide information on heat sources and physical properties of the corona. Dr. Robert Mac-Queen, High Altitude Observatory astronomer, said that a high point of the ATM experiments had been detailed examination of the corona for 45 consecutive hours, identifying the material making up the solar wind passing into the corona. At a solar-flare activity briefing Dr. Guiseppe Vaiana, American Science and Engineering, Inc., scientist and a principal investigator on Skylab, described the TV coverage of the solar flare photographed by Astronaut Paul J. Weitz: “What you are seeing is the great event of the day.” The flare had a double structure in the active region. A portion of it outlined the magnetic field of one polarity on one side and the other polarity on the other side, with a center neutral line. Two bright spots were seen on both sides of the neutral line. The flare extended 100 000 km (62 000 mi) up from the solar surface and covered 21/2 trillion sq km (1 trillion sq mi). It had peaked in intensity 3 min after it had been discovered by Weitz and decayed during the following 30 min. (Transcript)
A Detroit News editorial commented on Pioneer 10’s Dec. 3 rendezvous with Jupiter: “Jupiter is lucky. It appears to radiate three times as much energy as it receives from the sun. When all the knowledge Pioneer has transmitted has been absorbed and categorized by NASA scientists, it should provide clues to new energy sources for earth, particularly solar energy and the sun’s rays. All these possibilities are beyond the comprehension of an energy-conscious nation that in four years has grown blase about man walking on the moon. But they open the door for the scientists to apply on earth the potential resources of the solar system.” (D News, 12/5/73) December 9:	A partial lunar eclipse, one of three visible from North America during 1973, shaded 10% of the moon. Cape Canaveral residents could view the obscurity at its peak at 8:45 pm est. (Today, 12/10/73)	' December 10:	Establishment of a NASA Task Force on Energy Conservation and designation of Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), Special Assistant to the Administrator and Assistant Administrator for dod and Interagency Affairs, as Director of Energy Conservation were announced by Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator. In a memorandum to Center Directors and program and staff office heads Dr. Low said the Task Force would direct NASA activities to reduce energy use, determine where further energy reductions could be made in NASA and its programs, and apply technical and management ingenuity to finding new and imaginative ways in which NASA and other agencies could conserve energy. (Text)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate John R. Quarles, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency succeeding Robert W. Fri, whose resignation he accepted. The President also designated Quarles, Acting epa Deputy Administrator, as Acting Administrator pending the confirmation and appointment of Russell E. Train as Administrator. Quarles’ nomination was submitted to the Senate Sept. 5 and confirmed Sept. 14. (PD, 8/20/73, 982; 9/10/73, 1070; epa pio) August 16:	NASA announced tentative plans to observe the Comet Kohoutek during the Skylab 4 mission, planned for Nov. 9 launch to join the Sky-lab Orbital Workshop. The Apollo Telescope Mount instruments provided a broad capability for comet observations over a range of spectral .bands. Observations would begin in mid-November and continue until shortly before mission completion, scheduled for Jan. 4, 1974. The tentative plans would be reviewed after the completion of the Skylab 3 mission (launched July 28). If technical problems necessitated an earlier launch to minimize the length of unmanned operations, it would not be possible to observe the comet. A possible 10-day delay of the launch beyond Nov. 10 would also be considered, to permit observation of the comet until Jan. 14. NASA also deleted the requirement to maintain the capability to launch the backup Workshop, which originally was to have been maintained to Sept. 30. (nasa Release 73-162)
A secret Department of Defense study and an independent Air Force study had shown that costs on the F-15 fighter aircraft could run $1.7 billion —21%'—above estimates given to Congress, the Washington Star and Daily News reported. The engine developed for the F—15 had had 52 hitherto undisclosed hardware breakdowns. Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., was convinced the F—15 would not encounter the cost problems plagued by other large aircraft programs but was concerned about the engine problems. Seamans had asked NASA to help solve the problem and find better ways to develop new aircraft engines, the newspaper said. (Kelly, W Star & News, 3/18/73, Al) March 19:	President Nixon submitted Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1972 Activities to Congress. He said in his transmittal message: “The Apollo program was successfully concluded with the flights of Apollo 16 and 17. These missions were designed to obtain maximum scientific return and provided almost half the lunar exploration time in the Apollo program. Though it is far too early to attempt a definitive assessment of the value of this program, it is clear that one result will be a quantum jump in both our scientific knowledge and our technical expertise. Our unmanned satellites include a variety of vehicles ranging from meteorological, navigational and communication satellites to a new experimental spacecraft providing information on our resources and environment. Increasing practical applications for satellite technology confirm the immediate value of our efforts in space, while observatory satellites and others carrying specialized scientific instruments provide accurate and dependable data never before available to scientists on earth. The conclusion of the Apollo programs marks only another step in this Nation’s push into space.” The year 1972 had also seen advances in aeronautical research and development. “It should be emphasized that work in this field is particularly vital if America is to maintain its leadership in the development and production of civil and military aircraft and engines. Our efforts in aeronautics and space will allow us to meet demands in these and other important domestic and foreign areas.” The report said the year had been one “of significant, advanced accomplishments in lunar exploration, exploration of the planets and the universe, and in aeronautical concepts.” A balanced program had been initiated to “continue exploration in space, space science studies, application of space for benefits on earth, and the development of new technology for space and aeronautics” by the 16 Federal agencies reporting. (Text)
Soviet Novosty Press science writer Yury Marinin said in a letter to the Washington Post that the U.S.S.R. “abandonment” of manned lunar missions did not mean that nation was lagging behind the U.S. in space exploration. “Soviet specialists think it more expedient to explore the moon by automatic devices, with the present level of world technology. Besides, manned flights to the moon involve tremendous expenses.” Soviet automatic devices would be “steadily improved as they continue their planned studies of the moon.” (TV Post, 1/11/73, A19)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt received the traditional greeting from Congress following their Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. They were welcomed by the House of Representatives, since the Senate was not in session. Cernan told the House that Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s placement of the first U.S. flag on the moon in 1968 had been “a symbol of the courage and the dedication and the effort and self-sacrifice of 200 million people in this country who made that effort possible.” The act had “probably gained more pride and more respect throughout the entire world than any one thing that has happened ... in the entire 200-year history of our country.” With one step by Armstrong, “we are able to gain something that we had never really been able to grab hold of in my lifetime.” Evans said his stay in the CM had made him realize that earth, like spacecraft, had limited consumable resources and “somehow the human survival requirement means that we have got to conserve these resources and man must learn to adapt to his environment.” Schmitt said that, in obtaining knowledge through the Apollo program, man had evolved into entering universe. “Although the nature of that evolution was technological, I believe it will be marked a thousand years from now as a single unique event in human history” appearing “more distinctly even than history’s record of our use of atomic energy. It is at times unseemly, at times shortsighted but always human pathway through time, mankind found that its reach could include the stars.” (CR, 1/22/73, H372-4)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced it had adopted fuel-saving regulations permitting airlines to use flight simulators more in pilot training and flight checking. The new rules could save 200 000 cu m (50 million gal) of fuel annually and reduce flights by 9300. (faa Release 73-215) December 23:	Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper, astronomer and space pioneer, died of a heart attack at the age of 68, while visiting Mexico City. During his early career, Dutch-born Kuiper had discovered groups of dwarf stars, satellites of Uranus and Neptune, and an atmosphere surrounding Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. In the 1950s he became the first astronomer to measure Pluto’s diameter accurately and charted the equator and position of the poles of Venus. In the 1960s Dr. Kuiper became one of the foremost authorities on the moon, working in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor projects and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. (McFadden, NYT, 12/25/73, 24) December 24:	Fifth anniversary of the Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by the moon-orbiting crew of Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) to TV and radio audiences that included one of every four persons on earth. The crew of Skylab 4 (launched Nov. 16 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14), second crew to spend Christmas in space, devoted Christmas Eve to searching for and opening gifts hidden for them in the Apollo command module before launch by colleagues in Mission Control. The packages included a 91-cm (36-in) green cloth Christmas tree beneath the gear they would need for their scheduled Christmas Day space walk and a surprise package stored in the CM locker. Mission Control also planned to transmit over a teleprint circuit a Christmas card depicting the sun, Skylab, gifts, and Santa’s sled. (A&A 1968; UPi, W Star-News, 12/24/73, Al)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt visited Kennedy Space Center to thank employees for their efforts in making manned exploration of the moon possible. Dr. Schmitt said man would explore Mars in the not too distant future. “The reason it is possible to talk this way and not be accused of talking science fiction is because there’s no longer science fiction. It’s now only science prediction.” (upi, LA Her-Exam, 2/21/73)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial saluted Skylab as “a triumph of man’s ingenuity, endurance and indomitable spirit.” The May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission had been “a tremendous demonstration of why man is vital to the broad expansion of space missions that looms for the next decade, and it demonstrated on live television for every taxpayer who cared to watch exactly what the space shuttle is all about.” The first Skylab crew had salvaged 80% of a successful mission and a $2.5-billion investment from the prospects of total disaster, opened new vistas on the scientific work that could be accomplished from a space platform, and proved that man could live and work usefully for extended periods in space. (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/9/73, 7) July 9-20:	Apollo-Soyuz Test Project specialists from NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences met at Johnson Space Center. They continued development of trajectories and flight plans, agreed tentatively to a scientific experiment plan, and familiarized the Soviet crew of tbe July 1975 mission with the Apollo spacecraft. Participants included astp technical directors Glynn S. Lunney for the U.S. and Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev for the U.S.S.R., Apollo and Soyuz flight crews, the Working Group on Mission Model and Operational Plans, and members of the Working Group on Control and Guidance. The Soyuz cosmonauts [see May 24] attended lectures on and demonstrations of the Apollo spacecraft, docking model briefings, and crew activity discussions. Lunney and Bushuyev reviewed astp milestones and reaffirmed that they were on schedule. On July 14 the Soviet delegation heads and cosmonauts toured assembly and checkout facilities at the Rockwell International Corp. plant in Downey, Calif., where astp work was being carried out. Meeting results were announced by NASA in a July 20 communique. Progress had been reported on crew activities, control center operations, trajectories, and other operational aspects. Agreements were reached on November familiarization of the U.S. flight crews with Soyuz equipment in the U.S.S.R., a preliminary cosmonaut training plan in the U.S. in April 1974 and February 1975, and astronaut training in the U.S.S.R. in July 1974 and March 1975. The training plan was expected to be completed in November and flight procedures finalized by the end of 1974. Final selection of joint experiments would be made in October 1973. Flight safety reports would be exchanged. The U.S.S.R. had specified the Moscow Center of Control of Manned Space Flight near Moscow as astp control center and had announced that Cosmonaut Aleksey S. Yeliseyev would be U.S.S.R. flight director. The U.S. technical director and several U.S. working groups would attend U.S.S.R. ASTP meetings in October, (nasa Release 73—93; nasa Communique)
Apollo 16 and 17 lunar samples, representing the widest variety of soil and rock from both missions, were presented at Johnson Space Center to Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives Vladimir Shcherbina and Lev Tarasov by Dr. Paul W. Gast, jsc Chief of Planetary and Earth Sciences Div. The presentation of three grams (one tenth ounce) each of rock and soil from the Descartes and Taurus-Littrow landing sites was part of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement for exchange of lunar samples, (jsc Release 73-28)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 056 889 cost contract to Utah State Univ. to study disturbed and undisturbed infrared atmosphere. Rocketborne instruments .would measure optical and infrared emissions, both natural and those stimulated by atmospheric dosing from a rocket-borne electron source, (dod Release 113-73) March 5—8:	nasa’s Fourth Annual Lunar Science Conference, at Johnson Space Center, was attended by more than 750 scientists from the U.S. and 12 foreign countries. Visitors included scientists from the U.S.S.R. who presented papers on Apollo lunar samples received from the U.S. At the opening session Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator said, “I can see at least a decade of fruitful analysis, synthesis, and integration of the information locked up in the material brought back and still coming back from the scientific stations left on the moon” in the Apollo program. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, California Institute of Technology scientist, described “lunar cataclysm.” Lunar dust brought back by Apollo astronauts had been estimated to be as old as 4.5 billion yrs. But most lunar rocks were less than 4 billion yrs old and none were younger than 3 billion yrs. The best explanation was that 3.9 billion yrs ago the moon was battered and bombarded on an unprecedented scale, creating so much heat that old rocks were destroyed and a new generation of rocks was created. Since then the moon might have experienced minor volcanic eruptions but nothing like that period of cataclysm. Some scientists believed the moon had cooled and gone into a period of hibernation. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of the State Univ. of New York said even the orange soil found by Apollo 17 astronauts had turned out to be 3.71 billion yrs old, an age disappointing to scientists who had believed the moon had been formed by more recent volcanic activity. Dr. Keith A. Howard, U.S. Geological Survey geologist, compared the lunar landslide found near the Apollo 17 landing site to a large, high-velocity avalanche on earth. Dr. Howard suggested that gas within the lunar soil had been released during the slide. Apollo 17 samples would be searched for evidence of fluids. One Apollo 17 instrument placed on the lunar surface had made an atom-by-atom search for evidence of lunar atmosphere. Although the moon had no atmosphere, traces of argon, neon, and helium had been found. Dr. John H. Hoffman, associate professor of physics at the Univ. of Texas, said only argon appeared to have been generated from the moon’s interior. Neon and helium apparently had been deposited by the solar wind. Conference attendees unanimously voted to congratulate NASA on completion of the Apollo program by sending a letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: The conception, design, and implementation of lunar exploration represented “an extraordinary human and technological achievement.” To explore another planet, it had been necessary for man “to achieve many successive levels of technological capability and to surpass formidable barriers. This was accomplished brilliantly by the dedicated engineers and astronauts of NASA in conjunction with skilled management. On this technical base a new branch of science has been built.” (Transcript; Goddard News, 3/73, 2; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; NASA Activities, 4/15/73, 67) March 5-9:	More than 1000 administrators, congressmen, and government, industry, and university scientists attended the Erts 1 Earth Resources and Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center in New Carrollton, Md. Two hundred papers presented results from Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) experiments in agriculture and forestry, mineral resources and geology, environmental surveys, land-use mapping, and marine surveys. Dr. Marian Baumgardner, scientist at the Purdue Univ. Laboratory for the Applications of Remote Sensing, said results from Erts 1 study of semi-arid regions suggested that the satellite could identify and map vegetative, species, and management differences in range lands; gross soil patterns and differences related to agricultural and land-use-management problems and practices; areas of surface water and changes related to ground water recharge; crop damage by hail and windstorms; and areas of bare soil and related problems of erosion and conservation. Dr. William A. Fischer, U.S. Geological Survey scientist, said data from an Erts 1 study of Alaska had reinforced recent plate tectonic theories of a continuing mobility in the earth’s crust. The satellite had mapped fractures previously unknown or not put together as continuous structures in the earth’s crust. The fractures indicated “there has been a fundamental movement, extending deep down into the crust.” Dr. John Miller of the Univ. of Alaska said seismic data and Erts 1 identification of previously unknown fractures “has been an important input to the design of a bridge structure across the Yukon River . . . and possibly the pipeline.” (Transcript)
The Federal Aviation Administration announced award of a $735 213 contract to Collins Radio Co. to develop new area aviation techniques to increase airport and airways capacity. The two-year study would emphasize two-dimensional (positional and altitude guidance) and three-dimensional (added time element) area navigation concepts. (faa Release 73-30) February 9—19:	The U.S.S.R. ground control commanded the lunar explorer Lunokhod 2 to unfold its solar battery panel and begin its second lunar day of exploration. The moon car explored its parking area—a small deep crater with outcroppings of bedrock at its edge, formed 3 million yrs ago by a large meteorite that hit the surface of congealed lava. Lunokhod 2 made measurements of the magnetic field inside the crater by approaching it four times from different directions and making 120 precision maneuvers. The vehicle moved southeasterly to the Taurus Mountains. En route it measured physicomechanical properties of the soil and tension of the local magnetic fields, took panoramic photos of surrounding terrain, and tested riding characteristics of the lunar vehicle in various modes of operation. A monolith one meter (three feet) long of unusual lunar material was discovered Feb. 13. The plate had a strong, smooth surface unlike surrounding pockmarked stones and appeared to be much younger. During exploration of the giant crater Lunokhod 2 skidded and swerved over 2.3 km (1.4 mi) of difficult terrain with slopes up to 25° and sank in dust to the hub of its wheels as it ascended the rim of the crater. At the top of the rim, TV cameras showed a complex surface with ejecta piled on the rims of lunar holes formed when three meteorites hit the area within millions of years. Lunokhod 2 descended the slope of a 100-m (330-ft) crater, leaving deep ruts in loose rock. The difficult ascent was interrupted for 20 hrs to replenish electrical energy Feb. 19. Lunokhod 2 had covered 9.6 km (6.0 mi) since landing on the moon Jan. 16. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 2/14/73, LI; 2/15/73, L2-L3; 2/21/73, L2-L3) February 10-March 10:	Water impact and towing tests of the space shuttle’s solid-propellant booster were conducted by the Navy at the Long Beach, Calif., Naval Shipyard. Tests, under Marshall Space Flight Center direction, gathered data on retrieval of reusable solid-fueled-motor casings jettisoned from the orbiter stage at 40-km (25-mi) altitude. Test hardware, a 77%-scale model of the shuttle booster, was dropped from heights of 0.3 to 12 m (1 to 40 ft) at angles of 10°, 20°, and 30° off vertical. The model was towed at speeds of 3.7 to 14.8 km per hour (2.3 to 9.2 mph). Kennedy Space Center was responsible for development of the retrieval techniques; MSFC, for design and fabrication of solid-propellant reusable boosters, (msfc Release 73-12; icsc Release 22-73; NASA prog off) February 11:	Rising costs of the Skylab missions were discussed by Thomas O’Toole in a Washington Post article: Nearly $400 million had been added to cost estimates since the Skylab program had originated seven years ago. Postponement of the first Skylab launch from April to May had added $5 million in overtime costs and NASA had conceded another two-week delay and $5 million in additional costs was possible. Another reason for skyrocketing costs was the post-Apollo switch of emphasis from the moon and planets to the earth. Skylab’s original purpose had been to study the sun and addition of the earth studies program on Skylab had added greatly to costs. Skylab was the flagship of the U.S. manned space program. It was the “most impressive machine ever built,” weighing 90 metric tons (100 U.S. tons) and providing living quarters equal to a three-bedroom house. Scientists saw Skylab as the link between the first decade of space exploration and the 1980s, when the reusable shuttle would become operational. It would provide much information about effects on the human body of long periods in space. The last of three Skylab crews might stay in space for 70 days. “If they make it that long without any serious side effects, they will have done as much for space exploration as any of the pioneers before them.” (O’Toole, W Post, Al) February 12:	A statement by Western Union International, Inc., Vice President Thomas S. Greenish that mainland China had no plans for establishment of a domestic satellite communications system was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology. Greenish had returned from two-month stay in People’s Republic of China in connection with an earth terminal being built by WUI near Peking. (Av Wk, 2/12/12),
The National Science Foundation released Federal Support to Universities, Colleges, and Selected Nonprofit Institutions, Fiscal Year 1971 (nsf 73—300). Total Federal obligations (exclusive of loans) to institutions of higher learning increased in current and constant dollars. Current-dollar volume rose $253 million, or 8%, to a record $3480 million. Constant-dollar increase was 2%, the first increase since 1967. The first 100 universities and colleges in Federal support accounted for more than $2.4 billion during 1971, or 69% of Federal funds to all academic institutions. Private universities and colleges receiving Federal funds outnumbered public institutions receiving Federal funds 1242 to 1126, but public institutions accounted for 61% of total Federal obligations, 65% of degrees awarded, and 75% of students enrolled. In 1971 life sciences research and development funding was $741 million, or 48% of all Federal r&d obligations. Obligations for general support of NSF and National Institutes of Health science programs was $100 million, the same level as in 1970. The Atomic Energy Commission continued as the principal Federal agency funding academically associated r&d centers, with 64% of the $984 million Federal total. NASA and the Dept, of Defense awarded $312 million, or 32% of the total. (Text) During April:	Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt concluded the largest and most successful schedule of postflight public appearances undertaken by an astronaut crew. The tour, begun Jan. 12 in Los Angeles, included 57 stops in 25 states and the District of Columbia in 11 weeks. The astronauts met with 12 state governors and addressed state legislatures in Kansas, New Mexico, Georgia, Arkansas, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Colorado, and Washington. Activities Bureau Chief Eugene A. Marianetti of NASA’s Public Events Directorate said later that the astronauts had met no evidence of antispace sentiment, “only a lack of adequate information ... on the actual amount spent on the space program.” (NASA Activities, 5/15/73, 89)
A decision by de Havilland Aircraft of Canada Ltd. to build the world’s first short takeoff and landing (stol) passenger transport aircraft was reported by the Washington Post. The firm would shortly begin work on two prototypes of 48-passenger, turboprop DHC—7 aircraft to be test-flown within two years. The aircraft would be certifiable by 1975. The Canadian government had approved $80 million for development of the DHC—7, designed for routes under 800 km (500 mi). The aircraft would operate from 600-m (2000-ft) runways with minimal noise and pollution. (Botwright, W Post, 1/21/73, L2) January 22:	Former President Lyndon B. Johnson died of heart attack in Austin, Tex., at the age of 64. During his senatorial career preceding his election to the Vice Presidency in 1961, Johnson had served in 1957 as Chairman of the Prepardeness Investigating Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Armed Services, where he had instituted an inquiry into the status of U.S. satellite and missile programs. Hearings led to establishment Feb. 6, 1958, of the Senate Special Committee on Space and Astronautics with Johnson as Chairman. The Special Committee prepared the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 establishing NASA (effective Oct. 1, 1958). Before passage of the Space Act July 29, 1958, the Senate created the permanent Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences July 24. Johnson became first chairman—the position he held until 1961. Johnson was Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council 1961—1963 and was instrumental in persuading President John F. Kennedy to select attainment of a manned lunar landing within the decade as a national goal. Johnson had become 36th U.S. President on assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963 and had seen the first successful manned circumlunar flight, made by Apollo 8 Dec. 21—27, 1968, before he left office in January 1969. (W Post, 1/23/73, Al; CR, 1/29/73, S1467)
NASA’s 15th anniversary year—memorable for advances in earth resources technology, aeronautics progress, expanded international cooperation in space, and increased promise for future manned and unmanned planetary exploration—boosted the U.S. space program from the spectacular orbit of Apollo lunar exploration to a steady program of extended service to science and mankind. Skylab’s triumph heralded the approach of the shuttle era that would weld with the earth the vast regions of near-earth space, extending man’s transportation system into regions beyond land, sea, and air. The newest Pioneer probes began penetration into the mysteries of outer planetary space. Budget restrictions in line with President Nixon’s January 1250-billion target for total Government spending slowed space shuttle manpower buildup, suspended work on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory, and required phase-out of communications satellite work and curtailment of work on nuclear propulsion. But Skylab, the space shuttle, the scheduled U.S.-U.S.S.R. 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the Viking, the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, and many applications and aeronautics projects were retained in a balanced and productive program. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for the past seven years and member of the NASA staff since October 1958, retired at the end of the year. Dr. Newell had been Science Program Coordinator in the Nation’s first satellite program, the Naval Research Laboratory’s Project Vanguard, before establishment of NASA. Tight funding and the near completion of the Skylab missions brought a net reduction in NASA Civil Service employees of 1646, including retirements, during the calendar year, with a total 25 598 on board Jan. 5, 1974. Headquarters employees dropped by a net change of 80, Kennedy Space Center by 117, Johnson Space Center by 110, Marshall Space Flight Center by 374, Ames Research Center by 49, Flight Research Center by 13, Langley Research Center by 62, Lewis Research Center by 494 (with the phasing down of Plum Brook Station), Goddard Space Flight Center by 289, and Wallops Station by 14. aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office was closed with the end of the nerva program. Further reductions of 628—including 405 at msfc and 200 at LeRC—were scheduled in 1974, to bring the FY 1974 end-of-year total to the required 24 970 ceiling. Aerospace industry employment in the Nation increased to 946 000 in June but declined to 935 000 by the year’s end. Techniques developed for aerospace activities were applied to earthquake prediction, development of residential solar heating, and fuelsaving integrated systems for housing. NASA added 550 technical briefs to its more than 5000 technical innovations already available for U.S, industry use. More than 68 000 U.S. industrial and commercial firms requested additional data on these innovations. Some 3000 firms spent $625 000 for special assistance from nasa’s Regional Dissemination Centers; 1500 firms purchased 1891 computer programs and related documentation for $221 530. NASA liberalized its patent-licensing procedures to speed technology transfer and during 1973 five exclusive patent licenses, the largest number since the program’s inception, were granted. A nasa liaison office was opened in New York City to work directly with city agencies on public safety, drug detection, and fire prevention. A rechargeable heart pacemaker was developed under nasa auspices by the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Electronic components designed for space use were incorporated in the device, which could be recharged at home by the patient, eliminating the need for surgery every two years to replace conventional devices. A new radio transmitter temperature pill allowed doctors to check localized internal body temperature changes. A portable visual testing device permitted early detection of eye disorders. A test hospital room for paralyzed patients used space-developed devices for remote operation of communications systems and appliances. The nasa FY 1974 appropriation of $3,002 billion was $13.9 million below the budget request, $62.4 million below the $3.0645-billion FY 1973 authorization, and $406 million below the FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion. (A&A 1972; A&A 1973; Aerospace, 2/74, 6-11; nasa Off Comptroller; nasa Off of Admin; NASA SP-5119; nasa Release 73281)
Preliminary data from the May 17 Plowshare underground nuclear blast in western Colorado indicated the blast had not damaged vast oil shale deposits in the area, Atomic Energy Commission spokesman Dr. Charles Williams told the press in Rio Blanco, Colo. Oil industry officials had claimed the blast could damage the shale, a future energy source, (upi, W Post, 5/25/73, A3) May 23—June 6: The 16th Annual Meeting of the Committee on Space Research (cospar) was held in Constance, West Germany. Data from the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by nasa July 23, 1972, was presented in a three-day symposium on applications of space techniques to monitoring environmental problems. Recently analyzed data from the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7-19, 1972) necessitating changes in existing lunar models were presented during working group meetings. Other topics included space biology, astronomical experiments conducted by space vehicles, and data from planetary explorations. The National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council’s Space Science Board submitted its report United States Space Science Program, including progress in NASA’s geodetic satellite program. The program continued to provide essential ingredients in support of the emerging earth and ocean physics applications program (eopap), which would make geodetic satellite measurements for a global geometric network of reference points to a 10-m (33-ft) accuracy, refine knowledge of the gravity field for determination of geoid features of 1000 km (620 mi) accurately to about 10 m (33 ft), and evaluate the geodetic instruments used. The U.S.S.R. presented its report Space Research Performed in the USSR in 1972, including data from Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971, to orbit the moon). Meteoric particles near the moon were found not to exceed their density in interplanetary space. The moon’s perturbing effect on the earth’s magnetic loop and on interplanetary magnetic fields of solar origin were confirmed. Analysis of the sample collected by the Feb. 14-25, 1972, Luna 20 mission showed that the primary rocks of continental regolith were chiefly anorthosite rocks which sharply distinguished “continents” from “maria.” The sample contained finely dispersed metal iron of very high corrosion resistance, just as found in material from Luna 16 and Apollo 11 and 12. (nasa Release, 3/23/73; nasa pio; US text; jprs 59778, trans of USSR rpt) May 24:	President Nixon sent a message to the first Skylab crew on the eve of its Skylab 2 launch to join the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop, launched May 14: “Already the courage and ability which you and your colleagues have shown in coping with the initial difficulties of the mission have given us a great sense of confidence in the Skylab team. Through those efforts you have shown the world that man is prepared to meet and overcome the challenges of space.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/26/73, Al)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
NASA planned to spend up to $100 million during the next five years on the post-Apollo lunar science program to extract information from 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar samples, 30 000 photos, and “miles” of magnetic tape from six Apollo lunar landing missions, the New York Times reported. Director Anthony J. Calio of Manned Spacecraft Center Office of Science and Applications had said in an interview that recommendations in an October 1972 report of the Lunar Science Institute were being followed in much of msc’s planning, but the msc Lunar Receiving Laboratory would be closed on completion of Apollo 17 sample processing. The sample collection might be divided for storage at another Government facility as a “precaution.” The lrl report had said preservation of MSC curatorial facilities for lunar materials was “absolutely essential” to lunar science objectives. Calio said sample inventory and preparation of rock slivers for the thin sections library should take two years. Repository for Apollo geophysical material, including magnetic tapes, probably would be Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wilford, NYT, 1/3/73, 25)
Results of Apollo 14 and 16 (launched Jan. 31, 1971, and April 16, 1972) heavy-particle dosimetry experiments were reported in Science by scientists from Johnson Space Center and the General Electric Research and Development Center. Earlier measurements using Apollo helmets as dosimeters had indicated that a significant 1% of certain nonregenerative motor-control cells in the bodies of astronauts in space would be killed by radiation from densely ionizing, heavy atomic nuclei with the current Apollo spacecraft shielding. Doses of heavy particles penetrating the CMs of Apollo 8, 12, 14, and 16 correlated well with calculated effects of solar modulation of the primary cosmic radiation. Differences in doses at different positions inside the CMs had indicated that the redistribution of mass within the spacecraft could enhance safety from the biological damage that would otherwise be expected on manned, deep-space missions. (Fleischer el al., Science, 8/3/73, 436-8)
The exhibit “The Image of the Moon—Galileo to Apollo XI,” from the art collection of Anthony Michaelis, opened at the Univ. of Houston in Clear Lake City, Tex., in cooperation with the Univ. of Houston Libraries. (Invitation)
A Los Angeles Herald-Examiner editoral commented on NASA’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1] : “A decade and a half ago, the Congress charged NASA to explore outer space and to adapt space-related advances for immediate general use. Both mandates have been fulfilled, and NASA officers predict hundredfold advances over the next 10 years. We salute NASA on its 15th anniversary. When the question is asked ‘If we can go to the moon, why can’t we . . . ?’—chances are, the answer is ‘We can!’” (LA Her-Exam, 10/23/73)
A People’s Republic of China team of diplomatic and transportation officials arrived in Seattle, Wash., to discuss PRC purchase of 10 Boeing 707-320 transport aircraft. Boeing would train crews in Seattle and would assist with further crew training in Shanghai. (Av Wk, 2/5/73, 29) January 31:	Manned Spacecraft Center had named 10 investigators to receive the first Apollo 17 lunar samples, NASA announced. Five U.S. and five foreign scientists would receive allocations that included tiny rock chips and polished thin sections cut from three large rocks. Rocks 70035 and 75055 were dark gray basalts typical of material underlying the Taurus-Littrow valley; rock 76055—lighter colored recrystallized breccia that Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt had described as “anorthositic gabbro”—might have been part of the mountainside at one time. The first investigators had been recommended by the Lunar Sample Analysis Planning Team (lsapt). Most would attempt to determine sample ages by rubidium-strontium and argon analysis. Other studies would analyze trace elements and mineralogical content. Early allocations were being made with the stipulation that research be conducted so that results could be reported at the 4th Annual Lunar Science Conference scheduled for March 5-8. Additional preliminary allocations would be recommended by lsapt, including samples of orange soil found at Shorty Crater, (nasa Release 73-16)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., was named Executive Director of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics staff, succeeding Charles F. Ducander, who was retiring effective June 30. Committee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), said Swigert’s “broadly based skill and enthusiasm” would “aid in expanding the effort being made by the Committee to assure that our national space program and federal research and development will receive adequate support in the mid-1970s.” (AP, Houston Post, 4/14/73; Com Off)
A lunar sample brought hack from the moon by Apollo 17 (Dec. 7-19, 1972, lunar mission) was presented to President Henryk Jablonski of the Polish Council of State by U.S. Ambassador to Poland Richard T. Davies in Warsaw. Ambassador Davies invited Poland to participate in the U.S. Bicentennial celebration in 1976. (Warsaw pap, FBIS-Poland, 7/17/73, Gl)
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center payload to a 276.8-km (172-mi) altitude. The objective was to test the performance of the rocket configuration that would be used for a series of calibration rocket (calroc) launches during the manned Skylab mission scheduled for May. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. The calroc launches would provide a reference for the calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), calroc launches were also scheduled during the Skylab 3 and Skylab 4 missions, to acquire solar flux data on specific regions of the sun in conjunction with Skylab astronaut observations of the same regions with ATM experiments. Instrumentation on calroc would be similar to but smaller than that on the ATM. Black Brant VC would be used for all launches. Taking part in the program, managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, were Ames Research Center, Naval Research Laboratory, Harvard College Observatory, and the White Sands Naval Ordnance Missile Test Facility, (gsfc proj off; msfc Release 73-42)
Science articles presented geological data from the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission. The Apollo 17 Preliminary Examination Team described characteristics of lunar samples in one article. Petrographically, the samples were “the most variable returned by any mission. Some have the cataclastic, highly crushed textures common in Apollo 16 [April 16-27, 1972] return. Many are crystalline breccias whose petrographic characteristics indicate varying degrees of recrystallization or partial melting. Others are friable and dark gray like the many regolith breccias of previous missions. Others display features typical of the lavas returned from the Apollo 11 [July 16-24, 1969], 12 [Nov. 14-24, 1969] and 15 [July 26-Aug. 7, 1971] mare sites and a few have the coarse-grained igneous textures typically developed during the slow crystallization from basaltic melts.” Chemically, nearly all the characteristics of the Apollo 17 rocks could also be found in samples from previous Apollo missions. “However, unusually high zinc concentrations in the orange soil and the exceptionally low Ni content of the basalts suggest different source materials than for previously returned igneous rocks. The trace element contents of the anorthositic rocks are significantly different from nearly all those previously returned, again suggesting variations in the source regions.” ' The Apollo Field Geology Investigation Team reported on the ApoUo 17 Taurus-Littrow landing site. Impact-generated breccias underlay the massifs adjacent to the valley “and basalt has flooded and leveled the valley floor. The dark mantle inferred from orbital photographs was not recognized as a discrete unit; the unusually thick regolith of the valley floor contains a unique high concentration of dark glass beads that may cause the low albedo of much of the surface.” Apollo 17 scientist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt described the geological investigation of the Taurus-Littrow valley as reported in “the last major report of observations by the crews during the Apollo explorations of the earth’s moon.” He was confident “that the future holds many other such reports as man continues his exploration of the earth’s frontier and his use of the space environment.” He believed that “man’s abilities and spirit will continue to be the foundation of his evolution into the universe. Full satisfaction from this evolution only comes with being there.” (Science, 10/16/73, 659-90)
President Nixon presented National Medals of Science to recipients announced Oct. 6, during a White House ceremony. He said: “We all know that because the United States needed a concentration on defense at a critical time, and then later a concentration on space, that this opened broad, new vistas in the area of science, and this also resulted in a much greater Federal contribution and the justification for it from a budgetary standpoint, but now as we turn from war to the works of peace, we must not cut back on that research. What we must do is to channel the efforts in the field of research to peaceful uses.” (PD, 10/15/73, 1236-7) October 11:	An estimated $2.8 million in laboratory equipment used to process lunar samples had been shipped from Johnson Space Center’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory to the Atomic Energy Commission’s Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in New Mexico, JSC announced. AEC would use the equipment—vacuum chambers and pumps, stainless steel pipes, air-tight processing cabinets, and electronic monitoring devices— to investigate the use of lasers to produce energy through controlled thermonuclear reactions. The Lunar Receiving Laboratory had closed in June after processing the last lunar samples from the Apollo program. All sample material had been transferred to the Lunar Sample Curatorial Facility at JSC. The laboratory equipment had been declared excess property, (jsc Release 73-135)
Lunokhod 2, the U.S.S.R. automatic vehicle landed on the moon Jan. 16 by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), began its fifth lunar day. The panel of the solar battery was opened and the onboard systems checked. The vehicle left the large tectonic fracture explored the previous lunar day and started northeastward toward the shore cusp of the Taurus Massif to continue exploration of the Le Monnier Crater. Lunokhod’s Rifma radiation analyzer was sending data on the solar x-ray spectra and making comprehensive readings of a broad band of solar radiation. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 5/11/73, LI; Av Wk, 5/21/73, 20)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, nasa Director of Key Personnel and former Director of Manned Spacecraft Center, retired. With NASA since its beginning, Dr. Gilruth had been Director of msc (now Johnson Space Center) from its establishment in November 1961—and through five moon landings of the Apollo program—until he came to Headquarters in January 1972. Earlier he had been at the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory, predecessor of Langley Research Center, and was appointed Assistant Director in 1952. In 1958 he was assigned to manage the Nation’s first manned space program, NASA’s Project Mercury, as Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, (nasa Personnel Off; nasa Biog; NASA Release 72-11)
Apollo 17 astronaut-geologist Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt championed manned space flight in testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1974 NASA authorization hearings: “Man’s unique capabilities in space flight come into play in situations requiring special insight in dealing with complex processes or events occurring over relatively short timespans. This has been most obvious in space in the geological exploration of the Moon, for example, in the rapid and comprehensive collection of samples, photographs, and observational data in the valley of Taurus-Littrow last December. This capacity will also be clear in certain aspects of Earth and solar observation where short-term dynamic processes are involved and in many space laboratory situations where rapid adjustments to changing experimental conditions are necessary. The dynamic range of the human eye and the mind’s capability for rapid visual integration of changing geometry, color, and lighting make up an extremely versatile sensor system. In addition, when combined with experience and training of the man, this system allows for the efficient selection of other sensors pertinent to the problem at hand. By such selection man can intelligently reduce the quantity of data which analytical systems on the ground will be required to sort and treat in detail. This capability for on-the-spot data selection is not a trivial aspect of man’s presence at the data collection point. Probably one of man’s most useful capabilities is the precision by which he can operate, adjust, modify, or repair equipment. There is as yet little competition for man in this area on Earth or in space flight.” (Transcript)
Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz piloted their T—38 jet training aircraft from Johnson Space Center to Patrick Air Force Base near Kennedy Space Center to watch the May 14 launch of Skylab 1. ICSC technicians meanwhile tested the onboard batteries and emergency detection system on the Saturn V scheduled to boost the Skylab 1 Workshop into orbit. The Skylab 2 launch crew applied the protective covers that would shield the manned Apollo spacecraft during Saturn IB launch vehicle liftoff May 15. (upi, W Star & News, 5/13/73, 6; Wilford, NYT, 5/14/73, 24)
President Nixon praised U.S. space technology in a commencement address at Florida Technological Univ. in Orlando: “The genius that could send men to the moon, the genius that could produce the Skylab, the genius that built America into the strongest and most productive nation in the world, the science, scientists, the technicians, all the engineers, all of those who could do that, certainly they can find the way to clean the air, and clean the water, and do the other things that will build a better environment in America.” (PD, 6/11/73, 747)
Analysis of Apollo 15 and 16 data had shown that certain lunar craters, including Aristarchus, emitted gas puffs, the New York Times reported. Data from alpha particle experiments had indicated the events occurred in dark-floored or rimmed craters. Most events recorded had occurred when the moon was nearest earth orbit—the same time at which moon-quakes occurred. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/22/73)
Neutron-activation analysis of 27 Apollo 16 lunar samples for 17 trace elements was reported in Science by Enrico Fermi Institute chemists. Several breccias had been found to be strikingly rich in volatile elements. Similar enrichments had been found in smaller quantities in all lunar highland soils. “It appears that volcanic processes took place in the lunar highlands, involving the release of volatiles, including water.” Measurements suggested that the moon’s original water content could not have exceeded the equivalent of a layer 22 m (72 ft) deep. “The cataclastic anorthosites at the Apollo 16 site may represent deep ejecta from the Nectaris basin.” (Krahenbuhl et al., Science, 5/25/73, 858-61)
NASA held two Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center, while the Skylab 3 crew (launched into orbit July 28) completed its 56th day of<< work in the Orbital Workshop. At an Apollo Telescope Mount briefing, Skylab principal investigator James E. Milligan said that the Skylab 3 crew had operated the ATM console photographing the sun for 300 hrs. It was “remarkable how few mistakes they have made.” The sun also had been cooperative. “During this mission we’ve had everything from one of the quietest Suns I have ever seen to a Sun that was as active as it ever is, at least during a moderately active day during Sunspot maximum.” The crew had taken “thousands and thousands and thousands” of photographs of “on the order of one hundred” flares, coronal transients, and prominences. Jack H. Waite, Marshall Space Flight Center’s manager of corollary experiments, said at a corollary briefing that all the planned objectives of the corollary experiments had been completed. MSFC’s Material Processing Program Manager Robert L. Adams said the materials experiments had indicated that both electron-beam welding and the exothermic-tracing techniques could be used successfully in space for the assembly and repair of large structures. Experiments in the formation of metallic spheres had generally indicated more spherical and less porous products than their one-g counterparts could he produced. (Transcript)
Dr. Paul A. Gast, Chief of Space and Planetary Sciences at Johnson Space Center, and Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg of Cal Tech had been named to receive Columbia Univ.’s Kemp Medal for distinguished public service by a geologist, the Pasadena Star-News reported. The citation was for “performing a major role in the lunar projects of NASA, which have given the scientific world a better understanding of the moon.” (Pasadena Star-News, 4/27 /73)
The James H. Wyld Propulsion Award for 1973 was presented by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics to Gerard W. Elverum, Jr., Manager of trw Inc. Energy Systems Operations Div., and Norman C. Reuel, Vice President for Liquid Rocket Programs and Production Operations of Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div., during Las Vegas, Nev., ceremonies. Elverum was cited for “outstanding leadership and technical contribution to the deep throttling rocket engine for the Apollo lunar mission.” Reuel was cited for “outstanding leadership and technical contribution to the liquid hydrogen rocket engine for the Apollo lunar mission.” (Av Wk, 11/12/73, 9; aiaa pio)
A Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the U.S. stake in the Skylab missions, endangered by damage to the Sky-lab 1 Workshop during launch May 14: “Even if the present Skylab must be written off, the nation should not dismantle its unique capacity for manned space exploration. We have the equipment, including the Saturn V rocket, to mount another attempt in 15 months or so. More importantly, NASA currently has the brains and knowhow to operate in space with amazing powers of foresight and improvisation, which are being put to a severe test this week. The dispersal of this talent would be a loss to mankind in ways that can only be imagined.” (W Star & News, 5/24/73, A18) May 24-June 3: The 30th and largest Paris Air Show at Le Bourget Airport, marred by tragedy at its end, featured the first joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. pavilion—displaying models of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft to be used in the July 1975 joint mission—and a record display of aircraft, subsystems, and equipment from manufacturers in 19 countries. The aircraft included the Anglo-French Concorde and Soviet production model Tu-144 supersonic transports, U.S. prototype Northrop F-5E international fighter and Grumman Navy F-14 variable-geometry air-superiority fighter, Soviet I1-62-M medium-range transport and Yak general-aviation aircraft, and the first European A-300B Airbus. nasa Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley said at the opening of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. exhibit that NASA was “pleased to have the opportunity to demonstrate . . . the rapid progress our joint working groups have made. . . . During the past year, American and Soviet engineers have worked closely together in an atmosphere of good will to solve many complicated and technical problems. We are confident that the target date for a joint mission in Earth orbit in 1975 can be met. This joint mission will be an exciting adventure as well as a highly visible expression of our nation’s belief in the great value of exploring and using space in cooperation with other nations.” On May 30 the Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt met with Soviet Cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov, Valery N. Kubasov, and Anatoly V. Filipchenko— of the U.S.S.R. prime and backup crew for the Apollo-Soyuz mission— and Dr. Aleksey S. Yeliseyev at the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Pavilion. They inspected a model of the Soviet Lunokhod 2 lunar roving vehicle and Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft models and were invited aboard the Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport by its principal designer Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev. On June 3 the Tu-144 crashed into the French village of Goussainville, near Le Bourget Airport, while finishing a series of demonstration flights. All six crewmen, including pilot Mikhail Kozlov, and seven persons on the ground were killed and 28 injured. The aircraft was destroyed. A team of French and Soviet officials was appointed immediately to investigate the accident, which observers said might have resulted from attempted aerobatics. Witnesses said the Tu-144’s performance had been erratic just before it crashed. {Av Wk, 5/28/73, 6/4/73, 6/11/73; Shapley text; Tass, fibs-Sov, 6/1/73, F5; 6/4/73, F3) May 25:	Skylab 2 was launched from Kennedy Space Center Complex 39, Pad A, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle to carry Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz to join the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop for repairs and a 28-day mission [see May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission], (nasa prog off)
An Aviation Week & Space Technology cover photo showed orange and black particles brought back from the moon’s Shorty Crater by Apollo 17 astronauts during the Dec. 7-19, 1972, mission. Particles were • described by the magazine as 20 to 45 ,/rm in size—“about the size of terrestrial silt.” They were “glass, but in a process of devitrification, that is transition from non-crystalline form to crystalline minerals.” The orange soil was “rich in titanium—8%—and iron oxide—22%—but is also high in zinc.” (Av Wk, 2/12/73, cover, 20)
nasa efforts to study Comet Kohoutek [see June 21—23] were described in a Science article. NASA had established a special task force to help prepare for infrared, optical, and ultraviolet observations from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground. Oao 3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched Aug. 21, 1972) would observe Kohoutek in the months before and after its closest approach to the sun about Dec. 29, when Kohoutek was expected to be as bright as a full moon. During the passage near the sun, Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), various sounding rockets, and possibly the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) would be trained on the comet, which astronomers believed might be insulated from the rest of the solar system. (Metz, Science, 1/21/13, 333-4)
Richard W. Cook, Deputy Director, Management, at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire in June, msfc announced. He would be succeeded June 3 by John S. Potate, who was attending Massachusetts Institute of Technology, on leave from his position of Director of the Apollo Program Control Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight. Potate had joined the omsf in 1969. (msfc Releases 73-47, 73-77; msfc Org Ann 0101)
A technique of predicting probabilities that had been “absolutely mandatory” to the success of NASA’s Apollo program was being used by the Atomic Energy Commission to help determine the risk to the public of nuclear power plants, aec member and Apollo 8 Astronaut William A.	Anders said in testimony before the Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. The complicated technique of forecasting the reliability of mechanical systems and human beings using available data from similar activity components and subsystems was described by Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear engineer Dr. Norman C. Rasmussen during the nuclear reactor safety hearing. (Willard, W Post, 9/26/73) September 26:	Newspapers commented on the successful Sept. 25 splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28-Sept. 25], New York Times: “The word ‘triumphant’ is entirely appropriate because even at this early point it is evident that their 59-day stay in orbit was not only the longest manned space flight in history but also the most productive.” Skylab results to date had made two conclusions incontrovertible: “First, man can live and work effectively for long periods in space, a point particularly emphasized by the astronauts’ pleas in the last days of their journey to be allowed to remain longer in orbit. Second, stations in space are potentially as productive of scientific and technological benefits as the most optimistic predictions had suggested. There is every reason now to suppose that these benefits will range from the discovery of new mineral deposits on earth and early warnings about the formation and movement of storms to new and more effective methods of predicting the turbulence on the sun that interferes seriously with electronic communications on earth.” It could be taken for granted that “orbiting laboratories will become permanent fixtures in the heavens before too many years have passed. (.NYT, 9/26/73, 38) Chicago Daily News: The Skylab 3 astronauts had “earned their keep—and a place in the history of man’s conquest of the universe.” (C Daily News, 9/26/73)
NASA launched an Aerohee 200A sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. solar physics experiment to a 220.3-km (136.9-mi) altitude. The experiment was performed in collaboration with a Skylab 4 (launched Nov. 16) Apollo Telescope Mount experiment. The rocket performed satisfactorily. The experiment was 75% successful, (gsfc proj off) December 20:	The Air Force announced it had awarded Catalytic, Inc., a $2 600 000 firm-fixed-price contract for technical studies and investigations and preliminary design of a high-mach-number wind tunnel. The contract contained an option for Phase 2 completion of the total design, (dod Release 610-73)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt began an 11-week schedule of public appearances throughout the U.S. with an appearance at the Super Bowl football game in Los Angeles. (NASA Activities, 5/15/73, 89)
Newspapers commented on the Skylab missions as Skylab 2 astronauts activated the Apollo Telescope Mount aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop, following repairs to the damaged spacecraft they had joined May 25 [see May 14-June 23]. Miami News editorial: “To us, the conquest of the moon, and now the building of a space station, demonstrated that this nation can accomplish just about anything it sets its mind on. The secret lies in the magic word, commitment. With the kind of commitment we pledged to the space program, we could indeed surmount the housing crisis, the crime crisis, the energy crisis, or any other crisis.” (M News, 5/29/73) Wall Street Journal article: Skylab Vs successful in-orbit repair had wide implications for the U.S. space program’s future. “When the three Skylab astronauts erected a heat shield over their damaged space station, they both saved their mission and paved the way for future launching of two other missions in the $2.5 billion space-station program.” They also had provided NASA with “a powerful argument for new manned-flight projects.” NASA could contend that “the value of man in orbit has been proven in practice as well as in theory.” While budget shortages would preclude any attempt to capitalize on Skylab’s success before the space shuttle evolved, it had armed NASA against congressional critics of manned space flight. (Spivak, WSJ, 5/29/73) New York Times columnist Russell Baker: “The space program until now has seemed less malevolent than most new ventures in technology, but to people watching those incessant countdowns at Cape Kennedy it has also seemed pointless.” Lunar exploration had been “wonderful” but “it didn’t really open any horizons for most of us, and it was certainly hard to see how it was going to improve man’s lot.” Skylab, by contrast, was wonderful. “There they are way up there—270 miles [435 kilometers] in the sky. They are attached to 100 tons [90 700 kilograms] of machinery which stretches out through space a distance of 118 feet [36 meters], about the length of an exciting pass play in the National Football League. And what are they doing? Repair work. They are fixing some of the machinery which doesn’t work right.” This was space with a purpose. “We ought to be asking why NASA didn’t make this approach from the beginning instead of going after moon dust. The repair industry in this country could very well be rejuvenated by this trip, and not be a moment too soon, either.” (NYT, 5/29/73, 31)
Winners of an Army competition to develop the new advanced attack helicopter were announced by Secretary of the Army Howard H. Callaway. Bell Helicopter Co. and Hughes Helicopters & Hughes Aircraft Co. would compete in a flyoff with two prototypes per contractor. The flyoff winner would install and test the required subsystems for night vision, fire control, navigation, and communications. Values of the initial development contracts were $44.7 million to Bell and $70.3 to Hughes. (dod Release 316-73) June 22—July 28:	During unmanned operations of the Orbital Workshop, launched May 14, the Apollo Telescope Mount observed the sun’s chromospheric network, prominences, coronal transients, solar limbs, lunar libration clouds, and solar eclipses. Active atm operations were discontinued July 16 because the experiment pointing and control system’s primary pitch-rate gyroscope failed. An astrophysics particle collection experiment exposed outside the Workshop would be retrieved by the Skylab 3 crew, scheduled for July 28 launch. Sample panels of thermal coatings exposed on the airlock module also would be returned. Neutron analysis detectors, a student experiment, were monitored, (nasa prog off) June 23:	NASA held a Skylab 2 crew medical status briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. William R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the condition of Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz had improved over their June 22 splashdown condition. Conrad was in excellent shape, Weitz had no residual effects from the vestibular disturbances of the previous day, and Kerwin was “a thousand percent better” from the cardiovascular standpoint but still had some residual vestibular effects. (Transcript)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
A Kansas City Times editorial commented on the proximity of Soviet Salyut 2 and U.S. Skylab launch dates: “A minor fuss has been made over the timing of Salyut’s launch [April 3], which was seen by some as an attempt by the Soviets, after several misfortunes and embarrassments, to steal a bit of the luster from a U.S. manned flight. The point is irrelevant. These are not merely showpiece, national prestige projects. They are bricks-and-mortar foundation-laying for both countries’ futures in space. In the race for the moon, being first counted for something. In . . . learning to function usefully in a long-term space environment, the test is not how soon you get up but what’s accomplished after you’re there.” (KC Times, 4/11/73)
Telecare, an 18-kg (40-lb) medical unit equipped to diagnose and treat victims at a scene of emergency, had been developed by SCI Systems, Inc., from space technology, NASA announced. The ambulance-stored unit with two-way voice and telemetry communications permitted medical technicians to administer prompt professional care with special equipment under radio supervision of a doctor miles away. (NASA Release 73-209) October 18:	NASA announced plans to study Comet Kohoutek with an extensive array of electronic eyes. The comet, now some 400 million km (250 million mi) from the sun, was expected to be visible in the Northern Hemisphere around Christmas time. It was expected to be as bright as a full moon and to be larger than Halley’s Comet, which had appeared last in 1910. NASA scientists would use optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar to study Kohoutek in visible, ultraviolet, and infrared light from the ground and a high-altitude C—141 aircraft, as well as satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4 telescopes and cameras—to learn more about whether planets were remnants of the formation of the solar system or interstellar matter captured by the sun. Scientists would try to determine possible existence of a solid comet nucleus. Kohoutek was believed to have a 20- to 30-km (12- to 19-mi) nucleus with a probable head diameter of 96 000 km (60 000 mi). (NASA Release 73—207)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified on the effects of the Apollo program before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: Apollo “did not just sweep across our landscape to successful achievement of its specific objectives. Its effects on Earth are permanent and pervasive. Not just the hundreds of thousands of jobs it provided, the schools and homes it caused to be built, and the economic impact of the program itself; not just the invaluable accretion of scientific knowledge; not just the restoration of faith in American technological leadership—but a radical and enduring upgrading of technological capability throughout American industry. It is such advances that have enabled the United States to retain its preeminence in high technology production. And it is the continuation of such preeminence that is at stake when we consider the future of our space program.” (Transcript) April 5-26:	NASA’s Pioneer 11 (Pioneer-G), second Jupiter probe, was successfully launched into an excellent trajectory from Eastern Test Range at 9:11 pm est by a three-stage Atlas-Centaur-TE.........M-364—4 launch vehjcle. Eighteen hundred persons watched the nighttime launch after touring the Kennedy Space Center Flight Training and Vehicle Assembly Buildings, where Skylab was being prepared for a mid-May launch. Pioneer 11 sped away from earth at a velocity of 51 800 km per hr (32 200 mph), equaling the speed of Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, and still heading toward Jupiter), which flew faster than any previous man-made object. The primary objective was to obtain precursory scientific information beyond the Mars orbit with emphasis on investigation of the interplanetary medium during the 609- to 825-day journey, the Asteroid Belt, and Jupiter and its environment. The secondary objective was to advance the technology for long-duration flights to the outer planets. The 259-kg (570-lb) spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 12 scientific experiments to measure magnetic fields, plasma, cosmic rays and charged particles; the electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared ranges; and the asteroid-meteoroid population. During the encounter trajectory with Jupiter, the spacecraft would provide the best possible information on the radiation environment, provide good viewing conditions of Jupiter before periapses, and obtain a short occultation of the spacecraft by Jupiter. The spacecraft also carried a pictorial plaque identical to the one carried on Pioneer 10 for identification of its origin by any possible intelligent beings of another solar system. Six hours following launch the large number of thruster pulses used to precess the spacecraft and point the antenna toward the sun provided the impulse to deploy fully one of the two radioisotope thermoelectric generators that had failed to deploy completely at first. The magnetometer boom was deployed and the spin rate stabilized at 5.4 rpm. On April 6 four science instruments—the helium vector magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid, detector—were turned on. An April 11 midcourse correction moved the target point at Jupiter from slightly ahead of the planet as it moved on its orbit, and above the equatorial plane, to slightly behind the planet and below the equator. The adjusted course would allow several mission choices: to make an equatorial pass either close to or distant from the planet to inspect one or more of its moons; to pass over the flattened pole of the planet; to fly on to Saturn in 1980; or, like Pioneer 10, to leave the solar system and escape into interstellar space. The option chosen would depend on Pioneer 10 findings during its pass of Jupiter in December. Nine of the twelve experiments were turned on and were operating normally.	. The control center for Pioneer 11 was transferred April 16 from Jet Propulsion Laboratory to the Pioneer Missions Operations Center at Ames Research Center. On April 26 Pioneer 11, traveling at 9.34 km per sec (20 900 mph), was 14 350 000 km (8 920 000 mi) from the earth. A second midcourse correction was made. The operation of all spacecraft subsystems was normal and 11 of the 12 experiments were transmitting good data. Six to seven hits had been recorded by the meteoroid detector. The infrared radiometer remained to be turned on. The spacecraft was expected to enter the Asteroid Belt in August 1973 and reach Jupiter in December 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by Ames Research Center. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1968, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays. (NASA prog off; nasa Releases 73-41, 73-72; arc Release 73-43; icsc Release 61—73)
An exhibit honoring black pilots, including the 450 who flew combat missions in World War II, was opened at the Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, (upi, W Star & News, 4/8/73, 4) April 15-June 16:	Storm penetrations by high-performance jet aircraft enabled ground-based scientists to check radar returns against airborne measurements of in-cloud turbulence for the first time. A two-month experiment by the Air Force Systems Command’s Cambridge Research Laboratories and the National Severe Storm Laboratories of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration at Norman, Okla., fingerprinted the wind to gather faster, more accurate information to identify tornadoes and devastating windstorms. Hazardous air currents swirling inside storms registered a distinct impression on doppler radar. Radar signals were processed through an electronics package to permit observers to pinpoint and measure gusts or turbulence. With severe storm patterns identifiable, observers could forecast their threat to aircraft in flight and people and installations on the ground, (afsc Release OIP 101. 73; afsc pio) April 16:	The Skylab Orbital Workshop atop its Saturn V launch vehicle was moved from the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, for May 14 launch. The move marked the first time that both Complex 39 launch pads were occupied simultaneously by space vehicles. The Saturn IB rocket and Apollo spacecraft to convey Skylab’s first crew had been positioned on Pad B for May 15 launch, (icsc Release, 4/10/73; icsc pio)
The Senate received the nomination of l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Director of the National Security Agency and former NASA Apollo Program Director, to be a general, usaf. (CR, 7/25/73, S14742)
The Skylab 1 Investigation Board appointed to determine the cause of the anomaly that lost the Orbital Workshop’s meteoroid shield and one solar array wing during launch May 14 reported its findings and recommendations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. The Board, chaired by Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin, said the most probable cause was inadequate venting of the pressure in a tunnel beneath the shield. Differential pressure buildup in the tunnel had forced the shield away from the Workshop shell and into the supersonic air stream. The shield then broke the tiedowns holding the solar array wings onto the spacecraft. About 10 min into the flight one solar array wing was torn away completely when it was struck by the exhaust plume of the 2nd-stage retrorockets. The remaining solar array wing would not deploy until the astronauts cut the strap which had curled around the wing and penetrated the metal fairing housing the array. The Board had found that “the significance of the aerodynamic loads on the meteoroid shield during launch was not revealed by the extensive review process” and recommended that complex, multidisciplinary systems like the shield “should have a designated project engineer who is responsible for all aspects of analysis, design, fabrication, test and assembly.” There was no evidence that the shield’s design deficiencies had resulted from or been masked by the Skylab management system. “On the contrary, the rigor, detail, and thoroughness of the system are doubtless necessary for a program of this magnitude.” (nasa Release 73-135; Lundin testimony before Sen Com on Aero and Space Sci, 7/30/73) July 14:	Sweden had handed the 25-nation Geneva disarmament conference a list of 925 nuclear weapon tests carried out from World War II through April 25, 425 of them after the August 1963 signing of the treaty banning all experimental nuclear blasts above ground, Reuters reported. The majority of the 425 had been underground tests, but China and France, which did not sign the treaty, had continued atmospheric nuclear testing. (NYT, 7/15/73, 7) July 15:	The countdown for the July 28 launch of Skylab 3 began at Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn IB launch vehicle would boost the Apollo spacecraft and its three-man crew into earth orbit to rendezvous and dock with the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), where astronauts would live and work 56 days in space. The countdown was the first for a manned Saturn launch in which the flight crew would not participate with the ICSC launch team in a dress rehearsal. The rehearsal had been eliminated because of the performance record of the Saturn IB and V. The countdown would include a simulated T-zero, ignition, and liftoff with a fully fueled launch vehicle on Complex 39, Pad B. (ksc Release 163-73)
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Naval Research Laboratory payload to a 240.9km (149.7-mi) altitude. The rocket was one of the calroc series [see April 18] to provide a reference, using solar flux data, for the calibration of NRl’s instrumentation aboard the Skylab 1 Apollo Telescope Mount. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained, (gsfc proj off)
President Nixon sent to Congress United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Shaping a Durable Peace. The report recalled agreements made during the May 1972 Moscow Summit Meetings, including the agreement on a joint rendezvous and docking of Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. “Since the summit, all of the agreements have been carried out as expected. Our space agencies have conducted preliminary tests of models of the spacecraft docking system and crew training will begin this summer. The Joint Committee on Environmental Protection met in Moscow in September 1972 and planned 30 collaborative projects on a variety of subjects. . . . The Joint Commission on Science and Technology met in Washington in March 1973 and agreed to carry out some 25 projects in . . . energy, chemistry, biology, and agricultural research. American and Soviet naval officers will meet this year to review the agreement on reducing incidents between ships and aircraft. This process of cooperation has begun to engage an ever widening circle of people in various professions and government bureaus in both countries. Direct contact, exchanges of information and experience, and joint participation in specific projects will develop a fabric of relationships supplementing those at the higher levels of political leadership. Both sides have incentives to find additional areas for contact and cooperation, and I anticipate further agreements patterned on those already concluded.” (PD, 5/14/73, 455-653)
Lunar laser ranging system at the Univ. of Texas McDonald Observatory located the French retroreflector array attached to the Soviet unmanned explorer Lunokhod 2 (landed on the moon Jan. 16 by Luna 21). At the request of the French National Center for Space Studies (cnes), the 270-cm (107-in) McDonald telescope transmitted light pulses, which were observed after reflection from mirror array. Preliminary data indicated the surface location of Lunokhod 2 was very near coordinates given by the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The lunar radius at that point appeared to be smaller than previous data had indicated, (nasa Release 73-13)
Apollo 17 geologist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt was among 10 young Government employees named to receive the 25th annual Arthur S.	Flemming Award for outstanding contributions to Federal management and science, the Washington Star and News reported. The Schmitt citation was for “total performance as a scientist and astronaut, including geological training of early Apollo flight crews, and as lunar module pilot for Apollo 17.” Awards would be presented at a Washington, D.C., luncheon sponsored by the Downtown Jaycees Feb. 29. (W Star & News, 2/22/73; NASA Special Notice, 2/26/73)
The first scientific report on the findings of the Soviet remotely controlled lunar explorer Lunokhod 2 (launched Jan. 8 aboard Luna 21) during its 37-km (23-mi) traverse of the moon’s surface had been published in Pravda, the New York Times reported. Chemical analysis of the soil had shown a decrease in iron content and an increase in aluminum as Lunokhod had traveled from the plains into the foothills of the Taurus Mountains. Samplings taken near the landing site in the Lemonnier Crater at the eastern end of the Sea of Serenity had shown 6% iron and 9% aluminum. The ratio changed to 4% iron and 12% aluminum near the uplands. The change in content of aluminum was a distinctive feature of lunar geology; on the earth the amount of aluminum remained constant in continents and the ocean bottoms. Soviet scientists hoped to compare the lunar soil data with samples returned by the Apollo 17 astronauts (launched Dec. 7, 1972), who explored theTaurus-Littrow Valley 225 km (140 mi) away. (Shabad, NYT, 12/17/73, 66)
Rep. J. Herbert Rurke (R-FIa.) introduced three resolutions: H.J.R. 358 to provide for a portion of the moon to be displayed in the Capitol; H.J.R. 359 to establish an Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct a memorial at Kennedy Space Center in honor of U.S. astronauts; and H.J.R. 362 to redesignate Cape Kennedy Cape Canaveral. (CR, 2/21/73, H1061) February 22:	Presidential Reorganization Plan No. 1, abolishing the Office of Science and Technology and the National Aeronautics and Space Council [see Jan. 26 and July 1], was reviewed by the Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Executive Reorganization and Government Research. Chairman Abraham A. Ribicoff (D-Conn.) said, “Historically, Congress has allowed the President wide latitude in organizing his own office and so far no opposition has developed to this plan,” but added that questions had arisen as to whether the plan downgraded the voice of the scientific community within the Executive branch. Frederick V. Malek, Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget, said it was “no longer necessary to have a single office within the Executive Office specifically directed to science and technology.” National Science Foundation Director H. Guyford Stever, newly designated Science Adviser to the President, said that nsf had “many inputs to the scientific community and they have many inputs to nsf” and that he expected the routes for advice to remain open. (CR, 2/22/73, D128; Sci & Govt Rpt, 3/1/73, 7)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
Miami chemist Harry Bennett received U.S. Patent No. 3 738 374 for a tobaccoless cigarette filled with graphitized carbons developed by NASA for space use. The carbon, which would emit normal combustion gases and produce an ash without nicotine or tar, had been used by NASA to resist heat and strengthen lightweight structural components in spacecraft. (Pat Off pio; B Sun, July 9:	NASA announced it had invited U.S. and foreign scientists to propose experiments to be carried on the Apollo spacecraft during the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission to rendezvous and dock U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in space. The U.S. would carry 180 kg (400 lbs) of scientific and applications experiments and NASA also would conduct experiments from the earth orbit in space science, applications, medicine, and technology. Proposals for experiments were due July 23. (NASA Release 73127)
NASA, on its 15th birthday, found itself “in the throes of an identity crisis,” John N. Wilford said in a New York Times article. After a “fast and glorious youth, full of promise and widely heralded achievement,” could NASA, “knowing that it could be flying to the moon and beyond, adjust to a more mundane existence?” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had said in a recent interview: “Our charter is clear: We have to make the country strong in space. But NASA has to move back from the spectacular. We will become more like one of the service agencies of government.” (NYT, 10/1/73, 62)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented an award of $10 000 to Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren in a JPL ceremony. The award was for a 1968 discovery of mascons (mass concentrations of dense material beneath the lunar surface) and for imaginative interpretation of the discovery’s results and implications significant to the success of the Apollo program and future studies of the earth and other planets. The mascon discovery had received international recognition. Muller and Sjogren had been awarded the 1971 Magellanic Gold Medal of American Philosophical Society and had been elected members of the Society of Sigma Xi and Fellows of Britain’s Royal Astronomical Society, (nasa Release 73-6; NASA PAO)
The U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 automatic station (launched Sept. 28, 1971, toward lunar orbit) had discovered cosmic plasma on the near side of the moon, Tass reported. Mikhail Kolesov of the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had said the maximum concentration of matter was at 10 km (6 mi) from the lunar surface. Origin of the plasma was unknown but the plasma was believed to be greatly affected by solar wind. (fbis-Sov, 10/3/73, Ul) October 3: The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites on a single booster from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters were: Cosmos 588—1495-km (929-mi) apogee, 1450-km (901-mi) perigee, 115.3-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 589—-1489-km (925.2-mi) apogee, 1417-km (88Q.5-mi) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Cosmos 590—1489-km (925.2-mi) apogee, 1435-km (891.7-mi) perigee, 115.1-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 591—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1349-km (838.2-mi) perigee, 114.1-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Cosmos 592—1486-km (923.4-mi) apogee, 1333-km (828.3-mi) perigee, 113.9-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 593—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1366-km (848.8-mi) perigee, 114.3-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Cosmos 594—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1383-km (859.4-mi) perigee, 114.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 595—1487-km (924-mi) apogee, 1400-km (869.9-mi) perigee, 114.7-min period, and 73.9° inclination. Kenneth W. Gatland of the British Interplanetary Society later said in a Christian Science Monitor article that the satellites possibly were being used as a maritime communications system “to keep shore bases and command centers in contact with far-ranging elements of the Soviet fleet.” Since 1971 two eight-satellite systems had been orbited each year four to five months apart. Gaps of seven to nine months occurred between launches during the winter, when the Soviet northern fleet was hampered by sea conditions. The last Soviet eight-satellite launch was June 8, into similar orbits, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; CSM, 11/13/73; SBD, 10/4/73, 170; Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/3/73, Ul) The U.S.S.R. also launched Cosmos 596 from Plesetsk, into orbit with a 268-km (166.5-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 65.4° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 9. Cosmos 596 was the first of seven Soviet satellites launched and returned in quick succession, leading to Western speculation they were reconnaissance craft monitoring the Arab-Israeli war [see Oct. 15]. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/73; SBD, 10/9/73, 192)
Rep. Robert McClory (R—III.) and 20 cosponsors introduced H.R. 2351 to provide for systematic U.S. conversion to the metric system over a 10-yr period. (CR, 1/18/73, H361) January 19:	Director Andrey Severny of the Crimea Astrophysical Observatory said that the Soviet lunar vehicle Lunokhod 2 (deposited on the moon by Luna 21, launched Jan. 8) carried an astrophotometer, or electron telescope without lenses, to register, the glow in wide areas of the sky in visible and ultraviolet spectral bands. (SF, 4/73, 121)
Components of a navigation system similar to that of the lunar roving vehicles launched aboard Apollo 15, 16, and 17 (July 26, 1971, and April 16 and Dec. 7, 1972) to explore the lunar surface had been turned over by Marshall Space Flight Center to the Univ. of Kentucky for possible incorporation into a remotely controlled mine-surveillance vehicle, the Marshall Star announced. (Marshall Star, 8/8/73, 2)
A Science editorial commented on the energy crisis: “A combination of environmental concerns and energy shortages is fostering wide-spread beggar-your-neighbor attitudes. Everyone wants cheap, unlimited energy, but all are prepared to fight tooth and nail to protect the environment and to prevent the location of energy facilities in their vicinity. It so happens that we are going to have neither cheap energy nor a perfect environment. Moreover, if we do not learn how to think nationally rather than parochially and to balance energy needs against environmental concerns, we are headed for trouble.” (Abelson, Science, 10/16/73, 657) November 17:	Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov discussed progress and problems of the astp to date in an interview published in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Generally, everything was progressing according to plan, but “as yet there is no unified search and docking system either on our or the American spacecraft. Only now are designers creating such a system on Apollo and Soyuz.” Spacecraft design and technical difficulties were being overcome, but there had been many problems. Personal relations between U.S. and Soviet crews and experts were very good: “The American astronauts are knowledgeable and highly skilled specialists. Suffice it to say that my opposite number, Colonel [Thomas P.] Stafford, has flown in space three times. Among ourselves we call the program . . . ‘the meeting on the Elbe’ in space. It was in 1945 that Soviet and American soldiers marked their joint victory over fascism by meeting on the Elbe. Thirty years later we dream of marking a victory over the accursed ‘cold war’ with a unique space ‘meeting on the Elbe.’ ” The language barrier had not yet been surmounted. “We are learning English, the Americans are learning Russian. It is said that Russian is the more difficult. But Stafford is courageously surmounting the barrier. Recently we were visited by Dr. [George M.] Low, deputy director of NASA, Eugene [N.] Cernan and Tom Stafford. Stafford made an entire speech on the space meeting [see Oct. 1-18] in relatively fluent Russian. And I assumed the role of translator.” (fbis-Sov, 12/6/73, B3)
Soviet authorities had returned data tape and altitude recorder film salvaged from the scientific payload aboard a NASA balloon that fell in the Siberian wilderness after its July 15 launch from Fort Churchill, Canada, NASA announced. Recovery had followed a request for Soviet assistance from Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, to Chairman Boris N. Petrov of the Soviet Council for International Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space. Dr. Naugle and Academician Petrov were cochairmen of a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Near-Earth Space, the Moon, and the Planets. The cosmic ray detector and other instruments aboard the balloon had been damaged in the crash, but the data tape and film flown from Moscow had been pronounced usable by U.S. investigators. The experiment had been designed to measure distribution of electrons and positrons in primary cosmic rays, (nasa Release 73195)
The training version of Apollo 17 lunar roving vehicle (lrv), participating in President Nixon’s inaugural parade, required replacement of two batteries to negotiate the distance from the Capitol to the White House, because batteries had only 30-min life. Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt watched the battery change from an automobile following the lrv in the procession. [.Av Wk, 1/29/73, 13) January 21:	NASA established the Office of Management Planning and Review with James R. Elliott as Director, under Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The Office of Management Development was abolished and its personnel and responsibilities transferred to the new office. Elliott had joined NASA in February 1962 and had been a senior management consultant in Office of Management Development. (nasa Ann)
The appointment of Gerald D. Griffin—flight director on the Apollo 12, 15, and 17 missions—as NASA Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs effective April 23 was announced by Johnson Space Center. He would succeed H. Dale Grubbs, who was leaving after holding the post since 1970. Griffin had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his work on Apollo 12 and 15 and the Presidential Medal of Freedom Group Achievement Award for Apollo 13. He joined JSC (then the Manned Spacecraft Center) in 1964 and was named a flight director in 1968. (jsc Release 73-39)
The dismantling of the Federal fellowship program would liquidate some excesses but, “on balance, is a destructive move” at a time “when the need for some kinds of scientists and engineers is actually growing,” a Science editorial said. “After Sputnik was launched, this nation engaged in a frantic effort to expand its scientific capabilities. For a number of years government funds available for research in the physical and biomedical sciences increased rapidly. At the same time, the Apollo program was implemented. These developments created a shortage of scientists and engineers.” When Government support ceased to grow and unemployment arose, those in the Government who wanted to dismantle the fellowship program had had a useful excuse. But the unemployment argument was no longer valid. “The index of employment opportunities has climbed above 100. In some regions there already are shortages of engineers.” In years ahead, “this nation will encounter many unexpected problems requiring the skills of scientists and engineers. We may well come to regret bitterly the fact that we have been unable to do better than follow destructive blow-hot, blow-cold educational policies. We should adopt the more realistic assumption that this nation must have good science, good medicine, and good engineering, and we should make it possible for the top students, regardless of financial ability, to participate.” (Abelson, Science, 4/6/73, 13) April 6—13:	Two satellites, five aircraft, and ten surface vessels were used to study the New York Bight. The waters extending from Staten Island to more than 32 km (20 mi) east of Asbury Park, N.J.—used as a dump for sewer sludge, acid wastes, and dredging and excavation materials— were dyed green. Water circulation at and near the surface was mapped to plan balanced use of the coastal environment and to assess the impact of natural and man-made substances on the coastal zone. Data gathered by sensors on the aircraft and on Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) were checked for accuracy by measurements gathered by surface vessels. The program was managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with participation by NASA and the Navy, Environmental Protection Agency, Coast Guard, Federal Aviation Administration, and State of New Jersey. (noaa Release 73-60) April 8:	The first closeup radar images of the moon’s surface—obtained during the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission—had been assembled by scientists and engineers from Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the Univ. of Utah, the Univ. of Michigan, and the Center for Astrogeology of the U.S. Geological Survey, NASA announced. The “pictures,” products of the Apollo lunar sounder experiment, would eventually provide a geological cross-section of the moon, detailing subsurface structure to a depth of 1.3 km (0.8 mi), (nasa Release 73-65)
NASA held an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project news briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said the U.S.S.R. had agreed to lower the Soyuz cabin pressure to within 350 newtons per sq cm (5 lbs per sq in) of Apollo pressure during the July 1975 joint docking mission, to eliminate two-hour depressurization for each crew member before transfer to the other spacecraft. The change Would permit time for all three astronauts and two cosmonauts to fly in the others’ spacecraft. Previously, Only two astronauts had been scheduled to make the transfer. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the U.S. crew, said “the mission is going to be one of the most difficult . . . because it involves a different country, different language, different operating techniques. . . . But it can certainly open the doors for future cooperation between the countries, can enhance our capabilities” for progress together. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who would fly his first mission since he was disqualified from Project Mercury’s Aurora 7 flight (launched May 24, 1962) because of an erratic heart rate, said, “I think I’ve been pretty fortunate. And I don’t believe in looking back at the past too much except in relation to what benefit it will give me in the future.” Astronaut Vance D. Brand, who would make his first space flight, said, “I am really happy to get on this mission. I think as we look back over the years, it’ll be regarded as a very historic thing . . . having the doors open between the Soviet Union and the United States.” (Transcript)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, received the National Civil Service League’s 1973 Career Service Award for Sustained Excellence at the League’s 19th annual awards banquet in Washington, D.C. Dr. Low was cited as the individual most responsible for the success of the Apollo program because of his significant contributions toward solving reentry problems. Also honored was Paul G. Dembling, General Counsel for the General Accounting Office, who as NASA General Counsel had been a principal drafter of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and a major participant in developing the legal framework governing peaceful uses of outer space, (nasa Hq WB, 4/16/73; W Post, 5/5/73, B4)
The Astronomy Survey Committee of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Research Council issued Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 1970’s, Vol. 2, Report of the Panels. The report confirmed the Committee’s 1972 observation that the opening of the radio sky had suggested the presence of undiscovered physical laws and requirements for new observations and explanations. The observation had been made in Vol. 1, released June 1, 1972. The Panel on Radio Astronomy report said: “The processes taking place in the radiation-emitting region of pulsars are the most extreme we know of in the galaxy and far surpass in energy production any power source yet invented.” The understanding of the generating mechanism through further detailed study would improve the understanding of physics and could lead to “major developments in energy generation here on earth.” Suspicion was growing that the molecules already discovered in space were part of “a large group of molecules of ever-increasing complexity that may exist in space.” Belief was growing “that interstellar clouds . . . and fast particles may form large organic molecules. Such molecules, which may be as complex as the amino acids and may be of equal importance in our understanding of life, may be discovered by observations made at radio frequencies.” The Panel on Optical Astronomy noted that new technology for basing detectors in the upper atmosphere and in space had begun to make infrared astronomy “realistic.” The Panel on Space Astronomy said, “It appears that much of the energy emitted from astronomical objects and from the universe itself probably resides in the infrared, and hence some of the most important astronomical discoveries will be made in this region.” The Panel on Astrophysics and Relativity said that violent activity in the nuclei of galaxies was “probably commonplace” and not due to thermonuclear processes. The report concluded: “Man has landed on his first planet—the moon. But his mind and eye have traveled billions of light years into the past and in the next decade will penetrate unimagined new worlds.” (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 4/73, 1; nas pxo)
Twelve sensors mounted on an Air Force NC—135 aircraft flying 11 km (7 mi) above the Sahara desert had found no evidence of the shadow bands which had swept over the landscape just before the June 30 total solaT eclipse, the New York Times reported. A Canadian aircraft flying in the troposphere, the lowest region of the atmosphere, had seen the bands—one of the most unusual manifestations of the eclipse—clearly and had photographed them on the aircraft’s wing. Astronomers had theorized that-the bands resulted from refraction of the narrow slit of sunlight that shone through atmospheric layers when the sun was almost totally eclipsed. Another theory was that the sunlight had been detracted by the edge of the moon. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/3/73, 7) U.S. energy experts reiterated recommendations made by NASA and the National Science Foundation in their December 1972 report Solar Energy Research: A Multidisciplinary Approach. NASA had recommended that the U.S. undertake a 10- to l5-yr program to develop the use of solar energy to generate electricity. NASA and the nsf had called for Federal investment of $3 billion in solar energy research, nsf scientist William H. Wetmore told the conference that the U.S. estimated its deficit in oil supplies alone would reach from 10 to 16 million barrels a day by 1990 and would cause a trade imbalance of $15 billion annually.	' U.S. industry representatives reported their progress with solar climate control research to use solar energy for heating houses and factories. Washington Post columnist Claire Sterling commented later on the impact of the industry reports: “Perhaps more than any single factor at this conference, the willingness of these big American companies to actually put money into solar research and development has brought about a stunning change in thinking. From an essentially ‘do-good’ movement of scientists hoping to help the poor countries . . . with cheap solar cookers there has suddenly emerged a rich-state research and development movement on a supremely sophisticated technological level.” (Lewis, NYT, 7/2/73, 12; New Scientist, 7/12/73, 71-2; W Post, 7/16/73, A22; A&A 1972) July 4:	l/c Charley H. Manning (usaf, R.) flew his HU— 16B Albatross aircraft from Homestead Air Force Base, Fla., to a new record altitude for an amphibian aircraft, 9600 m (31 500 ft). The previous record had been held by Boris Sergievsky, who flew a Sikorsky S—43 amphibian from Stratford, Conn., to 7600 m (24 950 ft) April 14, 1936. (naa News, 8/73, 2)
NASA launched a Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Harvard College Observatory payload to a 131.6km (81.8-mi) altitude. The rocket was part of the calroc series [see April 18] to provide a reference, using solar flux data, for the calibration of the Observatory’s experiment on the Apollo Telescope Mount launched on the Skylab Workshop May 14. The experiment failed and the rocket was destroyed at 30.2 sec. (gsfc proj off)
Fourth anniversary of Apollo IPs first manned lunar landing July 20, 1969. Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), entered tributes in the Congressional Record. Fuqua said: “Since July of 1969 when Neil Armstrong first set foot on the lunar surface our national space program has had an ever-increasing wealth of technology and new knowledge and practical information of direct benefit to the people of the Nation and of the world.” In remembering the first lunar landing, “we need to be reminded of the need for strong support for our national space program today and in the years ahead.” Frey said: “The people of our space program are not resting on the laurels of this great achievement but are pressing on with the Skylab and the space shuttle to make space an ever-increasing contributor to the well-being of our Nation and the world.” (CR, 7/20/73, E4957, 4961)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology continued hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in the nasa Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, described the Dept, of Transportation Climatic-Impact Assessment Program (ciap), in which nasa was cooperating: The ciap “undertakes to assess the potential impact on the atmosphere of large fleets of SSTS [supersonic transports] operating in the eighties and the biological consequences of their potential modification of the stratosphere. We are cooperating with dot by contributing to the technology needs of ciap, with particular emphasis on the levels to which pollution can be limited.” Contradictory requirements for civil transport aircraft (low-fuel consumption engines required by SSTs for good range and payload characteristics, tended to be extremely noisy in terminal areas) might be best met by variable-cycle engines that varied their mode of operation in each condition of the flight profile, nasa would “intensively study variable cycle-engine concepts in FY 1974.” Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology in oast, testified that hypersonic research for potential application to military and civil airbreathing cruise vehicles was directed at “the critical aspects of propulsion, structures, and aerodynamics for this flight regime where hydrogen is used both as the fuel and as a coolant.” Hydrogen was the most likely candidate for hypersonic aircraft fuel because its high coolant capacity was essential for a propulsion system to survive in the high-temperature environment, and liquid hydrogen’s coolant capacity could cool portions of the vehicle’s structure away from the engine area. NASA’s structures and materials program provided essential technology for designing lightweight, reliable, actively cooled structures and advanced the technology of actively cooling structures heated to high temperatures. The program also extended shuttle technology on reusable surface insulation toward hypersonic cruise application. Flight Research Center test pilot Gary E. Krier testified on nasa’s digital fly-by-wire program to develop an all-electric flight-control system using intelligence inserted into the digital computer memory. “We did this by using refurbished Apollo equipment and two surplus [Navy] F-8 fighters. Using this approach, we estimate we flew about 2 years earlier than we otherwise could have.” To date, nasa had flown 15 DFBW flights with no major problems. “Airliners that we’ll ride in the 1980’s could profit from fly-by-wrre in the form of smooth flight at very high speeds and the near elimination of the response to turbulence by computer application of smoothing controls.” The “best use of fbw” was to build a control-configured vehicle [ccv] with reduced drag, increased lift, and slower approach and landing speeds. “It has been estimated that landing speed could be cut by 25 percent and range increased 15 percent with no sacrifice in mission capability, just by modifying existing aircraft. A much larger improvement in performance could be gained by starting from scratch with fbw. We have been refining aircraft for years now, and the fbw/ccv combination gives us a chance to make a quantum jump in aircraft performance.” (Transcript)
A need “to shift gears and return to the main line of development in space flight” was underlined by Michael A. G. Michaud in a Spaceflight article: The purposes of space flight “go far beyond our lifetime. Ultimately, our journey away from Earth will determine the future of the human race; this millennial, evolutionary effort must not founder now for lack of a satisfying rationale.” The basic purpose of space flight was “to expand the realm of Man.” Reasons were to challenge human abilities, learn more about the universe we live in, search for extraterrestrial intelligence and prepare for contact with it, develop and test technologies for earth use, stimulate and employ advanced sectors of the economy, improve orbital applications of space technology with immediate benefits, develop and test military technology, and encourage international cooperation. Michaud proposed a medium-term program to the year 2000 to assemble a manned space station in earth orbit, build a base on the moon, land human beings on Mars by 2000, prepare for interstellar flight, search for planets in other systems, and begin the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. A long-term program beyond 2000 would plan to send unmanned probes to the most promising nearby stars, create a permanent colony on Mars, experiment in planetary engineering—possibly on Venus, “where orbiting space vehicles could introduce materials into the atmosphere that might change its composition” —launch the first manned interstellar flights, and communicate with extraterrestrial intelligence. [SF, 10/73, 362-5)
Kennedy Space Center announced a $10 517 967 contract extension, through July 31, 1975, to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp. to process the Saturn IB 2nd stage for launching the Apollo spacecraft to rendezvous and dock with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft during the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. The award brought total contract value to $101 995 628. A six-month, $7 909 148 contract extension to Bendix Corp. Launch Support Div. brought to $240 857 165 the total value of a contract for launch support services, including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39. An $11831263 extension to an International Business Machines Corp. contract would provide launch support services to Saturn IB booster instrument units, for possible Skylab rescue vehicles and the astp launch. The extension, through July 1975, brought total contract value to $58 772 009. (icsc Releases 290-73, 291—73, 292-73)
Johnson Space Center announced the issuance of requests for proposals to build hydraulic actuators for space shuttle applications and to test them under simulated space conditions. The actuators were being considered for aerodynamics-surface and thrust-vector control on the shuttle. Proposals, leading to a firm-fixed-price research-and-development contract, were due by April 2. Work was to be concluded 12 mos after the contract award, (jsc Release 73-27) March 15-30:	Five U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint working groups met at Johnson Space Center and reached agreements on the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Technical specialists from each country would be in the other country’s control center during the mission and flight crews and specialists would be trained and made familiar with each country’s spacecraft and systems. Under a flammability agreement, the U.S. would provide fire resistant material for the Soviet cosmonauts’ flight clothing; the cosmonauts would use an Apollo headset in the Apollo spacecraft for communications to the Soyuz spacecraft over the Soviet communications link; the Soviet TV camera used in the Apollo spacecraft would be in a fireproof hermetically sealed container; and the still camera and film used by the cosmonauts in Apollo would be stored in a flameproof container. The U.S. would provide a 16 mm camera for Soviet use during docked operations in both Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. Agreements were reached on the prescribed procedure if either country encountered anomalous results during test activities that concerned the other country and on mission planning for rendezvous. The groups agreed that additional testing was required on the docking seals, that the U.S. would limit Apollo control system thrusting in the roll axis to two thrusters to preclude excessive structural loads on the Soyuz spacecraft, and that an additional docking test could be performed on the second day, with the Apollo systems passive and the Soyuz active. Both countries agreed to perform and exchange safety assessments in fire, pyrotechnic devices, cabin pressure, and propulsion and control systems. The 47-man delegation of Soviet scientists and engineers included Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and the Soviet astp Technical Director, Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev. At a March 19 press conference Bushuyev and U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney agreed that cordial, friendly, and cooperative progress was being made in planning the joint mission. Preliminary drawings of the two spacecraft had been exchanged so that mockups could be built. (C. M. Lee presentation to Aerospace Advisory Panel, 4/10/73; msc Release 73-24; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; Wilford, NYT, 3/20-73, 32; jsc pio)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council 1969—1973, to be a Commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission for the term expiring June 30, 1978. The nomination was confirmed Aug. 2. Anders would succeed James T. Ramey, whose term had expired. {PD, 7/23/73, 914, 920; CR, 8/2/73, D960)
The Senate confirmed the nomination of Col. Michael Collins (usaf, R.) to be a brigadier general. Gen. Collins, Apollo 11 command module pilot, was Director of the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 4/6/73, S6858; NASA Astronauts)
The award of a $7 125 497 firm-fixed-price contract to Litton Systems, Inc., for avionics for the F-4 jet fighter aircraft was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 360-73) July 20:	Skylab 3, scheduled for launch July 28 as the second manned mission to crew the Skylab Workshop, would be extended from 56 days to 59 days to provide a better recovery posture, NASA announced. Splashdown would be 6:26 pm edt Sept. 25, in the Pacific Ocean 547 km (340 mi) southwest of San Diego. A comprehensive review of the medical findings of Skylab 2 (launched May 25) had indicated that a 59-day mission was medically feasible. The medical data obtained on Skylab 3 would be reviewed at midmission point and weekly reviews would be scheduled for the remainder of the flight. Following each review, approval for continuation of the flight would be made for the next seven days by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider. Simulated T-zero ignition and liftoff with the fully fueled Saturn IB and Apollo spacecraft on its launch pad was successfully completed in the Skylab 3 countdown, begun July 15. (nasa Release 73-136; ksc Release 163-73)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight continued hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization [see Feb. 27], Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider described progress of the Skylab project at Kennedy Space Center: “The flight hardware has undergone intensive check-out at the module level including docking tests to verify the critical interface between the Multiple Docking Adapter and the Command and Service Module.” Stacking of the Saturn V and Saturn IB launch vehicles “has proceeded apace and end-to-end integrated systems tests of the orbital assembly have been completed.” Activities supported the mid-May dual launch, with rollout to Pad 39B scheduled for mid-April. The Skylab pyramid test program, “starting at the component qualification level and building up through the levels of subsystem and module testing, through acceptance reviews and checkouts, to the countdown demonstration, provides the confidence needed to launch and operate America’s first space station.” Deputy Associate Administrator for Management Harry H. Gorman in the Office of Manned Space Flight discussed the NASA personnel changes brought by completion of the Apollo program. The research, development, and operations contract support effort during the Apollo program had peaked in FY 1968 at 17 500 persons. The FY 1974 budget request would provide employment at a 9500 level—a 45% reduction. The Civil Service staff would decrease by 825 positions in FY 1974, to a total of 10 525. The reduction was also related to completion of Skylab, termination of communications lead center activity, and suspension of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory program. (Transcript)
An experimental connector smaller than a dime had been developed by Kennedy Space Center engineers to apply small electrical currents from an outside power source to move paralyzed human muscles, NASA announced. The connector—which would detach easily but provide good electrical contact while attached—was being tested at Rancho Los Amigos Hospital in Downey, Calif. The NASA Office of Technology Utilization was supporting the hospital’s research on application of high-purity vitreous carbon—developed originally for rocket engine linings—to implants of tiny platinum wires attached to small pads on human nerve endings. Earlier connectors had damaged human skin during the process of detachment and had cost $1000 each. The ICSC-developed connector detached readily and cost $50 to $100 each, (nasa Release 73—30) February 22—23:	Marshall Space Flight Center’s Science and Engineering Directorate sponsored a Research and Technology Review. The purpose was to expand the familiarity of scientists and engineers in government, industry, and the academic community with activities and accomplishments at MSFC having significant applications in space projects. Topics discussed were space sciences, manufacturing in space, optical contamination, materials and manufacturing, propulsion, computation and simulation, control and atmospheric flight mechanics, electronics communications and instrumentation, and apparatus, (msfc Release 73-16; 73-21) February 23:	Gamma ray spectrometers on Apollo 15 and 16 had mapped the moon’s radioactivity over 20% of the lunar surface, scientists from Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Goddard Space Flight Center, and Univ. of California at San Diego reported in Science. Highest levels of natural radioactivity had been found in Mare Imbrium and Oceanus Procel-larum with contrastingly lower enhancements in eastern maria. The rate of potassium to uranium was higher on far side of moon than on near side, “although it is everywhere lower than commonly found on earth.” (Metzger et al.; Science, 2/23/73, 800-3)
Newspaper editorials commented on the safe Sept. 25 return of Skylab 3. Baltimore Sun: The mission had been “an immense scientific success which produced unprecedented and extremely valuable data especially on solar activity.” It would be “mere superstition to believe nature is co-operating with man by producing solar flares and comets just when we would most like to have them. But the Skylab missions so far have had a lot of good luck.” (B Sun, 9/27/73, A14) Miami Herald: “All told, the Skylab missions appear to promise rewards even greater than the enlargement of knowledge created by the Apollo moon voyages. The outreach of the human mind is inexorable.” (M Her, 9/27/73) Chicago Sun-Times: “With casual aplomb, the astronauts performed their sophisticated experiments, floated weightlessly through, outside and around the Skylab, and fixed their spacecraft like mundane mechanics when something went haywire. It all seemed so routine. In the austere domain of space, as on Earth, how quickly does the miraculous become absorbed into the commonplace.” (C Sun-Times, 9/27/73) Christian Science Monitor: “Even those most intimately involved with the space program, slated now for more international participation as well as applause, would admit we may now but dimly grasp the full significance of our space sorties.” The names of the Skylab 3 astronauts would, nonetheless, be added “to the list of welcomed home heroes of mankind’s young space chapter.” (CSM, 9/27/73) Philadelphia Inquirer: “Space exploration has matured to space work. During 59 days in earth orbit—more than doubling the space flight record set earlier this year by three astronauts in the same Skylab—assignments were carried out with diligence and precision. Scientific experiments and observations could “produce long-range dividends, not immediately apparent.” Despite NASA’s extraordinary safety record space was “a hostile environment posing hazardous challenges to courageous men. But the richest rewards in space will come not from derring do but from workmanlike execution of assignments with down-to-earth relevance to needs of mankind.” (P Inq, 9/27/73)
nasa’s 15th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, to Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; Robert H. Gray, Kennedy Space Center Director of Launch Operations; S. Neil Hosenball, Deputy General Counsel; Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; and William E. Lilly, Comptroller. The NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, the agency’s highest award to non-Government personnel, was presented to Dr. Leo Goldberg, Director of Kitt Peak National Observatory, and Dr. Frank Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology lunar geophysicist. The Group Achievement Award went to the Apollo Lunar Sounder Investigator Team, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; the Communications Cost Reduction Team, NASA Hq.; the Mariner Venus/Mercury 1973 Program Team, jpl; the Scout Project Team, Langley Research Center; and the YF-12 Thermal Loads Calibration Team, Flight Research Center. Other awards included the Exceptional Service Medal to 35 persons and the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 32. (Program; NASA Release 73-219) October 26:	Skylab 4, the third manned Skylab mission—crewed by Gerald P. Carr, commander; Dr. Edward G. Gibson,, science pilot; and William R. Pogue, pilot—was scheduled for launch Nov. 10 at 11:40 am EST, Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced. Plans called for a 60-day or more, open-ended mission carrying enough consumables for 85 days. Mission extensions would be considered on the 56th, 63rd, 70th, and 77th days of the flight. Up to five extravehicular activities would be scheduled, to install and retrieve Apollo Telescope Mount film and experiment samples, repair an antenna on an earth resources experiment, and photograph the Comet Kohoutek on Dec. 25, just before it swung around the sun. An extended 85-day mission would splash down Feb. 3, 1974, at 12:15 pm est off the Pacific Coast near San Diego, (nasa Release 73—233)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin galactic astronomy experiment. The second, launched two hours later, carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 3—13:	NASA’s Mariner 10 (Mariner-J) Venus-Mercury probe was launched into a parking orbit from Eastern Test Range at 12:45 am est by an Atlas-Centaur Dl-A launch vehicle. After a 25-min coast, a 130-sec burn of the Centaur engines injected the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would allow Mariner 10 to pass within 5300 km (3300 mi) of Venus Feb. 5, 1974. Using the gravitational field of Venus to change the speed and flight path of the spacecraft, Mariner 10 would travel toward a March 29 encounter with Mercury, approaching the sun more closely than any other planetary mission. Mariner 10 would be the first spacecraft to use gravity assist in a dual-planet mission and the first to explore Mercury. The primary objective was to measure Mercury’s environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity-assist mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED! The seven experiments aboard the octagonal 503-kg (1108-lb) spacecraft included a TV camera and an infrared radiometer to investigate the planet’s surface; plasma science experiment, charged particle telescope, and magnetometer to investigate the environment around the planet and the interplanetary medium; dual-frequency-radio science experiment and ultraviolet spectrometer to measure characteristics of the Mercury neutral atmosphere and ionosphere if they existed; and celestial mechanics experiments to measure planetary mass characteristics and test the theory of relativity. All experiments had been designed and selected for their Mercury scientific objectives but also would obtain important data at Venus and during the cruise phases. The Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station was unable to maintain command lock with the spacecraft following spacecraft injection. Acquisition of the star Vega by the spacecraft Canopus tracker also was delayed, but two-way communications were established within an hour and, after repeated commands, Vega was acquired. Solar panels, high-gain and low-gain antennas, and plasma science and magnetometer booms were deployed. On Nov. 4-5 four moon and three earth TV picture mosaics were completed. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft was 1 394 000 km (866 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at a speed of 4.32 km (2.68 mi) per sec. All science experiments except the infrared radiometer and electrostatic analyzer had been turned on. The scanning electron spectrometer portion of the plasma science experiment was not operating properly and the problem was being analyzed. Four trajectory correction maneuvers were scheduled during the mission. The first, Nov. 13, successfully adjusted the flight path for closest approach to Venus on Feb. 5, 1974, as planned. A second would be made Jan. 18, 1974. On Feb. 9 and March 1, 1974, after the Venus encounter, maneuvers would target the Mariner 10 to pass Mercury at 1000-km (620-mi) altitude. The Mariner program, including mission operations and tracking and data systems, was managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., was responsible for the launch vehicle. Previous missions had been made to Mars, including Mariner 4, 6, 7, and 9 (launched Nov. 28, 1964; Feb. 24, 1969; March 27, 1969; and May 30, 1971). Mariner 9 had been the first spacecraft to orbit a planet other than the earth. All others had been flyby missions. (nasa prog off; jpl Release 673) November 3—January 9, 1974:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 interplanetary probe (launched March 2, 1972) became the first spacecraft to reach Jupiter during a two-month encounter, returning new findings about the giant planet and continuing toward Uranus and eventual exit from the solar system. November 3—December 3:	Encounter operations were begun Nov. 3 by Ames Research Center controllers and scientists and on Nov. 4 Pioneer 10 began sending photopolarimeter images of Jupiter to the earth three to eight hours a day. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft, 25 000 000 km (15 500 000 mi) from Jupiter, had begun measuring the placet’s atmosphere above Jupiter’s orange-and-blue-striped cloud tops and the characteristics of particles making up the dense clouds. On Nov. 8 the spacecraft crossed the orbits of Hades and Poseidon, the first two of Jupiter’s outer moons, and on Nov. 9 and 11 it crossed the orbits of Pan and Andrastea. At a Nov. 19 press briefing at arc Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, said that low temperature in that area of the solar system slowed evolution and scientists hoped to find objects not very different from what they were at their formation. “The passage of Pioneer 10 past Jupiter also marks the gateway to the exploration of the outer solar system. This is an exploration which is critical if we truly want to understand the formation and evolution of our solar system.” Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said that Pioneer 10 had encountered 100 times more space dust than expected during the journey between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter. He expected that 30 times more particles would be detected as the spacecraft neared Jupiter. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s moons Demeter, Hera, and Hestia Nov. 22 and was 11400 600 km (7 084 000 mi) from Jupiter. By Nov. 25 a charged particle detector aboard the spacecraft had begun to show traces of particle radiation. Preliminary indications were that the probe was beginning to cross into Jupiter’s magnetosphere, estimated to be 20 times stronger than the earth’s. The planet’s radiation belts contained particle concentrations up to 1 million times higher than the earth’s Van Allen Belt and were considered by some scientists to be extremely dangerous to the spacecraft’s electronics. At a distance of 8 336 400 km (5180 000 mi) from Jupiter, spacecraft instruments began returning pictures of Jupiter’s great red spot. The final spacecraft-attitude change before encounter was made Nov. 26 and a 24-hour day of imaging and polarimetry began. At 3:30 pm EST Nov. 26 Pioneer 10 successfully crossed Jupiter’s bow shock wave at a distance of 7 709 000 km (4 790 000 mi)—with great turbulence when the solar wind hit Jupiter’s magnetic field. The spacecraft was unaffected by the turbulence hut data from 6 of its 11 instruments changed dramatically. Solar wind speed abruptly decreased to half the normal velocity and solar wind temperatures rose sharply. On Nov. 27, at a distance of 6 760 000 km (4 200 000 mi) from Jupiter, the spacecraft crossed into the planet’s true magnetic envelope, the region of interplanetary space into which the solar wind could not penetrate. Pioneer 10 crossed the magnetopause, entering the magnetic field for the first time at 3:30 pm est. At a Nov. 29 press briefing arc scientists said new data had shown the reach of Jupiter’s magnetic field to be greater than predicted. It stretched more than 13 000 000 km (8 000 000 mi) in diameter and its strength was 40 times that of the earth’s ma'gnetic field. Its direction was south, rather than north as predicted. The strength of the magnetism at 6 400 000 km (4 000 000 mi) from the planet seemed to rise and fall in a regular 10-hour phase, possibly because of the planet’s rotation. Jupiter’s mass was also found to be greater than estimated and the spacecraft was being drawn toward Jupiter faster than planned; it would arrive at its closest approach two minutes earlier than predicted. On Nov. 30 Pioneer 10 recorded a sharp drop in magnetic and radiation measurements, indicating disappearance of the magnetic field. Eleven hours later the spacecraft again crossed the magnetopause, which had apparently been driven toward the planet by a disturbance in the solar wind. At 1 427 500 km (887 000 mi) from the planet, the spacecraft entered Jupiter’s dipole magnetic field. Preliminary data indicated that the outer portions of Jupiter’s magnetic field did not rotate with the planet and were more flattened than the earth’s field. Also, the magnetic dipole center was appreciably offset, both radially and toward the north from the center of the planet. The magnetic axis was tilted from the spin axis. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s innermost moons—Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, and Io—Dec. 2-3. As it came within 446 000 km (277 000 mi) of Ganymede, the infrared radiometer indicated the moon’s surface temperature was 125 K (—235°F). Six hours before its closest approach to Jupiter the probe entered the dangerous region of intense radiation and, soon after, the imaging system ceased returning picture data. Radio commands switched the system back to normal operation within 30 minutes, however. The press later reported that NASA attributed the mishap to an unidentified flight control room guest who had inadvertently pressed against a cathode ray display, pushing a button that cut out eight instruments. December 3—11:	As the gold and silver spacecraft approached Jupiter and radiation intensity increased 10-fold every two hours, reaching 65 million ev 90 min before periapsis, tense scientists paced the floor of arc’s Mission Control with fingers crossed. At 9:25 pm est Dec. 3, after a flight of 641 days and 826 000 000 km (513 000 000 mi), Pioneer 10 sped past Jupiter at an altitude of 130 000 km (81 000 mi), traveling 155 140 km per hour (96 400 mph), the fastest speed ever achieved by a man-made object. The spacecraft’s 11 instruments sent back readings and pictures that came in loud and clear, taking 46 minutes to reach a jubilant team on earth. “Needless to say, we’re elated,” Dr. John Wolfe, Pioneer Project Scientist, told cheering newsmen. The Washington Post later described the scene at arc: “So deluged were Pioneer scientists with transmissions of the spacecraft’s instruments, they were literally changing their minds about Jupiter’s physics and chemistry every hour.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “Some of us have been looking through telescopes at Jupiter since our early teens. This is more than we ever dreamed of.” The spacecraft suffered no apparent failures and continued to function as planned. However, preliminary estimates of radiation belt parameters and observed effects on the spacecraft and instrumentation indicated that the margin of survival had been small. As Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter, the spacecraft was accelerated and slung by the planet’s gravity into a new trajectory that would take it past the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and, traveling at a constant 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph), out of the solar system toward the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 10 would be the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. By 7:00 pm EST Dec. 4, it had traveled nearly 1600 000 km (1000 000 mi) beyond Jupiter. December 11—January 9:	arc Mission Control ended Jupiter picturetaking Dec. 11 and returned to routine interplanetary operations. The spacecraft recrossed the bow shock wave Dec. 12 and continued into interplanetary space. By Dec. 14 the spacecraft was 10 881000 km (6 761 000 mi) from Jupiter, traveling at 83 525 km per hr (51 900 mph) toward the edge of the solar system. Preliminary findings from the encounter included the discovery of an ionosphere (implying a tenuous atmosphere) surrounding Jupiter’s moon Io, detection of helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere, new density measurements of the entire Jovian system that would affect current theories on the formation of the universe, and new temperature measurements of Jupiter that indicated little difference between average daytime and nighttime temperatures. Pioneer 10 was expected to continue collecting and returning data until it reached the orbit of Uranus in 1980, almost 3 200 000 000 km (2 000 000 000 mi) from the earth. Data returned would determine whether the second Jupiter probe, Pioneer 11 (launched April 5 and crossing the Asteroid Belt since August), could safely be retargeted closer to the planet. The Pioneer 10 mission was officially adjudged a success Jan. 9, 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by arc. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1969, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays, (nasa prog off; arc Release, 11/6/73; nasa Releases 73-243K, 73-256, 73-279; Wilford, NYT, 11/25/73; 11/30/73, 1; 12/4/73, 1; 12/5/73, 13; O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/73, Al; AP, W Star-News, 11/28-29/73; AP, B Sun, 12/3-4/73; Miles, LA Times, 12/4/73; 12/6/73) November 3:	The Skylab 4 launch crew successfully completed a simulated launch of the Saturn IB booster at Kennedy Space Center. The booster was scheduled to lift the Apollo command and service module and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue into orbit Nov. 10 to dock with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) and begin NASA’s third manned Skylab mission. Following the perfectly timed simulation, the fuel was drained from the launch vehicle and preparations for the final countdown were begun. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/73, A7)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), who became Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Jan. 4, commented on his new post in a statement released to the press in Washington, D.C.: “Many people may have the impression that the space program is over now that the last Apollo moon landing has taken place. This is not the case. One important phase of our space exploration program has ended, but a new phase—a more productive phase in terms of benefits to man on earth—has already begun.” Sen. Moss would “work diligently with my colleagues on the Committee and with NASA to develop a clear understanding of the program” and its relation to other national needs and priorities. Sen. Moss has been concerned with the “apparent high cost of the space program in relation to other important demands on the Nation’s resources.” He would “approach the question of current, present and future level of the nation’s space program with an open mind.” (Text)
An account of the successful Apollo program was part of an Air Force “cram” course in recent U.S. history being given to returned U.S. prisoners of war at Maxwell Air Force Base, Ala., the Detroit News reported. (Fleming, D News, 5/15/73, 25) May 15:	Sen. James S. Abourezk (D-S. Dak.), member of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, called for a full-scale congressional investigation of the malfunction of the Skylab 1 Workshop [see May 14-June 22], during a Washington, D.C., press interview. (Lyons, NYT, 5/16/73)
Appointment of Roald Sagdeyev as Director of the Soviet Space Research Institute was announced in Vestnik, monthly publication of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Sagdeyev replaced Georgy I. Petrov, who went into voluntary retirement. Sagdeyev, a nuclear physicist, had been made a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in 1964 and had become a full member in 1968. Before his appointment as Director, Sagdeyev had specialized in plasma physics at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Novosibirsk. (AP, W Post, 9/23/7$, Al; 9/24/73, A21) September 2—7:	The 66th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) was held in Dublin, Ireland. U.S. participants included Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan and Apollo 16 commander John W. Young. The 1972 fai Gold Space Medal was presented to Cernan in recognition of the Dec. 7-19, 1972, final Apollo mission which had “accomplished all of its goals and magnificently concluded the extraordinary and highly successful Apollo program.” Cernan also received t'he 1972 De la Vaulx Medal for his absolute world record of 21 hrs 32 min 44 sec for “Duration of Stay Outside his Lunar Module ‘Challenger’ Spacecraft,” set during Apollo 17. Young received the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for “remarkable leadership, skill, daring and dedication” as commander of the April 16-27, 1972, Apollo 16 mission and the V. M. Komarov Diploma, on behalf of himself and Apollo 16 Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II and Charles M. Duke, Jr., for successful completion of all but one of the mission’s 33 major experiments. The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Aeronautics was awarded to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration “in recognition of its outstanding contribution to air traffic efficiency and safety by the development of the now fully operational Automated Radar Terminal System” (arts). The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Astronautics went to Boeing Co. Aerospace Group for design and production of the lunar roving vehicle (lrv) used during the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions. The Paul Tis-sandier Diploma was presented to Kay A. Brick for “her outstanding contributions to women’s aviation over the past 23 years” as a member and Chairman of the Board of the All-Women’s Transcontinental Air Race “Powder Puff Derby.” (naa News, 9/73, 1—2; faa Release 73— 155; A&A 1972) September 3:	The U.S. had “discreetly blocked” Soviet attempts to purchase 10 ilc Industries’ Apollo lunar-configured spacesuits, Aviation Week & Space Technology'said. The U.S.S.R. had been told that U.S. export of such technology could not be approved. (Av Wk, 9/3/73, 11) September 4:	World atlases were inaccurate in delineating outer boundaries of polar icecaps according to imagery returned by Nimbus 5 (weather satellite launched by NASA Dec. 10, 1972), NASA announced. A Goddard Space Flight Center study had shown that synoptic photos from Nimbus 5 clearly indicated polar regions underwent large-scale changes in a short time. Boundaries between the multiyear icepack around the North Pole and the large areas of first-year ice varied significantly within one freezing season. Even greater changes occurred around Antarctica. Nimbus 5 also was measuring daily rainfall distribution over the earth’s oceans to indicate to meteorologists how much energy was being released into the global atmosphere. An electrically scanning microwave radiometer aboard the spacecraft was measuring rainfall rate and heat thus released to enable forecasters to understand a tropical storm or hurricane and predict its 24- to 48-hr intensity, (nasa Releases 73-176, 73-175)
The last Apollo splashdown party given by National Space Club in Washington, D.C., had the theme “Salute to Apollo: Man’s Promise for the Future.” The program included remarks and messages from President Nixon; Vice President Spiro T. Agnew; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President and President-Aerospace Group William B. Bergen; and Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr. Former President Lyndon B. Johnson who had died during day, had sent a message commending space pioneers who had “made the Apollo miracle a living reality. It has been more . . . than an amazing adventure into the unexplored and the unknown. The Apollo program has been and will endure as a monument to many things—to the personal courage of some of the finest men our nation has produced—to the technological and managerial capability, which is the genius of our system—and to a successful cooperation among nations which has proved to all of us what can be done when we work together with our eyes on a glorious goal.” Master of Ceremonies Peter S. Hackes of National Broadcasting Co. eulogized President Johnson as “the policy father of the space program.” A message from Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), former Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Apollo program had been an “outstanding example of government, industry, and university cooperation and has really shown brilliance of management and technological competence.” An Apollo film was narrated by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director. Dr. Petrone said the Apollo program had taken 12 yrs “and I don’t look upon this as curtains at the end of a play. It’s like the curtain at the end of the first act. It’s just beginning.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said President Johnson had been instrumental in achieving congressional support for the space program. Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders recalled President Johnson as “a very large man, very down to earth” who had the spirit of an astronaut, but was “a little too big” to be one. (Program; Texts; Smyth, W Post, 1/23/73, B2; ri pio)
