The first map of gravity forces on the moon’s far side indicated that the strong gravitational tug of mascons (mass concentrations) on the lunar face was caused by lava flooding rather than by buried meteorites as previously thought, California Institute of Technology planetary scientist Dr. Alfred J. Ferrari reported in a press release based on a paper to be published in Science. The map was developed from measurements of the orbits of two small subsatellites left orbiting the moon by Apollo 15 and 16 in July 1971 and April 1972 and of Lunar Orbiter 5 (launched 1 Aug. 1967). Basins on the moon’s far side, not lava-filled, exerted only weak gravitational forces on orbiting spacecraft, while lava-flooded basins on the front side exerted a strong pull. (Miles, LA Times, 17 Dec 74; Ferrari interview, 20 Nov 75; Ferrari, Science, 27 June 75, 1927-1300)
Federal support to universities and colleges had declined 7%, to $3823 million, during FY 1973 in the first decline since 1970, the National Science Foundation reported. The drop had been largely the result of a $267-million decrease in funds from the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare but other significant decreases were posted by nsf, down $40 million; Dept, of Defense, down $11 million; and NASA, down $8 million. Federal funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million, 5% below 1972. Two science fields had shown an increase in Federal r&d support between 1972 and 1973'. Life sciences’ $934 million was a 4% increase; engineering’s $204 million was up 6%. (nsf Highlights, 15 July 74) 15— 16 July: Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1—first U.S. domestic communications satellite, launched by NASA 13 April—began operations during inaugural ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. McFall, Chairman of the Board and President of Western Union Corp. transmitted the first message, from New York to Los Angeles, using the original Morse key to tap “What hath God wrought!” It was the same message sent by inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24 May 1844 over the first experimental telegraph, a 65-km line between the Capitol in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md. Regular commercial operations began 16 July, providing services for Westar J’s first two commercial customers, American Can Co. and Bank of America. (Westar Inaugural Transmission press kit, 15 July 74) 16— 29 July: NASA launched Aeros 2 (Aeros-B) aeronomy satellite for West Germany from Western Test Range at 4:51 am pdt on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle into polar orbit with an 879.0-km apogee, 221.3km perigee, 95.65-min period, and 97.44° inclination. The NASA mission objective—to place the Aeros 2 satellite in an earth orbit permitting successful achievement of the scientific objectives—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 26 July. The scientific objective was to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of the main absorption. The long-range objective of the satellite, which carried one Goddard Space Flight Center and four West German experiments, was to provide a model of the ionosphere from which upper atmospheric conditions could be predicted. By 29 July the vehicle and experiments were performing satisfactorily and the West Germans were initiating spacecraft operations. A July 1965 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany had provided for a series of cooperative satellite projects. The Aeros program, the second in the series, was authorized by a 10 June 1969 agreement and Aeros 1 was launched 16 Dec. 1972. The 1974 contract between NASA and the West Germany Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) for the Aeros 2 launch provided for reimbursement of NASA for launch vehicle and services. NASA would also provide one experiment, tracking, and backup for data acquisition, bmft was responsible for development of spacecraft and instrumentation operation and control of the satellite after launch, and data reduction and analysis except for the gsfc experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. (nasa mors, 30 Nov 72, 8 & 29 July 74; NASA Releases 69-91, 74-183; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 75) The 1969 launch of Apollo 11 was commemorated 16 July by ceremonies at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. At 9:32 am edt, the moment of launch, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., unveiled a plaque designating the site a National Historical Landmark. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the thousands of guests: “No matter our achievements, ... we cannot relax our pursuit of knowledge, for we must face the coming crises of our time. Every effort must be made to see that the opportunity which our technology presents is not lost. We may be sure that the opportunity will not occur soon again, if ever. To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources— a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no return.” Unless “we continuously restore the fund of basic knowledge, we shall ultimately exhaust it. . . . “Some day we will establish scientific outposts on the Moon, and even tap its mineral resources. And in the not-too-distant future astronauts may tread the surface of Mars and the glaciers of the moons of Jupiter in search of extraterrestrial life. . . . The future began here at 9:32 a.m. on July 16, 1969. At that moment on July 16 in the year 2069, launch windows to Mars, Neptune, and Pluto will be open. Will we fly through those windows? I think we will.” In 19 July ceremonies at the San Clemente, Calif., Western White House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names of each astronaut who had represented “this country in a flight above the surface of the Earth.” President Nixon told Armstrong the greatest contribution to the space program was not the exploration or technology but the “spirit you and your colleagues . . . have had the opportunity to demonstrate.” The Smithsonian Institution hosted 20 July activities marking the day of the landing. Speaking on the Mall in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks said Apollo 11 had been a “dramatic demonstration . . . that progress in human affairs does not spring full blown from the efforts of one man or group of men. What we saw was the culmination of the efforts of hundreds of scientists and engineers from Leonardo da Vinci ... to the Apollo 11 astronauts. Each built on what his predecessors had accomplished until the accumulation of knowledge made possible the kind of quantum leap forward represented by the Apollo Program.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, called the day of the landing “the day man ended an era of one-planet civilization and began a new age as traveler and colonizer of the universe.” Despite difficulties, men would “make more of these steps into the vast but exciting reaches of the solar system.” A 21 July service at the Washington Cathedral in Washington, D.C., dedicated the Space Window donated by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator at the time of the landing. The window, designed by Rodney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory, representing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. During the ceremony, Armstrong presented a 7.18-g, 3.6-billion-yr-old lunar rock, brought from the moon by Apollo 11, to the Cathedral. The rock would be inserted into a hydrogen-filled plexiglass container embedded as the centerpiece of the window. (PD, 22 July 74, 815; NASA Activities, 15 Aug 74, 5-14; transcript; program)
Selection of the oflicial emblem of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, scheduled for July 1975, was announced by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The circular emblem displayed the English word “Apollo” and the Russian “Soyuz” around a center disc depicting the two spacecraft docked in earth orbit, (nasa Release 74-49)
The TV film “Houston, We Have a Problem” was criticized by former astronaut James A. Lovell, commander of the aborted Apollo 13 moonlanding mission (launched 11 April 1970), in a letter to the NASA Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher. The fictitious film focused on the personal lives of the Mission Control team that brought the crippled Apollo 13 spacecraft back to earth. Lovell said the film was “in poor taste”; the safe return of Apollo 13 was one of NASA’s finest hours and “it is not necessary to resort to soap opera plots to enliven the . . . story.” (Carmody, W Post, 1 March 74, C7)
Results from NASA’s Pioneer 10 mission (launched 2 March 1972 toward a 3 Dec. 1973 encounter with Jupiter) were published in a series of articles in Science. Plasma analyzer data had indicated that Jupiter had a detached bow shock and magnetopause similar to the earth’s but with a much larger spatial extent and with the size highly responsive to changes in solar wind dynamic pressure. The thermal structure of Jupiter was found to he closely related to the visual appearance of the planet, with illuminated and nonilluminated sides having the same brightness temperatures. The net thermal energy of the planet was twice the solar energy input. Magnetic field measurements showed a very strong magnetic field and implied the dipole was inclined at about 15° to Jupiter’s axis of rotation. The satellite Io was found to have an ionosphere extending from near the surface to about 1000 km. A new density of 3.5 g per cc—close to the density of the moon and Mars—was established for Io. Densities of the other satellites of Jupiter were progressively lower in proportion to their distance from the planet. More comprehensive reports of Pioneer 10 experiments were published in the Journal of Geophysical Research of 1 Sept. (Opp, Wolfe, et al., Smith et al., Kliore et al., Science, 25 Jan 74, 302-324; Journ Geophysical Research, Pioneer 10 issue, 1 Sept 74)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt became NASA Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs. He headed NASA’s new Office of Energy Programs, supporting Federal agencies responsible for energy research and development. The office consolidated functions previously performed by other Headquarters offices. Dr. Schmitt, science pilot on the Apollo 17 lunar landing mission, had been Chief of the Science and Applications Directorate in the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. He had been on temporary assignment at Headquarters as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Energy Research and Development since 29 Jan. (NASA Ann, 16 May 74)
The economic return from the U.S. space program amounted to 33% per year, exceeding the typical yield from investments in stocks, bonds, and real estate, Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Johnson Space Center Director, said in a speech at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. at Blacksburg, Va. Among returns not immediately visible to the public were some 30000 inventions available by the end of the Apollo program. The price of Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite—surveying the earth since its launch 23 July 1972—was less than 50 cents per American. “Given its potential for aiding us in the coming years, who would not support a program that costs less than a . . . half-pound [one fourth kilogram] of ground beef?” Dr. Kraft estimated that the space shuttle, at an annual cost of $5 for each American, was an investment that would “pay, perhaps, the greatest return to future generations.” With such a vehicle we could not only perform a variety of scientific studies with immediate application to life on earth but build permanent, space stations and launch planetary vehicles and eventually starships. The space shuttle program, with its international cooperation, would unite “many nations for the benefit of all.” (Text)
A Science editorial commented on the Nixon Administration and science: During his terms in office President Nixon, who had resigned 9 Aug., had been preoccupied by foreign policy and Watergate reaction. Science was “at most an afterthought.” Because he thought that science should advance the cause of national security and prestige, “grand technology seemed to have had a special fascination for Nixon,” most evident in his enthusiasm for the Apollo program and the supersonic transport. He had made a dramatic declaration of war on cancer and set the Nation toward Project Independence, under which the U.S. was to “achieve energy self-sufficiency by 1980.” There was “little evidence that Nixon was hostile to science but rather that, except for the technological extravaganzas, he was simply not interested.” He lacked rapport with scientists, allying himself instead with proponents and practitioners of the quasi-science of modern management. The Presidential tapes (tape recordings made secretly of conversations in the Oval Office) showed a President “badly informed, even indifferent,” helping to explain why the White House science advisory machinery was deemed expendable. “But in the present situation it takes no special wisdom to see how r&d decisions will affect how the government deals with serious energy and food problems and how important these actions will be in future economic developments. The Nixon tapes illustrate why good presidential advisers and good mechanisms to transmit their advice are necessary in every sphere of policy; this should not be overlooked amcmg the lessons of Watergate for the new Administration.” (Science, 23 Aug 74, 675-8)
Kennedy Space Center had extended its contract with Chrysler Corp. Space Division for the period 1 Jan. 1974 through 31 July 1975, KSC announced. The $7 092 547 extension, which brought total value of the contract to $36 467 389, provided for prelaunch, launch, and postlaunch support of the Saturn IB 1st stage for a Skylab rescue vehicle, if required, and for the launch of an Apollo spacecraft in the 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, (ksc Release 17-74) During January: A 65% noise reduction during landing had been demonstrated by 38 United Air Lines, Inc., flight crews in an in-service evaluation of a NASA-developed landing technique under visual and instrument flight conditions, NASA announced. Using the NASA technique, a Boeing 727 aircraft approaching on a two-segment path exposed only a 50-sq-km area to greater than 90 effective perceived decibels of noise. The program was closely coordinated with the Department of Transportation, the Federal Aviation Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency. Program guidance was provided by a Panel on Noise Abatement Flight Procedures with members from FA A, DOT, aircraft and avionics manufacturers, airlines, and pilots’ associations. (NASA Aeronautics Update, Jan 74)
Manned space spectaculars were gone, at least until the 21st century, Thomas O’Toole said in the Washington Post. The similarities between the air age when men had begun flying and the space age were striking. Aviators had been considered stuntmen until they began to carry the mail. The Apollo flights, with their “vaguely circus air,” had struck many pepple the same way. The space shuttle promised to change all that. The U.S. planned to operate five shuttles, each one carrying more than 27 000 kg of satellites and space machinery into orbit 12 times a year, to “improve the quality of life on earth and to find out if life exists elsewhere in the solar system.” By the end of the 1980s the U.S. would have visited eight of the solar system’s nine planets; the only exception was Pluto. While one part of the space agency looked at the other planets, another would be looking down to learn more about the earth’s health. The next 20 yrs would see an unprecedented use of earth orbit to observe and communicate with the earth. O’Toole quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying that the earth orbit might become overcrowded. Not that things would bump into each other but “there will not be enough radio frequencies to communicate back to earth.” (W Post, 24 March 74, Cl)
American Broadcasting Co. Science Editor Jules Bergman recalled tales of astronauts in a TV Guide article and noted that, with the splashdown of Skylab 4, an incredible era of space flight had come to an end. In 30 manned flights the U.S. had moved from the first 15-min sub-oibital flight to 12 Americans walking on the moon and then finally to the near-routine Skylab endurance missions. It would be a long while before someone set out for the planets, a trip which would require far more advanced propulsion systems than now available. But “we will go to the planets. . . . We will go beyond Jupiter. We will go beyond this solar system and eventually build starcraft to go so far that man’s only limit will be his imagination and ingenuity. But the mission clearly for the next decade is this Earth: it is the only home man has at the moment.” (TV Guide, 2 March 74)
Skylab . . . has demonstrated that this nation is capable of conducting broader and more useful beneficial activities in space that directly relate to our own planet Earth,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a postrecovery press briefing at Johnson Space Center. It had “moved the space program from the realm of the spectacular into a new phase that can be characterized ... as almost businesslike if not yet quite routine.” The Skylab experience was necessary for the future in space and had confirmed that NASA was proceeding in the right direction with development of the space shuttle. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said 30 earth resources passes had been planned and 39 accomplished during the Skylab 4 mission. There had been 350 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount observations planned and 338 hrs completed. Observations of Comet Kohoutek included 13 by the Apollo Telescope Mount and 111 by other instruments. All 28 planned corollary experiments and all major medical and student experiments had been completed. Original planning had called for 140 days in orbit for the three manned missions; 172 were accomplished. Skylab’s greatest achievement “was to prove . . . there is no limit in our space research”; the limit “is only our resolve, not our ability to do work, not the ability of men to work and not our technical knowledge.” (Transcript)
A new medical device, the mobile automatic metabolic analyzer (mama) developed from Apollo and Skylab technology to measure energy expended by ambulatory patients, was presented to the Univ. of Alabama Medical School by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center. The instrument—primarily a mass spectrometer—:would accurately measure metabolic activity, recording oxygen consumed, carbon dioxide produced, and nitrogen and moisture exchanged to gauge the progress of severely disabled persons through phases of rehabilitation. mama was developed and manufactured at msfc under NASA’s technology utilization program, (nasa Release 74-18)
The leadership of “NASA’s other hero,” former Administrator James E. Webb, was recalled by Julian Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in the Washington Post: The fifth anniversary of the 20 July 1969 Apollo 11 lunar landing would bring toasts to former astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and others. But it had been Webb’s “incredible leadership” which had made the event possible. Webb had “fought the Bureau of the Budget for every nickel” and usually got his way. In Congress, few believed he was not a scientist or engineer. He dazzled them with his knowledge of the technical as well as his management of the vast NASA program structure. “But it was in the internal workings of NASA where his strength lay.” He had an uncanny knack for “standing back and looking at the big picture.” He never took on a problem without coming up with as many as four options and, for Webb, every option was an opportunity. Abruptly in 1968, Webb resigned. Most of the major Apollo decisions had been made. “Almost shockingly, it was less than a year away from the first manned lunar landing. Had he . . . waited just a while longer, he could have basked in the moment of tremendous glory.” (W Post, 21 July 74, C6)
The success of Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount solar experiment was more than a milestone in space exploration, Dr. John Eddy, solar physicist of the Boulder, Colo., High Altitude Observatory, said in a New Scientist article. This battery of the world’s most advanced telescopes lofted to the ideal observation site had clarified previous theoretical sketches of the vertical extent of the sun’s chromospheric structures. Spicules, which outlined the giant circulation cells of the chromosphere and extended through the transition region, disappeared at temperatures of 1 million K in the low corona, suggesting that the magnetic field lines diverged in the corona. First results from the atm x-ray observations destroyed the common concept of a homogeneous background corona, which had served as a basis of modern coronal physics, and revealed that the corona was composed almost entirely of closed loop structures fitting magnetic field lines calculated from observed photospheric fields. Reasons for the ATM success included the large-scale and highly sophisticated instruments, large data-storage capability, efficiency of instrument operation, operation of the six instruments in concert, extensive ground support, and astronaut interest and training. Program results would be shared by scientists in many countries and the program appeared a good investment, in scientific yield per dollar spent. (New Scientist, 21 March 74, 738-741)
President Ford outlined “Project Interdependence,” a global approach to the energy problem, in his address to the ninth annual World Energy Conference in Detroit. The President proposed that all nations increase production, reduce consumption, and eliminate waste of energy; that a cooperative spirit exist; that poor nations receive special attention; and that fuel prices reach a level providing strong incentives to producers without disrupting consumer economics. Describing U.S. mobilization to achieve long-term goals, the President said the energy program would require “a commitment in excess of the successful one made by John F. Kennedy to put a man on the Moon in the last decade.” (PD, 30 Sept 74,1181—6)
Hazard analyses and quality control techniques developed by NASA in the Apollo program would improve the reliability of safety and antipollution equipment used in the offshore drilling of oil wells, NASA announced. At the request of the U.S. Geological Survey, NASA teams at Marshall Space Flight Center, the Mississippi Test Facility, and the Michoud Assembly Facility had recommended development of subsurface safety valves, activated either automatically after sensing increased velocity in the oil line or by remote control from a surface location, to protect the marine and coastal environment, (nasa Release 74-10)
Capt. Lee R. Scherer (usn, Ret.), Flight Research Center Director, had been named Director of Kennedy Space Center effective in mid-January 1975, NASA announced. He would succeed Dr. Kurt H. Debus, who retired 9 Oct. Before going to frc in 1971, Capt. Scherer had been Lunar Exploration Director in the NASA Hq. Apollo Program Office, directing the scientific exploration of the first five manned landings on the moon. He had been Manager of the Lunar Orbiter Program 1963—1967. (nasa Ann, 23 Dec 74)
Tass commentator Georgy Sergeyev commented on the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project: The success of Skylab and the first flight of Yuri A. Gagarin, the space walk of Aleksey A. Leonov, and the exploration of the moon by American astronauts, were only “milestones along the road of exploration of outer space.” ASTP would be another step. The joint Soviet-American mission had become possible, not only because of the efforts of scientists, but also because of the “conditions of a favorable political climate established in Soviet-American relations as a result of the fruitful . . . summit meetings.” The main task was to see that “these changes become irreversible.” astp would go a long way toward “making space exploration really internationalist.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 14 Feb 74, B6)
Johnson Space Center announced extension of two contracts for program support to the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A $ 695 077 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract extension covering 1 Jan. 1974 through 30 Sept. 1975 had been given General Electric Co. to continue support of all Apollo hardware-related programs including automatic checkout equipment. A $2 424 250 cost-plus-fixed-fee extension for 1 Jan. 1974 through September 1975 had been made in a Boeing Co. contract to provide systems and project engineering support to the astp and Skylab program offices. (JSC Release 74-001)
“I am sure life will move out from the Earth, probably first to the Moon and then to Mars,” Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech reviewing NASA’s planetary program before the National Space Club. Just what form of life would be transplanted, whether man or some simple organism, would be the subject of debate. Four planets—Jupiter, Venus, Mars, and Mercury—had already been visited. The next major event would be the Viking landings on Mars in 1976. Historically, two significant events in 1965 had determined the direction of the planetary program. The first was r. study at Woods Hole, Mass., which had recommended that the space program, following Apollo, should search for life on the planets and give first priority to the study of Mars—while also maintaining a wide-ranging program of general planetary exploration—because Mars most closely resembled the earth and was the most likely to support life. The second event, the 14 July 1965 flight of Mariner 4 past Mars, supported the recommendations when it found evidence of water in the Martian atmosphere. “In retrospect, I think the decision . . . has been sound.” But a major decision that faced NASA this summer, one year before the launch of Viking, was whether there should be follow-on Viking missions. “Should Mars continue to have first priority in planetary exploration? . . . Clearly, if we find evidence of life on Mars, . . . Mars will have first priority.” (Text)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) praised the Skylab 4 astronauts (launched 16 Nov. 1973) on the eve of their splashdown after a record 84-day mission, concluding the Sylab program. On the floor of the precedented.” After damage to the Orbital Worshop during its 14 May House of Representatives Rep. Teague called the Skylab record “un-1973 launch, the three crews had repaired and altered the systems, exceeded their expected workloads, and returned vast amounts of useful information on earth rseources, solar phenomena, physical science, life sciences, and technology. The crews had spent 41 hrs in extravehicular activity and 171% days in earth orbit, demonstrating that man could live indefinitely and work productively in space. To date the U.S. manned space program had amassed 30 flights with some 21 850 hrs of active operation in space. “These programs— Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab—have made direct contributions to our daily lives as well as new scientific knowledge. . . . Skylab has amply demonstrated that space can be used for practical purposes.” (CR, 7 Feb 74, E533) _ _ _
Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974), announced he would leave the NASA astronaut corps 30 Nov. 1974. Dr. Gibson, a scientist-astronaut since 1965, would join Aerospace Corp. of Los Angeles as a senior staff scientist, specializing in the interpretation of solar data gathered during the 171 days of manned operation in the Skylab program. He had held primary responsibility for the 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount operation on Skylab 4, making extensive observations of solar processes, (jsc Release 74-246)
The U.S.S.R.’s Cosmonautics Day and 13th anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in 1961, was marked by articles in the Soviet press. “Cosmonautics is one of the most important testing ranges of science in which many directions of science and technology are being synthesized into a single constantly perfecting system,” Soviet Academician Valentin Glushko wrote in Pravda. The successes of cosmonautics in the preceding 15 to 20 yrs had given a powerful impetus to various branches of knowledge. The initial accumulation of facts by spacecraft had been completed. On the agenda now was the detailed study of dynamic processes, the interconnection of phenomena, and the verification of hypotheses and models. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, acknowledged in an interview with Sovietskaya Rossiya the importance of orbital stations for future space experiments. He also acknowledged that Soviet designers had not yet been able to develop a satisfactory space shuttle. He said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned landing on the moon. His impassioned defense of the Soviet space program suggested that it, like the U.S. program, was under fire by domestic critics; “many millions of rubles” had been saved because of the use of meteorological satellites. In Trud, Academician Boris N. Petrov, head of the Council of International Cooperation in Space Exploration and Use under the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that manned flights “must become more frequent and more extended” to produce “really creative work for specialists of many branches of science.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 16 April 74, Ul-2; Wren, NYT, 13 April 74) to meet mission lifetime requirements—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 23 April. Westar 1 was acquired by a mobile ground station at 9:38 pm edt and control was turned over to Western Union. The satellite apogee motor was successfully fired at 5:21 pm edt 16 April and Westar 1 was placed in geosynchronous orbit with a 35 592-km apogee, 35 166-km perigee, 23-hr 35-min period, and 0.6° inclination. An onboard hydrazine reaction control system was moving the satellite toward its final position above the equator at 99° W longitude. Each of 12 transponders aboard Westar 1 could relay 1200 voice circuits, 1 color TV channel with program audio, or data at 50 megabits per sec. The Westar system-including one satellite to be launched in June, one satellite to be held in reserve, and five earth stations—would greatly increase Western Union’s capacity for commercial and personal communications. Expected to be operational in August, the system would be the first to interconnect, under one company, satellites and an existing continent-wide, computer-switched, multipurpose terrestrial network. (nasa mors, 19 March 74,24 April 74; gsfc Wkly SSR, 11-17 April 74; nasa Release 74-77; McElheny, NYT, 15 April 74, 1; AP, CSM, 18 April 74; SBD, 26 April 74, 322; gsfc proj off, interview, 7 Nov 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 16, carrying cosmonauts Col. Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, from Bay-konur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 2:40 pm local time (4:40 am est) in preparation for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. The spacecraft, identical to the one that would fly during the ASTP mission, entered orbit with a 280-km apogee, 194-km perigee, 89.3min period, and 51.8° inclination. Tass reported the purpose of the mission was to test the spacecraft’s onboard systems, which had been “modernized to meet the demands of the joint flight”; make scientific and technical investigations; and observe and photograph sections of the earth’s surface for the solution of economic problems. In a prelaunch Tass interview, Filipchenko said that the mission was to last several days. “This would be enough for us to test carefully all the ship’s systems, above all its docking gear.” Using a passive simulator docking ring, Soyuz 16 would make docking and separation maneuvers in almost all the ASTP modes. In addition, U.S.S.R. astp Technical Director Konstanin D. Bushuyev said in a launch-day Tass interview, the crew would check out the Soyuz life support system, which had been redesigned for better compatibility with Apollo. Soyuz normally had a cabin pressure of 10 newtons per sq cm (14.7 psi) and an atmosphere similar in oxygen content to terrestrial atmosphere. Apollo maintained its pure oxygen atmosphere at 3.5 newtons per sq cm (5 psi). To reduce the acclimation period for the crews’ transition between the two atmospheres, the U.S.S.R. had agreed to reduce the pressure and increase the percentage of oxygen in the Soyuz atmosphere. The system’s capacity also had been increased to accommodate four persons. On 3 Dec. NASA, which had been tracking Soyuz 16 since shortly after launch, began a 15-day joint tracking rehearsal with the U.S.S.R. After the mission, information gathered by nine U.S. tracking stations would be compared with data from Soviet tracking stations. Meanwhile the crew reduced the spacecraft’s cabin pressure to 7.2 newtons per sq cm (10.4 psi) and doubled the oxygen content, from 20% to 40%, with no adverse effect. Color TV broadcasts from the spacecraft showed all was well. A trajectory correction 4 Dec. placed Soyuz 16 in a circular orbit with a 225-km altitude, 88.9-min period, and 51.8° inclination, an orbit similar to astp requirements. Simulated docking and separation maneuvers “passed off without a hitch” 5—7 Dec., Tass reported. Medical, biological, earth resources, and astronomy experiments also were carried out during the six-day mission. At 1:04 pm Baykonur time (3:04 am est) 8 Dec., Soyuz 16 softlanded in the U.S.S.R. 300 km north of Dzhezkazgan in Kazakstan. Tass reported the cosmonauts were in good health. Following the successful landing, U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney conveyed his congratulations “for the brilliant rehearsal before the Soviet-U.S. flight.” In a Tass interview Bushuyev said, “We have succeeded in checking in real space flight the whole package of the new system and units responsible for the success of the future linkup of the Soviet and U.S. spaceships.” Soyuz 16 was the third manned U.S.S.R. launch in 1974, following Soyuz 14 (launched 3 July) and Soyuz 15 (26 Aug.). (gsfc SSR, 31 Dec. 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 2-11 Dec 74; Wren, NYT, 3 Dec 74, 16; 4 Dec 74, 26; jsc Release 74-272) 2, 12 December: American astronauts and technicians, although denied access to Soviet spacecraft factories, would be permitted to inspect the Soyuz spacecraft for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at the Bay-konur Cosmodrome launch site in May 1975, NASA officials said at a Johnson Space Center news conference. U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said the arrangement would satisfy U.S. technical needs. In a 12 Dec. press conference at Star City, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. chief of cosmonaut training, said American crews would be permitted to view only facilities directly connected with the flight itself. “Everything that American astronauts need to be acquainted with on the Soyuz that will fly will be shown them beforehand.” In the meantime astronauts would train with mockups and simulators, (jsc Pio, interview, 15 Sept 75; Keefer, Today, 5 Dec 74; Chriss, LA Times, 3 Dec 74; Toth, LA Times, 13 Dec 74; fbis-Sov, 13 Dec 74, Ul)
A proposal to tap energy from tiny black holes, superdense objects in space, was presented by Dr. Lowell Wood, member of a three-man team from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratories, at a conference of international physicists organized by the New York Academy of Sciences. Some black holes within the orbit of the moon might be so tiny that their effects would not be evident beyond a few hundred meters. A tiny power plant could be placed in orbit to accompany the moving hole but remain at a discreet distance. Fusion fuel would then be fired from the power plant to the hole, and the hole’s extremely powerful gravity would squeeze the fuel toward the vanishing point. The fuel would fuse, releasing vast amounts of energy, which could be collected and beamed to the earth by microwave frequencies. (Sullivan, NYT, 9 March 74, 12)
The economy of Florida’s Brevard County was recovering from the impact of Kennedy Space Center layoffs that had followed the end of NASA’s Apollo and Skylab programs, the Washington Post reported. Employment at the launch facilities had formed the basis for Brevard County’s economy and when manpower at ksc was cut in half “the bottom dropped out.” Construction came to a near halt, small businesses closed, and personal bankruptcies soared. By March 1971 the Federal Housing Administration held title to 986 repossessed Brevard County homes and the total tripled in the next three years. However, an advertising campaign, begun in 1971 to attract retired persons to the area and its vacant bargain real estate, started an upswing in the economy. Also contributing to the upswing were a pledge that NASA would not let its ksc manpower fall below the current 9500-employee (Civil Service and contractor) level, assurances that the Air Force would maintain its 13 300-man work force at Eastern Test Range for the next five years, construction of a new regional shopping center, and the advent of Disney World 95 km away. (Myers, W Post, 28 July 74, E10)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, signed a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences agreement on news coverage of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project flight, scheduled for July 1975. The agreement brought a protest from Associated Press President and General Manager J. Wes Gallagher because it excluded American newsmen from the Soviet launching. In a 23 Oct. letter to Gallagher, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, stated that, while the Soviets were adamant on this question, they had otherwise agreed to provide “the most complete, Comprehensive release ever to the U.S. news media of real-time information related to a Soviet space mission.” The agreement, Dr. Fletcher noted, covered joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. activities while recognizing the right of each nation to establish policies for their respective independent activities. The U.S. would not exclude Soviet newsmen from the U.S. liftoff. The Public Affairs Agreement provided that, beginning with the Soyuz launch and ending with the Apollo recovery, onboard information from both spacecraft, voice communications between the spacecraft, and ground communications with both spacecraft, as well as ground-based and onboard TV, would be exchanged immediately. The first real-time TV coverage of a Soviet launch would be released to the West. Factual information on joint activities would be released immediately. Lines from the U.S. public affairs center in Moscow would communicate with technical specialists in the Soviet mission control center. For the first time, Soviet commentators would be at the Soviet control center and launch site during mission operations to describe countdown, launch, and mission events as they occurred, for immediate release, (nasa Int Aff, interview, 30 Sept 75; AP, NYT, 12 Oct 74, 2; 24 Oct 74, 9; NASA press conf transcript, 12 Nov 74)
Glynn S. Lunney, Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager, received the Arthur S. Flemming Award—given each year to 10 outstanding young Federal employees by the Washington, D.C., Jaycees—during a ceremony in Washington. Lunney’s selection was based on his work as U.S. Technical Director of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The award cited his leadership and technical ability as important elements in the cooperation and progress achieved in the project by the two participating countries, (jsc Release 74-110; JSC Roundup, 21 June 74, 1) observatories, rockets, and aircraft. Dr. Charles R. O’Dell, project scientist for NASA’s Large Space Telescope program, said Kohoutek had been a landmark in the study of the solar system. “We found large numbers of heavy molecules that we had never seen before. We always thought they were there but now we have proof of it.” (nasa Release 74-109; Michelini, Birmingham Post-Herald, 14 June 74)
Major reorganizations were announced at NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director. Dr. Fletcher said the Headquarters reorganization and key personnel appointments would consolidate planning and direction of research and development programs under the Associate Administrator and overall planning and direction of the field center operations under the newly created position of Associate Administrator for Center Operations. Dr. Petrone was named Associate Administrator. He would remain as msfc Director until early summer when he would be replaced by Dr. William R. Lucas, msfc Deputy Director. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. He would also continue as Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science until a successor was named. Dr. George M. Low, in addition to his duties as Deputy Administrator, would serve as Acting Associate Administrator for Center Operations until the new position was filled. He would be assisted by Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), who would also continue as the Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, was named Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. Bernard Moritz was appointed Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The reorganization, effective 15 March, followed completion of the Apollo and Skylab programs and would provide mechanisms for the phaseover from conventional launch vehicles to the space shuttle and new programs, Dr. Fletcher said. At msfc, Dr. Petrone said that the reorganization, effective 30 May, would enable the Center to fulfill requirements of its varied assigned programs and improve its competitive position to obtain new assignments. The major changes were in the Science and Engineering Directorate. A Deputy for Operations and a Deputy for Systems had been established. Business operations and control of all resources had been consolidated into a centralized office at the directorate level. Elements under the s&E Directorate included two associate directors, an Associate Director of Engineering and an Associate Director of Management; two offices, Reliability and Quality Assurance and Research and Technology; and eight laboratories. The laboratories were being restructured to emphasize system engineering and integration, analysis, design, and testing. The in-house capability to manufacture, inspect, and check out major hardware projects had been eliminated, with the associated supply, warehousing, and procurement capability. Reorganization in msfc’s Administration and Program Support Directorate included consolidation of Center-wide automatic data-process-ing functions within A&PS. Offices under a&PS would include Technology Utilization, Manpower, Financial Management, Facilities, Procurement, Management, Services, Logistics, and Computer Services. (NASA Ann, 5 March 74; NASA Release 74-76; msfc Release 74-31)
Analyses of light flashes seen by crew members of the last Apollo missions, tentatively attributed to cosmic ray nuclei penetrating the head and eyes, were reported by Univ. of Houston and Johnson Space Center scientists in Science magazine. Three kinds of flashes—the spot or star-like flash, the streak, and the cloud—had occurred randomly, with no apparent preference for one eye over the other. Astronauts saw many more flashes during translunar coast experiment sessions than in transearth coast, although the cosmic ray flux appeared to be the same inside the spacecraft during both coasts. No physiological explanation was found for this difference in frequency of flashes. (Pinsky, et al., Science, 8 March 74, 957-958)
John H. Disher, Skylab Program Deputy Director since August 1965, had been named Director of Advanced Programs in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. Skylab had concluded operations with the 8 Feb. splashdown of its third manned mission to visit the Nation’s first experimental space station. In the Advanced Program Office, Disher would head evaluations of concepts for manned space activities within changing national needs and priorities, to guide transition from present to future programs. From 1959 to 1961 Disher had headed advanced manned missions. He had also served as Apollo Test Director and Assistant Director for Apollo Spacecraft Development, (nasa Release 74-48)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners’ appointment as nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science became effective. He succeeded Dr. John E. Naugle, who had become Deputy Associate Administrator. Dr. Hinners, Director of Lunar Programs in the Office of Space Science before his appointment, had joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director and Chief Scientist of Apollo Lunar Exploration in the Office of Manned Space Flight, (nasa Ann, 26 June 74)
The U.S.S.R. cosmonaut corps was being built up at same time the U.S. astronaut force was dwindling, a Miami Herald article said. The Herald quoted Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, who had visited the U.S.S.R. during training for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, as saying : “Star City (where most of the cosmonauts live and train) looks like a boom town. There’s no doubt the Soviets have a vigorous ongoing manned space effort planned for the next five or six years.” He said that the number of buildings in Star City had tripled in the previous two years, with more under construction. The total of 75 to 80 cosmonauts was a sharp increase over the estimated 55 of five years ago. In contrast the U.S. astronaut corps had fallen to 34 from a peak of 60 during the Apollo program, with only three training for a flight. Stafford said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. had any new spacecraft under development hut rather planned for the continued use of the Soyuz as a workhorse. (M Her, 21 Aug 74)
“No other person who has flown in space has captured the experience so vividly,” Henry S. F. Cooper said in a review of Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut’s Journeys by Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins. Although the book was “long and rambling,” touching a great many bases in Collins’ career from Air Force test pilot through Gemini 10 and Apollo, “it is something new under the sun to find an astronaut who isn’t afraid to express his feelings.” Collins was best at single impressions, . “little snapshots,” still sharp and clear five years after the lunar landing. Two days out on the mission, “ ‘The moon I have known all my life, that two-dimensional, small yellow disk in the sky, has gone somewhere to be replaced by the most awesome sphere I have ever seen. . . . This cool, magnificent sphere hangs there ominously, a formidable presence without sound or motion, issuing us no invitation to invade its domain.’ ” Collins had cast off the “diffidence astronauts normally wear like spacesuits to protect themselves from prying earthlings. ... ‘I have been places and done things you simply would not believe. I have dangled from a cord a hundred miles up; I have seen the earth eclipsed by the moon, and enjoyed it. I have seen the sun’s true light, unfiltered by any planet’s atmosphere. I have seen the ultimate black of infinity in a stillness undisturbed by any living thing. ... I do have this secret, this precious thing that I will always carry with me.’ ” (NYT Booh Review, 11 Aug 74,1)
Sen. James G. Abourezk (D—S.D.) asked the Government Accounting Office to investigate the “evidence of solar energy feasibility” contained in a report by Atomic Energy Commission scientists. He said evidence that solar energy could be developed more quickly and cheaply than previously believed had been ignored when the aec recommended, in a report to the President, that only $200 million out of a total of $10 billion for energy research should be spent on solar energy for a five-year period beginning in 1975. Sen. Abourezk wanted to know “why the A.E.C. has been sitting on scientific data pointing the way toward solar energy while major oil companies are quietly moving to take control of the means to produce solar power.” (upi, NYT, 1 April 74, 34) During March: Apollo 17: Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP-330), dated 1973, was issued. The Taurus-Littrow landing site for the 7-19 Dec. 1972 final mission of the lunar landing program had been the most diverse in both geologic features and samples brought back. Seismic traverse experiments had indicated basaltic flows extended to a depth of 1.2 km. The traverse gravimeter experiment had provided limits to the density of underlying material and permitted development of models to help interpret mascons. Analysis of mare basalts from the Apollo 11,12,15, and 17 missions and from the U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 indicated that the filling of the mare basins took place mostly between 3.2 billion and 3.8 billion yrs ago. Formation of more than 90% of the cratering was believed to be 4 billion yrs earlier. Highland material collected on Apollo 14,16, and 17 missions showed a widespread occurrence of breccias with an apparent age of 3,8 billion to 4.1 billion yrs, with strong evidence that rocks as old as 4.5 billion to 4.6 billion yrs existed on the moon. Dark mare regions were thought to be underlain by lava, but craters had been mostly caused by impacting projectiles. The moon was once active volcanically but was now quiet, with any activity since 3 billion yrs ago highly restricted or nonexistent. It had a crust more than 60 km thick and a negligible overall magnetic field. Two theories of lunar evolution had come from mission data. The first was that the planet was chemically layered during its formation, with a low interior temperature gradually increasing, perhaps reaching the melting point in the last billion years, while the initial heat of the exterior gradually decreased. The second theory assumed that the moon, chemically homogeneous and molten during formation, underwent extensive chemical differentiation resulting in surface concentration of radioactivity very shortly after formation. None of the three theories of origin of the moon—separation from the earth, capture from a solar orbit, or formation from a dust cloud—could be absolutely eliminated by data collected to date, but chemical differences made it unlikely that the moon was torn from the earth. (Text)
A Federal grand jury had charged Charles R. Riser of Maryland with mail fraud in setting up Andromeda Space Covers, a mail-order firm selling fake space exploration items, the Baltimore Sun reported. Fifteen persons had paid for golf balls driven across the moon by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., during the January 1971 Apollo 14 mission, but he had used only two balls and these were still on the moon. The assistant U.S. attorney on the case said that astronauts might be called to state whether signatures on other souvenirs were authentic. (Erlandson, B Sun, 14 Sept 74, B20)
President Nixon wired congratulations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, on Mariner 10’s successful 5 Feb. flyby of the planet Mercury: “The successful flight . . . marks another historic milestone in America’s continuing exploration of the solar system. With this mission we will begin to end centuries of speculation abotxt our planetary neighbor closest to the Sun. On behalf of all Americans, I extend warmest congratulations to NASA and the Mariner 10 team on their outstanding performance. The hard work, skill, and ingenuity that contributed to the success of Mariner 10 is in keeping with that historical tradition which began when men landed at Plymouth Rock and has continued through the landing of men on the moon.” (PD, 1 April 74, 374)
The Apollo command and service module for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, which had been delivered to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station by a C-5A transport, arrived at Kennedy Space Center. The spacecraft completed the ASTP flight hardware with exception of the docking module, which would arrive at ksc in late October after thermal and vacuum tests at Johnson Space Center, (ksc Release 132-74)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first U.S. man in space and the fifth man to walk on the moon, announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy effective 1 Aug. During his 5 May 1961, 14.8-min Mercury -Redstone 2 mission, Shepard flew his Freedom. 7 spacecraft to a 186.2-km altitude and initiated the U.S. manned space program. He commanded the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission 31 Jan.—9 Feb. 1971. Shepard would join the Marathon Construction Co. of Houston, Tex., as a partner and Chairman, (nasa Release 74-203; A&A 1961)
Marshall Space Flight Center began a six-month study of the feasibility of adapting the backup Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount to fly on the space shuttle for solar observations. NASA anticipated that modified atm instruments positioned in the shuttle payload bay could provide low-cost scientific returns on early shuttle flights, (msfc Skylab Off, interview, Jan 75; Covault, Av Wk, 15 April 74,24-5)
The surface of Jupiter’s moon Io might be composed of evapo-rite salt deposits, rich in sodium and sulfur, NASA reported. A year-long Jet Propulsion Laboratory study had indicated that deposits had resulted from migration of salt-saturated aqueous solutions to Io’s surface from a warm or hot interior followed by loss of the water to space. Salt-rich materials could have been produced by the leaching of carbonaceous meteorites. According to Dr. Fraser P. Fanale, jpl team leader, the deposits could account for Io’s high reflective power, the absence of ice hands, and the dark reddish poles. Sodium vapor emissions from Io had been first reported in February 1973 by Dr. Robert Brown of Harvard Univ. Subsequently, the cloud of sodium was observed to extend more than 320 000 km from Io. In August Dr. Fanale with two other astronomers had proposed explanations for the sodium emissions. Proton bombardment experiments had indicated that sodium and other atoms had been blasted from Io’s surface by the impact of Jupiter’s magnetospheric protons, electrons, and ions and had formed a cloud around Io. Io’s glow, according to intensive spectral studies, resulted from scattering of sunlight by the sodium cloud, (nasa Release 74-315; Fanale et al., Science, 6 Dec 74, 922-5; Matson et al., Astro Journ, 15 Aug 74, L43-6; jpl proj off, interview, 24 Sept 75, nsf Release 74-199)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two contracts for studies of Skylab results. American Science and Engineering, Inc., received $2 044 860 and the Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory received $264 684 to study j ointly results from the Apollo Telescope Mount x-ray spectrographic telescope experiment. The telescope had been used during the three Skylab missions (25 May-22 June 1973, 28 July-25 Sept. 1973, and 16 Nov. 1973-8 Feb. 1974) to photograph x-ray producing solar events, (msfc 74-132)
The British government announced that it was seeking new talks with France on the Concorde supersonic airliner after heavy losses were predicted for each airliner built. Official estimates had indicated that Britain would lose $450 million to $517 million in producing 16 aircraft and, even with a selling price of $40.25 million to $47.5 million, losses would rise until sales reached 70 or more. (Reuters, B Sun, 19 March 74, C9) Dr. A. Albee, California Institute of Technology scientist, said that analysis of an Apollo 17 lunar rock sample indicated that the sample was 4.6 billion yrs old and an example of a very early differentiate. The study suggested that the lunar crust formed very early in the evolution of the moon by extensive melting associated with differential, gravitational separation of various other rock types. The conference showed the trend among lunar scientists had been shifting away from the initial dating and chemical analysis of rock to cross-discipline studies of possible implications of the lunar samples to understanding of solar system chronology. (JSC Release, 7 March 74; JSC Roundup, 29 March 74,1)
NASA announced two Kennedy Space Center contract awards for space shuttle facilities. Morrison-Knudsen Co., Inc., had been given a $21 812 737 contract to construct a space shuttle runway with overruns, apron, taxiway, and access roads. The runway—to be completed within 850 days after the notice to proceed—was to be built northwest of the Vehicle Assembly Building. Reynolds, Smith, and Hills received a $1 463 000 fixed-price contract to design modifications to Launch Complex 39 and Mobile Launcher 3 for shuttle operations. Complex 39, Apollo and Skylab launch site, would next be used for a manned flight in 1975, for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Releases 74-66, 74-67)
The combined calculated weight at launch of the U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz 4 (launched 14 Jan. 1969) and Soyuz 5 (launched 15 Jan. 1969) had indicated that the spacecraft had carried propulsion systems far in excess of requirements for an earth orbital mission, David Woods reported in Spaceflight. The 1.97-km-per-sec velocity requirement of such active docking vehicles as Soyuz 4 had matched the total velocity requirement of 1.94 km per sec of Apollo 11 (launched to the moon 16 July 1969), indicating that these early Soyuz spacecraft had been capable of manned lunar missions, Woods deduced. (SF, Aug 74,300-302) September 1974
Computer enhancement of multispectral photographs from Erts 1 satellite (circling the earth since 23 July 1972) had been proved useful for finding mineral and water deposits on the earth. Computer image enhancement, first used at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to improve early spacecraft pictures of the moon and Mars, had identified surface signs of known mineral deposits for JPL and U.S. Geological Survey investigators. Twenty ERTS-identified points had been verified in a test area, exploratory drilling had uncovered water-bearing rock 12 m below an ERTS-indicated water hole, and fractures indicating other drilling sites had been revealed, (nasa 74-27)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on NASA’s space program and the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4: “The Apollo moon missions and Skylab have moved NASA to a point where few if any scientists any longer condemn the space program as ‘more circus than science,’ and Skylab, especially, has given manned spaceflight an unassailable new reputation as a superb scientific instrument. ... It is unfortunate that the space program entered its most useful and significant period in conjunction with the loss of interest in space on the part of a public obsessed with Watergate and the energy crisis” but “there are no indications the American people wish to junk the space program.” NASA’s FY 1975 budget included promising projects. “The evolution of man into spaceman has just begun and there are wondrous things ahead.” (B Sun, 9 Feb 74)
U.S.S.R. flight controllers for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project began two weeks training at Johnson Space Center in preparation for the July 1975 mission. Some 20 Soviet controllers attended sessions on Apollo trajectory, spacecraft systems and communications, docking module, Mission Control Center operations, and contingency flight planning. (jsc Release 74-264; NASA Release 74-284; JSC Roundup, 8 Nov 74)
A declassified feasibility study by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. had indicated that reflector satellites 200-900 m in diameter could illuminate ground areas continuously at night, the Huntsville Times reported. Pointing out commercial uses, an official from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had managed the Project Able study, told the Times that potential applications included reflecting microwaves from space for conversion to electrical power, beaming rays on Florida’s orange groves should frost threaten the fruit crop, and lighting Alaska during its extended darkness. Launched on a Saturn V booster or on the space shuttle, a 640-m-dia, 20 000-kg reflector satellite could provide twice the light of the full moon and raise the temperature of the area covered by several degrees, (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 11 Sept 74)
Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, nasa Chief of Solar Physics, testified during NASA FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight that Skylab data had changed the understanding of the solar wind. Scientists had thought the solar wind reached the earth because of an expansion of the sun’s corona, but Skylab data indicated the sun’s magnetic fields confined the corona material and pulled it inward. The corona expanded and escaped in a significant amount only through coronal holes in the magnetic field. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, testified that the Skylab 2 and Skylab 3 crews (launched 25 May and 28 July 1973) had experienced similar reductions in their blood cell mass, with a red blood cell reduction. However, after the 59-day Skylab 3 mission the compensating response of the blood-forming elements was faster, returning the mass almost to the pr'eflight level within two weeks after splashdown—rather than the six weeks required after the 28-day Sky-lab 2 mission. The Skylab 4 crew (which splashed down Feb. 8 after 16 Nov. 1973 launch) showed much less red blood cell loss and a much faster return to preflight levels after the 84-day mission, indicating adaptive changes to the space environment. The space life sciences program sought to understand the mechanisms of adaptive changes and would “undoubtedly assist our understanding of basic body physiology of man here on earth.” Capt. Chester M. Lee, Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Program Director, said that during Skylah missions the orbital altitude and the limited number of ground stations had permitted communications coverage only 38% of the time. The lower orbital altitude for ASTP would reduce communications coverage to 17%. To alleviate the problem, the Apollo command module was being modified for communications via the ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for 1974 launch. Communications woxdd move from a manned spacecraft through an unmanned communications satellite to the ground for the first time. Coverage would be increased to 50%. The present configuration of the communications network would furnish minimum real-time data to meet experimental requirements. (Transcript)
Dr. George A. Van Biesbroeck, Univ. of Arizona astronomer noted for his work with twin stars, asteroids, and comets, died in Arizona at the age of 94. Dr. Van Biesbroeck had charted the orbit of Neptune’s second satellite, published catalogs of double stars, and discovered 11 asteroids and 2 comets. In the 1930s he had been instrumental in establishing the McDonald Observatory in Fort Davis, Tex. Dr. Van Biesbroeck had won the Franklin L. Burr Award from the National Geographic Society in 1952 for finding new proof of the bending of light from stars in support of the Einstein theory of relativity. (AP, NYT, 26 Feb 74, 36) 24 February-1 March: This would be the age we could contact other civilizations, Dr. Frank D. Drake, Cornell Univ. astronomer, told the annual meeting of the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science in San Francisco. The problem was finding ways to detect them. Analysis of data from a 1973 search of 500 stars by Univ. of Maryland and Univ. of Chicago scientists had failed to reveal radio emissions suggestive of other technological civilizations. Possibly “no one is seeking to make radio transmissions” and eavesdropping would be the only method of detection. Project Cyclops, a NASA-supported study proposing construction of a 16-km-wide field of 1400, 91-m antennas, would have a high probability of success if civilization existed within 200 light years. The ultimate $5-billion cost would be less than the Apollo moon landings and would give man a chance to contact the “galactic community.” {NYT, 14 March 74, 15; Salisbury, CSM, 7 March 74) _
Josef Boehm, rocket pioneer from Peenemuende, Germany, and Chief of Marshall Space Flight Center’s Electromechanical Engineering Div., died at the age of 65. An associate professor of kinematics before joining Dr. Wemher von Braun in 1939 at the Rocket Research Center in Peenemuende, Boehm came to the United States in November 1945 with Dr. von Braun under U.S. contract. He was instrumental in designing and engineering the first U.S. spacecraft for the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, beginning with Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958), and continued with msfc after it was formed in 1960. He had a major role in developing the Skylab Workshop’s Apollo Telescope Mount. (Marshall Star, 9 Jan 74,4; Huntsville Times, 1 Jan 74)
The first prototype B-l intercontinental strategic bomber was unveiled at Palmdale, Calif., by the Air Force and Rockwell International Corp. Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger told on-lookers that the new aircraft was needed to complement the U.S. arsenal of land-based and submarine-based missiles. Although smaller and lighter than the B-52 it was meant to replace, the B-l could fly farther and faster, carry almost twice the payload, and use a shorter runway. Powered by four 133.4-kilonewton-thrust (30 000-lb) turbofan engines and lifted by variable geometry, or “swing” wings, the bomber could fly efficiently at speeds in excess of mach 2. The projected cost of production models— $76.4 million each—made the future of the aircraft controversial and uncertain, (dod Release 505-74; Getler, W Post, 27 Oct 74, A6; Wright, NYT, 27 Oct 74,43) 26 October—4 November: An agreement for NASA to submit life sciences experiments for flight aboard the next available Soviet biological satellite was negotiated during the fifth joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine in Tashkent, U.S.S.R. The first U.S. experiments would be passive specimen modules, completely autonomous from spacecraft power, life support, and data-recording systems, and would require no operational commands from the ground during flight. NASA would prepare descriptions of the proposed experiments in December and deliver flight hardware by 15 Aug. 1975. U.S. investigators would also participate in pre- and postflight studies of blood and tissue samples from animals flown aboard the next Soviet biological satellite. The protocol was confirmed by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences 4 Dec. Representatives also discussed preparations for the joint July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission; exchanged results from Apollo, Skylab, Cosmos, Salyut, and Soyuz programs; and discussed pre- and postflight examinations, vestibular training, and crew reaction to flight. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 16 Dec 74, 42-3; NASA Release 74-237; NASA Int Aff, interview, 17 Oct 75; Moscow Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, BIO; 8 Nov 74, U1) 27 October-2 November: The 67th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) convened in Sidney, Australia. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was presented the 1973 fai Gold Space Medal for his role as Skylab 2 commander, and Astronaut Alan L. Bean was presented the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for his role as Skylab 3 mission commander. Both men also received the De la Vaulx Medal for their successive space duration records. (naa News. Oct 74, Dec 74,1) 28 October-9 November: Luna 23, second Soviet lunar mission of 1974, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tvuratam into a parking orbit with 246-km apogee, 183-km perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.5° inclination, where the “automatic station” was separated and launched on a near-to-planned trajectory to the moon. After a 31 Oct. flight path correction, the spacecraft on 2 Nov. entered a, lunar orbit with 104-km apogee, 94-km perigee, 117-min period, and 138° inclination. On 4 and 5 Nov. the orbit was changed to 105-km apogee and 17-km perigee. The spacecraft landed in the southern part of the moon’s Sea of Crisis 6 Nov., but rugged terrain damaged a device designed to take rock samples from a 2.5-m depth. The planned drilling and collection of lunar soil had to be abandoned for a reduced equipment-testing program. Work with the station was discontinued 9 Nov. (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, Ul-2; 10 Nov 74, Ul; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4 Nov 74, Ul; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74, 13; SF, April 75,152) _
Personnel from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, operator of the solar observatory at Johnson Space Center since 1970, would move to Marshall Space Flight Center, jsc announced. NOAA would continue at msfc as co-investigator in an experiment conducted with the Apollo Telescope Mount on the Skylab Workshop during its 1973— 1974 mission. The experiment had gathered solar radiation data in the x-ray region of the solar spectrum. The jsc-noaa solar observatory would reopen for space shuttle operations, (jsc Release 74-253)
The satellite relay system planned for the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz space mission was tested by Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center communications engineers. Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May) and the Apollo S-band, steerable, high-gain antenna were tested together for the transmission of voice, television, and simulated telemettry data in preparation for the first spacecraft-to-satellite-to-ground routing employed in the manned space flight program. Signals were transmitted between JSC and the ground station in Rosman, N.C., via the Ats 6 in a simulation of mission conditions, (jsc Release 74-264; jsc Roundup, 8 Nov 74)
NASA announced selection of 39 scientists to provide experiments for the 1978 Pioneer twin missions to Venus. The selection, made from 162 scientists who had submitted proposals to NASA, included one scientist each from Germany and France. The scientists would participate in a detailed study of the planet, including composition, structure, and radiation field of its atmosphere; nature of the clouds; and magnetic and radiation environment of the planet, (nasa Release 74-155) 24 June—12 July: Eight U.S. astronauts—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, Donald K. Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R. Lousma, Robert F. Overmyer, and Karol J. Bobko—took part in training in Star City, near Moscow, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A ninth, Eugene A. Cernan, took part in the first two weeks of training, representing the Johnson Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. In addition to studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet flight crews in simulators and mockups. They also continued planning procedures and checklists for the joint mission, (jsc Release 74-121; JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 25 June-19 July: The Salyut 3 research station and—nine days later—the Soyuz 14 spacecraft carrying a two-man crew were launched into nearearth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R. manned orbital workshop. Salyut 3 was launched at 4:55 am local time 25 June (7:55 pm EOT 24 June) from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with 252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to improve the station’s design, onboard systems, and equipment and to perform scientific research during space flight. By 30 June Salyut 3, which consisted of two cylinders more than 21 m in length and weighing some 18 500 kg, had been raised to a near-circular orbit with a 268-km apogee and 265-km perigee. Soyuz 14 was launched 3 July at 11:51 pm local time (2:51 pm EDT) from Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich, commander and veteran of the 12 Aug. 1962 Vostok 4 mission, and Yuri P. Artyukhin, flight engineer, to rendezvous with Salyut 3. The launch was seen by Soviet citizens by delayed broadcast on Moscow TV. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 338-km apogee, 201-km perigee, 89.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July Tass interview that the main objectives of the mission were “testing methods and systems of controlling the craft, improvement in the life-sustaining complex, [and] exploration of new possibilities of using both separate craft and groups of space objects to accomplish scientific and applied tasks in a nearearth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July trajectory correction placed the spacecraft in an orbit with a 277-km apogee, 255-km perigee, 89.7min period, and 51.6° inclination. All spacecraft systems were successfully checked out and the crew was reported to be in good health. The Soyuz 14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and docked with Scdyut 3 on 5 July during their 17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the Soviets would use during the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m three-room laboratory. During their 15-day mission the cosmonauts studied geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, atmospheric formations and phenomena, physical characteristics of outer space, and manufacturing techniques, as well as testing the Salyut space station’s improved design and solar-panel energy system. The crew also studied the influences of space on the human organism and exercised to prevent loss of muscle tone, using an onboard comprehensive trainer to simulate running, jumping, and weight lifting. . Tass reported 15 July that some Soviet scientists considered terminating the mission because unexpected, intense solar flares 4-8 July dramatically increased the radiation exposure. However, because the flares subsided and the space station’s orbit prevented excessive exposure, the crew’s work was not disrupted. While the cosmonauts worked in space, two Soviet researchers lived in a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same work. All commands relayed to the orbiting Salyut 3 were first checked on the ground and alternate versions of decisions for unforeseen situations were calculated. On 8 July the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, in training at Star City for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, telegraphed congratulations to the Salyut 3 cosmonauts on their “great success.” They said they looked forward to meeting the two after their “happy return.” By 18 July the crew completed most experiments and began transferring equipment to Soyuz 14. After checking out spacecraft systems, the cosmonauts undocked 19 July. Retrorockets were fired, parachutes deployed, and Soyuz 14 softlanded at 5:21 pm Baykonur time (8:21 am edt) 140 km southeast of Dzhezkazgan 2000 m from the planned target after 15 days 17 hours 30 min in space. The crew left the spacecraft unaided, and on-the-spot medical checks showed the cosmonauts’ health was “good.” All mission tests were reported completed. For the first time, a U.S.S.R. orbital mission had been in touch with mission control continuously because of maritime tracking. Salyut 3 was the third space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz 10 docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. A second crew, launched 6 June 1971 aboard Soyuz 11, entered the orbiting station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days. The three died during reentry when an open valve evacuated air from the spacecraft. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 20-26 June, 3—10 July 74; gsfc SSR, 30 June, 31 Aug 74; Tass, FBis-Sov, 25 June-23 July 74; UPl, W Star-News, 14 July 74; Browne, NYT, 9, 20 July 74; SBD, 9, 27 July 74; A&A 1973)
Evidence revealed during U.S.—U.S.S.R. planning for the joint 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had indicated the Soviet Union was never in the race to the moon, the Associated Press reported. U.S. officials had learned the Soyuz capsule was designed for relatively brief earth orbital flights and for ferrying cosmonauts to and from a space station, but it could not make a journey to the moon. AP quoted Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, a member of the astp planning team, as saying, “Our Apollo spacecraft is far, far more sophisticated and has got a greater capability than their Soyuz. That doesn’t say the Soyuz is no good. It was just built for a different job.” In addition, Soyuz was designed to be controlled from the ground or by preautomated devices. “Their spacecraft ... is designed around a philosophy that it doesn’t need a man to fly.” Cernan said that the U.S.S.R. “had no major over-all goal like landing on the moon. Their goals were all to be first. Get the first iron ball in orbit. Get the first man there . . . the first woman . . . the first multiman spacecraft.” By proceeding in this way, politically they “gained some significant firsts.” (Benedict, H Chron, 7 June 74)
The Navy had selected International Business Machines Corp. Electronic Systems Center as prime contractor for the light airborne multipurpose system (lamps) helicopter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Under a $13.8-million contract, IBM would develop and test a prototype antisubmarine warfare and avionics and weapon control system for installation and integration in a helicopter furnished by the Navy. (Av Wk, 8 April 74,24) 8 April-3 May: Some 75 Soviet aerospace specialists—including U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev, prime crewmen Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, Flight Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and training officer for astp crews Valery F. Bykovsky—joined U.S. astp astronauts and specialists at Johnson Space Center to continue technical discussions and planning for the July 1975 joint astp mission. Agreement was reached that specialists and flight crews would visit the U.S. launch site in February 1975 and the U.S.S.R. launch site in May 1975, for familiarization with the spacecraft and to test compatible equipment. NASA had defined no technical need for U.S. representatives at the Soviet launch site during actual liftoff; U.S. specialists would be in the control center. Apollo docking module and Soyuz life-support-system tests were reviewed, in addition to safety assessment reports on control systems and spacecraft manufacturing test and checkout. Schedules for each of the five joint experiments—ultraviolet absorption, biological interaction, microbial exchange, multipurpose furnace, and artificial solar eclipse— were approved. Agreement was also reached on the basic approach and content of the joint flight readiness review, to be held in May 1975. The U.S.S.R. crew and U.S. astp Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton walked through hundreds of procedures for the first time as crews, to verify the integrity of the docking module that would connect the Soyuz and Apollo command and service modules. At a 26 April press conference Stafford demonstrated his proficiency in the Russian language by answering newsmen’s questions in Russian. Cosmonauts and astronauts agreed that “we’ve no problem in language.” One cosmonaut said, “Our work is considerably better when the American crew speaks Russian and our crew speaks English.” Glynn S. Lunney, astp Technical Director for the U.S., said during a 3 May press briefing that the work in the U.S. and jointly was on schedule. The progress “has been good and . . . gratifying.” Prof. Bushuyev said that “there can be no longer any doubt that we will be successful in preparing for and achieving our joint flight in July 1975.” (jsc Roundup, 12 April 74, 1; astp Communique; Press briefing transcripts, 26 April 74, 3 May 74)
George Cunningham, paralyzed from the neck down in a high school football game, was the first quadriplegic to use a device developed for astronauts disabled in space, the Baltimore Sun reported. He could place a telephone call, control a radio or TV, open the curtains in his hospital room, or call the nurses’ station by blowing into a tube. The device, Nu-Life, made up of two tiny video display screens and a miniature computer, was operated by inhaling and exhaling into a plastic tube or controlled by eye rotation, a turn of the head, or a touch of the tongue. (AP, B Sun, 21 March 74, A3) 23 March-5 April: NASA’s Mariner 10, launched 3 Nov. 1973, became the first spacecraft to explore Mercury, during a 12-day flyby of the planet— returning some 1700 TV photos and much new information on its atmosphere, surface, mass, and shape. The incoming encounter sequence began 23 March at 5 600 000 km from Mercury, transmitting the clearest photos yet taken of the tiny planet. Although most of the photos were recorded on tape before transmission, real-time photos with reduced resolution were sent to analyze the reflective properties of Mercury at different lighting angles. By 28 March photos were showing the-planet to he heavily cratered like the moon. During the incoming near-encounter, from 17 to 3% hrs before encounter, 18 frames were transmitted. Mosaics were made for locating smaller areas photographed later at higher resolutions. Spacecraft instruments identified an extremely thin atmosphere surrounding the planet, containing helium at concentrations above lunar levels and small amounts of neon, argon, and possibly zenon. Mariner 10 passed within 704 km of Mercury at 4:47 pm edt 29 March, within 56 km of the aim point. Data were transmitted without interruption over the 150 000 000-km distance until earth occultation began at 4:50 pm edt. Radio signals were recovered following the 12min occultation. Photos of the planet—described by scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory as “superb”—showed details less than 1.6 km in size and covered almost half the planet’s surface, which was pocked with craters as deep as 32 km and between 8 and 160 km wide. Giant cracks in the surface suggested high heat beneath. Some ancient volcanic activity was seen in a few rille-like ravines that crossed the craters and domelike hills. Absence of halo craters indicated young craters probably had been covered by the dust storms that constantly swept the planet. At a jpl press briefing following the encounter, Dr. James C. Fletcher said onboard instruments showed that Mercury had an unexpected magnetic field, estimated to be 1 % that of the earth. The magnetic field was measured at 90 to 100 gammas at the spacecraft’s closest approach, with an extrapolated value at the surface of 100 to 200 gammas. As Mariner 10 raced by Mercury on 30 March, photos of the morning side of the planet showed a much smoother region than the rugged area seen under the afternoon sun. The north pole region appeared much less pitted and flatter than the south pole. Instruments found that Mercury was two-thirds iron, making its density greater than previously believed and probably responsible for the unexpected magnetic field. Concentrations of uranium and thorium were comparable to those on the earth. Preliminary results, presented at a 31 March press conference at jpl, included a Mercury mass measurement 100 times better than previous ones, a detached well-defined bow shock wave, a temperature varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side (— 300°F to 800°F) with no thermal anomalies detected, opaque surface soil with the top few centimeters 1.0 to 1.5 times as dense as water and 50% as porous, and high-energy electrons in the mev range observed from 700 to 5000 km above the surface. An ultraviolet scanner had detected what appeared to be an egg-shaped moon moving in orbit around Mercury, but the Mariner navigational team later identified the object as a dim but very hot star, known as 31 Crater in the constellation Corvus. Despite a power anomaly, Mariner 10 continued to transmit TV pictures in real-time at 117.6 kilobits per sec and tape-recorded frames at 22.05 kbps. TV imagery was discontinued 5 April when the resolution became equal to that of earth-based telescopes. All mission events were accomplished as planned and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. The spacecraft was expected to swing back by Mercury in September, (nasa mor, 24 April 74; jpl Press Kit, 19 March 74; NYT, 24 March 74, 30 March—1 April.74; W Post, 29 March—1 April 74; W Star-News, 28 March 74; LA Times, 20 March-1 April 74)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
A Washington Star-News editorial commented on the triumph of the Skylab program: Although a “fellow wondering where his next tank of gas is coming from has difficulty getting excited about the cosmos,” the country “could take much encouragement from the successful completion of the $2.6-bilIion Skylab program.” We could expect that this had been well worth the effort and that a similar crash program on energy could meet with the same success. Americans would not venture into space again until the space shuttle project at the end of the decade, except for the 1975 linkup of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft. If all went well, that “could be the most fascinating and heartening adventure since that first landing on the moon.” (W Star-News, 14 Feb 74, A18)
Data from Pioneer 10, launched 2 March 1972 toward a 3 Dec. 1973 encounter with Jupiter, had indicated that sulfur was one possible element in the surface composition of Jupiter’s moon Io, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Scientists at msfc had studied the reflective properties of Io and concluded that sulfur was one of the few materials that could have the high reflectivity and strong absorption features observed. The theory would be tested by measuring the changes in reflectivity of sulfur at different wavelengths and temperatures and observing the reflectivity change of Io in the fall when Jupiter would be in the evening sky. (msfc Release 74-72)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 astronaut and now Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator for Energy Research and Development, testified in Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on FY 1975 authorizations: One of the most important contributions NASA could make to energy research and development was the application of managerial techniques developed in the space program, permitting programs, schedules, and budgets to be defined and then adhered to without major degradation of the original goals. “This mission-oriented approach to research and development and its broad integration of the great capabilities and imagination of industry will... be applied just as successfully to the critical problems that face the Nation and the world in energy.” (Transcript)
The first Apollo lunar surface experiment package (alsep), placed on the moon by Apollo 12 astronauts in November 1969, had far exceeded its one-year life expectancy and was still functioning, along with instruments in alsep packages from Apollo 14 through 17, nasa announced. From alsep magnetometers, Dr. Palmer Dyal, Ames Research Center lunar investigator, had calculated that the moon had a magnetic field 1000 times weaker than the earth’s, with an iron content about 9% by weight, in contrast to the earth’s 30%. The heat flow measured by alsep instruments was half the earth’s, indicating differentiation and upward concentrations of radioactivity early in the moon’s history. Seismometers had uncovered a new class of moonquakes originating at depths of 100 km or less below the lunar surface. Dr. M. Nafi Toksoz of Massachusetts Institute of Technology earlier had reported that preliminary information indicated the moon had a small core less than 800 km across, lying inside a molten shell 600-1000 km down from the surface, where deep moonquakes had been detected. Seismic, magnetic, and heat-flow data had also suggested that the moon was further along than the earth in its evolutionary history, (nasa Release 74-313; NASA prog off, interview, 17 Nov 75; McElheny, NYT, 18 Nov 74)
Tentative NASA plans for launching 810 payloads into space in the next two decades were outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. The total, for late 1973 to 1991, included non-NASA payloads for Government agencies (other than the Dept, of Defense), foreign agencies, and private industry. The tentative payload model—presented to Congress in October 1973 to show “what could be done in the 1980s” when the space shuttle was in use—included as many as 10 missions to the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1990 and 1991 two very heavy payloads might be sent to orbit one of Jupiter’s moons and land an instrument package. Tentative missions to the inner planets included five missions to Venus, one of them with a lander, and two spacecraft to orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return samples from the two moons of Mars. Lunar missions under consideration included a lunar polar orbiter in 1979, two other orbiters in the 1980s, two lunar rovers in the 1980s, a lunar halo satellite to ensure communications with the hidden side of the moon, and two lunar rovers in 1990 and 1991 that could return samples to the earth from any point on the moon. Other plans under consideration were a flyby and rendezvous with Comet Encke and a landing on the nucleus, a flyby of Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. Of the 810 total payloads, 57 were designated for planetary exploration and 753 for earth orbit. Scientific satellites for earth orbit were Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large Solar Observatories, Large Radio Astronomy Observatories, and x-ray telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing. In the applications field were large Earth Observatory Satellites. And NASA expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation satellites for other agencies or private industry through 1991, not including those for DOD. Of some 300 payloads to be flown in the Spacelab, most would be NASA payloads in the fields of astronomy, physics, earth observations, earth and ocean physics, communication and navigation, life science, and space technology. Of non-NASA payloads, 10 would be for private industry space processing, beginning in 1985. Some 10% were expected to be flown for foreign users. The large number of contemplated missions, even with the increasing number of U.S.S.R. launches, was expected to have very little impact on the environment. Effects of the major constituents of the solid-fueled rocket booster exhaust—water vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, and aluminum oxide—would be negligible. (Text)
The Apollo 16 command module (launched 16 April 1972) went on public display at the Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The CM, called Casper, had carried Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and John W. Young to the moon and back during the fifth successful lunar landing mission. (Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 1)
Dr. Robert A. R. Parker, scientist-astronaut and program scientist for the Skylab mission, had been named Chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, Johnson Space Center announced. Dr. Parker succeeded Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, who had been named Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs at NASA Hq. in May. The s&ad would serve as an interface between eventual space shuttle payload users and nasa and participate in the shuttle flight research program. Dr. Parker had been named a nasa scientist-astronaut in 1967 and had been a member of the support crews for the Apollo 15 and 17 missions. (JSC Release 74-186)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Chief of the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center and Apollo 17 astronaut, began a 90-day assignment as special assistant to the NASA Administrator to coordinate NASA’s effort in energy research and development and facilitate NASA aid to other agencies working on energy research, (nasa Release 74-37; Off Energy Prog, interview, Aug 74)
Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Theodore Wydeven, Jr., had developed a new technique for coating salt lenses, NASA announced. Lenses made from large salt crystals had long been used in scientific applications because they were transparent to infrared light, but they were susceptible to fogging from even slight moisture. Using a method from his water purification experiments, Dr. Wydeven had prepared a Teflon-like membrane in an electric discharge to coat a salt lens, at a few cents a coating. The coating increased resistance to moisture and enhanced optical quality of the lens because of the film’s antireflection properties. (nasa Release 74—319) 10-hr procedural simulation of the launches of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, with exchange of status reports and data on spacecraft position, was held at JSC the third day. The first JSC Mission Control Center simulation with Apollo crewmen was scheduled for mid-February 1975, with the first all-up simulation with both control centers and both Apollo and Soyuz crews in late March 1975. (jsc Release 74—275; Chriss, LA Times, 24 Dec 74, 8; JSC pio, interview, 15 Sept 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 656 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 322-km apogee, 185-km perigee, 89.6-min period, and 51.8° inclination. The press reported that Cosmos 656 was probably a test flight of a Soyuz spacecraft. The spacecraft reentered 29 May. (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, Fbis-Sov, 29 May 74, Ul; O’Toole, W Post, 30 May 74, A18) ' 29 May—19 June: The U.S.S.R. launched Luna 22 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 1:57 pm local time (4:57 am edt). The automatic station was separated from a platform rocket system in earth orbit and put into a close-to-planned trajectory for the moon. A flight-path correction maneuver 30 May aimed the spacecraft toward a selected area of near-moon space. Luna 22 went into circular orbit of the moon 2 June, with a 220-km apogee, 220-km perigee, 130.0-min period, and 19.6° inclination. The Soviet press reported 3 June that all instruments aboard the spacecraft were functioning normally and scientific investigation of the moon had begun. Luna 22 was transferred into an elliptical orbit with a 244-km apogee and 25-km perigee 9 June to take detailed TV photos of the lunar surface and to study surface relief using an onboard altimeter. Chemical composition of rocks was obtained by determining the gamma radiation. After completion of the photography program the spacecraft was moved to an orbit with a 299-km apogee and 181-km perigee. By 19 June Luna 22 had completed 187 orbits of the moon; all equipment continued to function normally, (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 30 May 74, Ul; 4 June 74, Ul; 20 June 74, Ul; SF, Nov 74, 434) 30 May—28 June: NASA launched Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite from Eastern Test Range at 9:00 am edt on a Titan TlIC launch vehicle. The booster ejected the transtage and spacecraft into an elliptical parking orbit with a 626-km apogee and 152-km perigee. At the second equatorial crossing the first bum of the transtage placed the spacecraft in a transfer orbit. Launch, parking orbit, and transfer orbit were close to the program plan. At 3:29 pm EDT, Ats 6 was injected into geosynchronous orbit with a 35 845.6-km apogee, 35 774.1-km perigee, 23-hr 57-min period, and 1.8° inclination. The near-perfect orbit eliminated need for corrections, leaving nine kilograms of fuel for operational contingencies. The spacecraft separated from the transtage at 3:33 pm EDT. An orbital correction 7 June changed the 0.27°-per-day westward drift to a 0.05° eastward drift. Checkout of spacecraft systems and onboard experiments was completed 28 June with no significant anomalies. The mission was adjudged a success 26 Sept Primary objectives of the mission were to inject the spacecraft into near-geostationary orbit, erect and evaluate a nine-meter antenna to provide a good-quality signal to small inexpensive ground receivers, stabilize the spacecraft using a three-axis control system, and support user-oriented applications experiments. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate new technology in aircraft and maritime traffic control and infrared earth observations; acquire system data for communications applications in space, including spacecraft-to-spacecraft relay; test spacecraft control; and measure particles and radiation. The 20 experiments included a health-education telecommunications experiment to broadcast programs in several languages simultaneously to citizens in remote areas of the country. The satellite also would aid in remote medical telediagnosis and teleconsultation, transmitting patients’ medical records to faraway hospital centers for emergency assistance. One year after launch Ats 6 would be moved over Lake Victoria in Central Africa. India would then use the satellite to broadcast programs teaching agricultural techniques, family planning and hygjene, school courses and teacher education, and occupational skills to 5000 villages. The $600 ground receiving terminals each consisted of a receiver, converter, and three-meter chicken-wire antenna. Ats 6 was the sixth in a series of ATS satellites developed to advance technology in design, propulsion, and stabilization systems; meteorological concepts; applications; space environmental studies and measurement systems; and communications. Ats 1 (launched 6 Dec. 1966), Ats 3 (5 Nov. 1967), and Ats 5 (12 Aug. 1969) were still transmitting useful data. The ATS program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications. (NASA mors, 24 May, 3 June, 8 July, 2 Oct. 74; NASA prog off, interview, 5 Feb. 74; NASA Release 74-111)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in his article “Are Skylab and the Space Shuttle Worth the Investment?” in Government Executive that everything done in the Skylab program—with total runout costs of $2.6 billion through FY 1974—had been necessary for future progress in space. He believed the Skylab team had “taken another giant leap for mankind comparable to the first step upon the Moon or the first satellite in Earth orbit.” And even if the shuttle were not expected to save $1 billion a year in launch and payload costs, as it was—after an $8-billion 1972-1991 investment—the U.S. “should still build it. We cannot run Spaceship Earth without it.” We could not “begin to think of obtaining solar power from collectors in space without the Shuttle; we cannot hope to unlock the still hidden energy secrets of the Sun and stars without improved space observatories launched by the Shuttle; we cannot hope to develop the tools for management of natural resources and protection of our environment on a global scale without manned and unmanned Earth observatories launched and serviced by the advantages of a ‘hydrogen economy’ in the future unless we are willing to support such important steps toward that future as a hydrogen-fueled Shuttle. In short, there is no new frontier in space for America and mankind without the Shuttle.” (Govt Exec, Jan 74,38-42) February 1974
Francis C. Schwenk, Director of the Research Div. in NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified on four NASA projects in hearings on space nuclear propulsion and power before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Early research had shown that high-temperature thermionic converters combined with a compact nuclear reactor could provide an efficient power plant for advanced planetary missions. NASA technology would now focus on thermionic energy conversion for achieving highly efficient operation at lower temperatures. During the Apollo and Pioneer programs, NASA had proved the advantages of a small (40- to 70-w) radioisotope-thermoelectric-generator power system, which had operated at 6% efficiency at a cost of $20 million per kilowatt. NASA was developing technology for a 0.5- to 2.0-kw gas-turbine conversion system (Bray-ton energy conversion system) to achieve efficiencies of 25% and reduce costs to one fourth. Gaseous-core nuclear rocket research had led to plasma-core reactors as advanced energy sources for terrestrial as well as space propulsion uses; use of uranium hexafluoride as plasma fuel was expected to achieve efficiencies of more than 50%. Lewis Research Center research into superconducting magnets and plasma confinement and heating in advanced steady-state schemes was expected to show within a year whether a superconductive magnetic apparatus (summa) could produce fusionlike plasmas as predicted. (Text)
