Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, received the gold medal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers at its annual winter meeting honors assembly in Houston. Faget had been responsible for design and testing of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft and the Skylab space station, as well as of the Space Shuttle scheduled for flight in the late 1970s. Previous JSC recipients of the ASME gold medal had been JSC Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., in 1973 and former JSC Director Robert R. Gilruth in 1970. (JSC Release 75—98)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking system functioned well even though “conditions were not too favorable in the second docking,” spacecraft designer Vladimir Syromyatnikov said at a Moscow press conference. Although he said he was not yet familiar with all the details, Syromyatnikov said there had been a great deal of pitch between the two craft. “We know that the Soyuz system, after capture, is turned off, while the manual operation of the Apollo ship. . . should have been turned into a different mode.” At point of capture Soyuz began to turn on its axis at approximately 3° per sec, and the shock absorbers on the Soyuz “were very strained in order to absorb this strain.” All the pitch was “quelled” after about 40 sec, Syromyatnikov added. When a reporter asked why this happened, flight engineer Sergei Tsibin said, “We know that at one moment on the Apollo there was a folding of the gyroscopic system. We also know that at the moment of locking and latching the Apollo and Soyuz were rolling at approximately 1 degree a second. This should not have taken place.” The Los Angeles Times reported on 21 July that the Russians were worried about a pressure drop in Soyuz and had voiced concern over possible damage to the Soyuz by the hard docking. However, the Times quoted NASA officials in Moscow as saying that the docking had been within prescribed limits though conceding that “it may have been a little harder” than the first one. (USSR press briefing transcript, 20 July 75; Toth, LA Times, 21 July 75)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $4 778 000 contract extension to Bendix Corp.’s Launch Support Div. for support services including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39, mobile launchers, mobile service structure, industrial complexes, technical shops, propellant systems, life-support facilities, and a components-cleaning laboratory. The 4rmo extension brought the total value of the contract to $266 662 753. Complex 39, launch site for the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz Test Project missions, would be the launch and landing site for Space Shuttle. Modification of the facilities was under way. (KSC Release 260— 75)
The Indian Space Research Organization began transmitting instructional programs to inexpensive ground receivers in more than 2400 isolated villages throughout India, using NASA’s Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974. As part of the 1-yr satellite instructional television experiment (SITE), the transmissions would stress improved agricultural techniques, family planning and hygiene, and school courses pertinent to Indian villagers’ needs. After the experiment, Ats 6 would be repositioned over the western hemisphere. During its first year in operation, Ats 6 had transmitted medical and educational programs to remote communities in Alaska, the Rocky Mountains, and Appalachia. During the 15—26 July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the satellite had helped relay communications from the Apollo spacecraft to ground stations, increasing coverage from the usual 17% to 55% for each orbit. (NASA Release 75—221; NASA MOR M—966—75 —01, 7 July 75; Borders, NYT, 3 Aug 75, 10)
NASA announced that Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Associate Administrator, would leave NASA in May to join the National Center for Resource Recovery as president and chief executive officer. Dr. Petrone, who in 1960 was assigned on loan from the Army to Kennedy Space Center as Saturn project officer, later became Apollo program manager responsible for planning, developing, and activating all launch facilities for the Apollo program. Upon retirement from the Army he served at KSC as director of launch operations from 1966 to 1969, when he was appointed Apollo program director. In 1972 he was assigned additional responsibilities as program director of the NASA portion of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. In Dec. 1972 he was appointed Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, a position he held until his appointment in 1974 as Associate Administrator. (NASA Releases 69-124, 75-98)
The U.S. could land men on Mars in 10 yr if a commitment similar to President Kennedy’s pledge in 1961 to make a moon landing were made, Dr. Wernher von Braun, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech at the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Dr. von Braun, vice president for engineering and development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., said that nuclear-powered command ships could be sent to orbit the planet while a lander traveled to the Martian surface. The cost of the program would approximate the near-$25 billion cost of the Apollo program. (B Sun, 16 Feb 75, B16) '
An Apollo-Soyuz Test Project flight readiness review at Kennedy Space Center was attended by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee; and top management from NASA Headquarters and Marshall, Johnson, and Kennedy Space Centers. During the meeting Lee said that “ASTP is on schedule and ‘go’ for launch on July 15.” Top management had reviewed and closed out all aspects of flight preparations. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lun-ney reported that no hardware problems remained that might interfere with an. on-time launch. MSFC Saturn Program Manager Ellery B. May reported that the 8-yr-old Saturn IB launch vehicle had been carefully checked out and all components were being monitored by periodic inspections; during one of these inspections corrosion cracks had been discovered in the fins, requiring them to be replaced [see 19 Feb.—19 March], May reported that the vehicle was ready to fly. William H. Rock, manager of the Sciences and Applications Project Office at JSC, said that modifications, including a larger, more effective lightning rod on the launch tower, had been made to the launch pad to minimize the hazards from lightning strikes. Jesse R. Gulick, KSC meteorologist, said that thunderstorm probability for launch day was 23% and that the probability of a tropical storm or hurricane winds was less than 3%. Based on previous years’ data, chances were good that, even if bad weather postponed the primary launch date, the Apollo spacecraft could be launched within 4 days. (MSFC Release 75 — 119; KSC Release 104 —75; Marshall Star, 18 June 75, 1; Ezell et al.. The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 310 — 12)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt, the only scientist astronaut to walk on the moon, had announced his candidacy for U.S. Senator from N. Mex., the Washington Post reported. A Republican, Dr. Schmitt would oppose Democratic Senator Joseph M. Montoya, who was expected to seek reelection. (IF Post, 10 Sept 75)
Viking 1 was successfully launched at 5:22 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range’s Launch Pad 41 on a Titan Ill-Centaur launch vehicle. The launch, first scheduled for 11 Aug., had been postponed until 14 Aug. to replace a faulty thrust-vector control valve on the launch vehicle [see 11 Aug.]. A second delay had occurred when the spacecraft’s internal batteries had discharged to 9 volts, well below safe limits [see 13 Aug.]. The spacecraft, Viking A, had been removed from the launch vehicle and replaced by Viking B. The range safety officer had issued a waiver of standard procedures and permitted removal and installation of the spacecraft without detanking and depressurizing the launch vehicle, thus allowing the launch to be rescheduled for 20 Aug. Viking 1, consisting of a 2360-kg orbiter attached to an 1180-kg lander, was placed in a trajectory to Mars within the designed 3-sigma limits. Nearly 35 min after trajectory insertion, the Centaur stage separated from the spacecraft. The solar panels were deployed and oriented toward the sun, and the biocap—a container used to hermetically seal the lander while in earth’s atmosphere—was jettisoned. On 27 Aug. at 2:30 pm EDT a trajectory-correction maneuver targeted the spacecraft to its Mars orbital insertion point. By 28 Aug. all systems aboard the spacecraft were operating normally and in a cruise mode. Travel time to Mars was estimated at 10 mo, with a possible Mars landing on 4 July 1976, the height of the U.S. Bicentennial. A second spacecraft, Viking B, had been scheduled for a 1 Sept, launch to arrive at Mars in 12 mos. The Viking missions supported NASA’s planetary program goals of exploring the solar system and gaining knowledge of its origin and evolution, and of the origin and evolution of life and of the dynamic processes that shaped man’s terrestrial environment. Specific purpose of the two Viking missions was to increase knowledge of Mars by making observations from Mars orbit and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the surface, with particular emphasis on biological, chemical, and environmental data on past or present existence of life on the planet. Viking 1 was targeted to land in the Martian equatorial region, in a very low area resembling the fluvial plain of a dry river bed—an ideal site to search for organic material. Alternate sites for both Viking landers had been selected and there would be some flexibility until insertion into Mars orbit, after which the available band of landing sites would be narrowed by orbital geometry. Once in orbit, the orbiter would survey prospective landing sites; when the decision on where to land had been made, retrorockets would separate the lander from the orbiter and the lander would descend to the surface, sequentially braked by its aeroshell’s drag, by a parachute, and finally by its retrorockets. After landing, the science instrumentation would be activated and exploration would begin; data would be transmitted back to earth by the lander radio or through a radio-relay link with the orbiter. The orbiter’s main body, an octagonal ring 46 cm high with alternating 140- and 51-cm sides, consisted of 16 modular compartments. The entire structure was 10 m across the tips of the extended solar panels and 3.3 m high from the lander attachment points to the launch vehicle. Besides propulsion, navigation and control, communications, power, computer, and data-storage subsystems, the orbiter carried its science instrumentation mounted on a scan platform that could move with 2 degrees of freedom. The three science instruments were twin high-resolution, slow-scan TV cameras; an infrared atmospheric water detector; and a high-resolution infrared thermal mapper for detecting surface-temperature variations. The lander was a six-sided aluminum and titanium box 46.2 cm deep and enclosed top and bottom by cover plates; it measured 3 m wide and 2 m high from the footpads to the top of the S-band antenna. The six sides measured 109 cm and 56 cm alternately, with the three landing legs attached to the three narrower sides. The three retrorockets were mounted at 120° intervals on the lander; generating up to 2838 newtons (638 lbs) thrust, they would be ignited at an altitude of 1220 m to slow the lander’s descent from 222 kph to 9 kph at landing. Four small engines provided attitude control. In addition to subsystems for thermal control, power, and communications, the lander carried six instruments: twin scanning TV cameras, a sophisticated biology laboratory, a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer, a meteorology instrument, and a seismometer. Used with numerous temperature, pressure, and magnetic sensors, the instruments would perform entry, landed, and radio experiments. NASA’s investigation of Mars had begun in 1964 with the launch of Mariner 4. That spacecraft’s flyby on 15 July 1965 had revealed the planet to be moonlike with a dry, barren, cratered surface showing little evidence of wind or water erosion and no magnetic field. The better instrumented Mariners 6 and 7 that flew by the planet during the summer of 1969 reported a chaotic view of jumbled ridges and valleys unlike anything found on the earth or moon. The spacecraft also showed wide featureless expanses where craters had been somehow eroded, suggesting that Mars had been geologically active. Mariner 6 and 7 photographs showed a thin layer of snow—probably carbon dioxide—and instruments measured a thin atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide. High-quality photographs from Mariner 9, placed in Martian orbit on 13 Nov. 1971, provided evidence of fluid erosion, glacial action, and volcanoes. The Viking missions had continued the Mariner explorations of Mars. Viking was managed by Langley Research Center under overall direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science; LaRC also had management responsibility for the lander system designed and built by Martin Marietta Corp. Jet Propulsion Laboratory designed and built the orbiter system. The Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was the responsibility of Lewis Research Center; LaRC managed launch and flight operations executed by Martin Marietta, Kennedy Space Center, and JPL. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for tracking and data systems, and JPL managed the mission control and computing-center system. (NASA MORs S—815—75—01/02, 1 Aug 75, 28 Aug 75, 16 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—183; LaRC Launch and Mission Operations Status Bulletins Nos 9—11; Viking: Mission to Mars (NASA SP—334); W Post, 18-22 Aug 75; NYT, 18-22 Aug 75)
A 9.6-gram finely powdered lunar sample arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center where scientists would measure in a vacuum the sample’s thermal conductivity, a fundamental property governing heat flow through the surface of the moon. The data, correlated with data obtained from previous studies on simulated lunar samples, would be used to develop a thermophysical model of the moon, helping scientists better to understand the moon’s origin, history, and relationship to the earth. (MSFC Release 75—41)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
Pulsars had been discovered to be not only superdense but also superfluid, Columbia University physicists reported in Astrophys-ical Journal. Pulsars, collapsed remnants of exploded stars formed almost entirely of neutrons, had been shown to be so dense that a spoonful would weigh millions of metric tons. Theorists had suspected that such objects, even with a thin rigid crust of iron, would be superfluid—a state produced experimentally on earth in small helium specimens cooled almost to absolute zero, where both friction and viscosity disappear. Material inside such an object, stirred into motion, would swirl indefinitely. The Columbia Univ. experimenters had attempted to measure the surface temperature of a young pulsar, such as the one in the Crab Nebula. If the temperature were less than 8.8 million0C, the object would probably be superfluid; a fast-spinning neutron star would cool rapidly because of its reduced heat capacity. Temperatures of such objects could be detected by x-ray wavelengths, but the x-rays produced could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere. Space observation was necessary, and rockets launched by NASA from Hawaii and N. Mex. tested the Crab nebula pulsar, using the moon as a curtain. As the moon passed across the whole nebula several times, cutting off its various x-ray emissions, the physicists had been able to identify the x-rays indicating temperature. Since the Crab nebula pulsar’s temperature was shown to be less than 5 million °C, the physicists concluded that the pulsar must be superfluid. (ATT, 30 Dec 75, 40)
Space scientists and astronomers had been wrestling with a “cultural crisis” in putting names to features of distant worlds that had never been clearly seen before, as closeup views of several planets became available and more were on the way. Working through the Intemational Astronomical Union, the scientists had been forced to look beyond the names of scientists and explorers that had been used almost exclusively for objects on the moon and on Mars. A meeting on the problem in Moscow in July 1974 had agreed that objects on Venus would be called after women famous in mythology and history. New maps of the recently photographed surface of Mercury would bear the names of contributors to the arts and other humanities; the scientists had sought advice from scholars in the humanities to get the widest possible representation from past and present cultures. The Moscow meeting on new approaches to names for planetary features had been preceded by intense work on naming newly discovered configurations on the moon and on Mars. A complete scheme of names for more than 500 large formations on the far side of the moon—visible only to spacecraft because one side of the moon had always been turned toward earth—had been approved in 1970. Soviet scientists had rejected suggestions of names from the humanities for features on the moon and on Mars; they had urged a fresh start on Mercury, a new planet, with formations named not only for authors, as the Americans had originally suggested, but also for persons in other branches of the humanities. (NYT, 25 Dec 75, CIO)
NASA announced the appointment of David R. Scott as Director of Flight Research Center to replace Lee R. Scherer, who had become Director of Kennedy Space Center. Scott had been an astronaut on Gemini 8 (16 March 1966), on Apollo 9 (3 — 13 March 1969), and on lunar landing mission Apollo 15 (26 July—7 Aug. 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, Scott served as technical assistant to the Apollo Program Manager at Johnson Space Center, and as special assistant for mission operations and government-furnished equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75)
Although more than 26 million Americans watched the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project handshake in space, TV coverage was “adequate without being particularly outstanding,” TV critic Lee Winfrey said in the Philadelphia Inquirer. Two obstacles were insurmountable. NASA “is doggedly efficient, it got us to the moon first and it did the job again this time. But it is as colorless as a pane of glass and invariably capable of making the highest excitement look like the dullest routine.” NASA had an unshakable air of the 1950s about it: till white, all male, crewcut, and straight-shouldered. The second obstacle was that the mission was “another goodie that Richard Nixon dreamed up for us. Which means it was all show and no substance.” The U.S. paid $250 million for an aerial handshake. “Nixon made us buddies with Brezhnev and so, through shadow shows like Apollo-Soyuz, we are supposed to remain.” (Winfrey, P Inq, 22 July 75)
NASA awarded a 1-yr contract to Boeing Co. to study a proposed Large Lift Vehicle (LLV) made up of Space Shuttle engines, fuel tanks, and avionics. Launched without the Space Shuttle Orbiter, the LLV could carry tons of freight into space, or could rocket to the moon with a second stage attached. It would be less expensive than the Saturn V because the avionics package could be retrieved in orbit and the twin boosters were recoverable. In a 1974 interview with the Huntsville Times, John H. Disher, NASA Director for Advanced Programs, had said that no definite mission for the LLV was planned, but that NASA was looking to the future. (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 12 Aug 74; NASA Hq Adv Progs Off, Fero, interview, 10 Aug 75) August 1975
A theory that the moon was actually a piece of the earth broken away early in the planet’s formation 4.5 billion yrs ago was presented in a paper by Dr. John A. O’Keefe, a Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Professor Harold C. Urey, Nobel Prize winner from the Univ. of California. The paper, presented by Dr. O’Keefe at a meeting of the Royal Society in London, stated that although the moon had little, if any, metallic core, data from Apollo lunar-landing missions and earlier unmanned lunar flights had provided chemical evidence that lunar rocks were once a part of a mass that had included a considerable portion of molten iron. The higher proportion of molten metal in the earth supported the theory that, before the split, the iron in the earth had sunk to the center, drawing with it the gold, platinum, and other rare metals found in molten rock originally mixed with the iron. According to the theory, the moon was pushed to its present distance from the earth by interaction with the tides of the body of the earth. Other theories about the formation of the moon included the possibility that the moon had been captured by the earth’s gravitational field when it passed near the earth, or that it had been formed simultaneously with the earth. Neither of those theories explained the moon’s lack of a substantial metallic core. (NASA Release 75—171)
The development of space law, which had begun about the time of the launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 in 1957, was a unique process. “The problems are both literally and symbolically out of this world,” NASA General Counsel Neil S. Hosenball said in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Star. Does any state have the right to claim the natural resources of celestial bodies? Were earth’s criminal and civil laws applicable in space? What was the difference between establishing a planetary base and planting a nation’s flag? Which court would rule on extraterrestrial squabbles? These were some of the questions lawyers and politicians would have to consider in the space age. Few precedents existed, and no judge had yet heard a case in a legal dispute originating outside the earth’s atmosphere. In fact, a world court, recognized by all major powers, did not exist. In 1962, a United Nations ad hoc committee on peaceful uses of outer space had developed principles later incorporated into the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. These included a ban against military activity in outer space and against any nation’s claiming a section of space or a planet as its own. Other treaties dealt with specific points such as the rescue of astronauts and the registration of spacecraft and space stations. Hosenball stressed that most charters and treaties were drawn up ahead of time in anticipation of problems likely to occur as space exploration expanded. The Sentinel quoted G. P. Zhukov, chief legal counsel of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, as saying that detente between , the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had been assisted by the success of “legal regulation in space. . . . Man’s foot had not yet stepped on the surface of-the moon and we had already formulated what man could and could not do on the moon. The law was ahead of science.” (Orlando Sentinel Star, 12 Aug 75)
Twenty-five spacecraft on twenty-four vehicles were scheduled for launch by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The 25 spacecraft included 14 for NASA programs, 10 for other organizations, and 1 as a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting the year would be the 15 July launch of an Apollo spacecraft carrying Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton as the U.S. contribution to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Apollo would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19—launched 7 hr earlier than Apollo and carrying Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov—allowing both crews to exchange visits and perform joint scientific experiments. The two sets of Viking spacecraft, scheduled for 11 and 21 August launches, would journey through space for a year before arriving in the vicinity of Mars. There each set of spacecraft would separate into an orbiter and a lander to make orbital and surface investigations of the Martian environment. Other NASA spacecraft would include ERTS-B Earth Resources Technology Satellite and SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, in January; GOES-C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, in March; OSO-I Orbiting Solar Observatory, Nimbus-F experimental meteorological satellite, and Explorer 53 (SAS-C Small Astronomy Satellite), in May; GOES-A Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, in June; Explorers 56 and 57 Dual Air Density Explorers, on a single booster in July or August; Explorer 54 (AE-D Atmospheric Explorer), in September; and Explorer 55 (AE-E), in December. The 10 spacecraft to be launched by NASA for other organizations included 5 comsats for Communications Satellite Corp.: IntelsatIV F—1 in February, Intelsat-IVA F—1 and F—2 in July and October, and Marisat A and B in April and July. Other reimbursable launches would include Telesat—C (Anik 3) for Canada in March, COS-B Celestial Observation Satellite in July for the European Space Agency, Symphonie—B experimental comsat in September for France and West Germany, RCA-A (RCA —Satcom 1, in orbit) comsat in December for RCA Corp., and ITOSE-2 Improved TIROS Operational Satellite in late 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Helios— B would be launched late in 1975 as a cooperative effort with West Germany. The schedule called for 18 of the 24 launches to be made from Kennedy Space Center, 5 from Western Test Range, and 1 from San Marco. For the launches NASA would use a Saturn IB, 3 Titan-Centaurs, 5 Atlas-Centaurs, and 15 Thor-Delta launch vehicles. (NASA Release 75—5; KSC Release 180—74)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases, introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into public law P.L. 94— 303 on 1 June 1976 The committee appropriation allowed for no new starts but did permit an increase of $400 million in funding for the Space Shuttle. The committee supported manned NASA activities such as an international cooperative space-docking mission built on the successes of Apollo and Skylab programs, and the development of the Space Shuttle as an economical, versatile transportation system to give a wide variety of users access to space. The committee also endorsed a space science flight program furthering knowledge of the earth, atmosphere, moon, sun, planets, interplanetary space, and stars; a research and development program to identify and demonstrate useful applications of space techniques in areas such as weather and climate, pollution monitoring, earth-resources survey, earth and ocean physics, communications, and space processing; U.S. leadership in aeronautics and space programs; worldwide tracking and data acquisition support for NASA’s manned and unmanned programs; a program to assist in the development of national energy self-sufficiency; and a technology utilization program to speed dissemination of technological and engineering information gained during NASA programs to government, industry, and other users. The committee restored $48.4 million for the two-spacecraft Pioneer—Venus mission scheduled for launch in 1978; the House had cut the funds requested by NASA in the original budget. The Senate agreed with NASA that the project had high scientific priority, and that delaying it to a less opportune launch window when Venus was further from the earth would require redesign of the spacecraft and would cost $50 million more than originally planned. The committee also restored $1 million cut by the House from the $5 million requested for definition studies and advanced technological development of the Large Space Telescope. The study was necessary for NASA to define an optimum design at minimum cost. The committee added $7 million to the $7 million NASA request for research and development to help understand and monitor physical and chemical processes in the upper atmosphere, emphasizing the need for studies of the depletion of stratospheric ozone. Because some committee members had had reservations about the high cost and safety hazards of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the committee said it would like to be notified well in advance of any future joint space mission to permit an accurate assessment of potential benefits and costs. The committee’s recommendation of $82.1 million for construction of facilities, $25 million less than the request, would allow continuation of previous work including Space Shuttle facilities, facility rehabilitation and modification and minor construction, and facility planning and design. Not only did the committee, agreeing with the House action, cut the $2.5 million requested for an addition to the Lunar-Sample Curatorial Facility at Johnson Space Center, it also agreed with the House in denying funds to modify the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center—not included in the original request but authorized by Congress—until the committee had had an opportunity to review the necessary funding in a formal budget request. The recommendation of $775.5 million for research and program management, the same amount approved by the House, was $0.5 million less than NASA’s request. The reduction reflected a 10% cut in General Services Administration rental charges. The Senate committee recommended a total of $925 028 000 in funds for the transitional period 1 July— 30 Sept. 1976. NASA Transitional Budget Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House-Recommended Appropriations Item Budget Request Authorization (diff. from req.) H.R. Appropriations Committee (diff. from req.) Research & Development 730.6 700.6 (-30.0) 700.6 (-30.0) Construction of Facilities 14.5 10.8 (-3.8) 10.8 (-3.8) Research & Program Management* 213.8 213.8(0) 213,7 (-0.1) TOTALS* 958.9 925.2 (-33.8) 925.0 (-33.9)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew was making “excellent progress” recovering from lung ailments that developed when the crew inhaled nitrogen tetroxide during Apollo reentry [see 15—24 July], Johnson Space Center Director of Life Sciences Richard S. Johnston told a crew-status press briefing at JSC. Johnston told reporters that, if the crew continued to progress, they would be released from Tripler Hospital on 29 July. However, their activities would be restricted for an additional 10 days to protect them from undue exposure to large crowds, to ensure continued improvement, and to avoid respiratory complications. (ASTP Transcript PC-59)
Walter Cronkite, U.S. broadcaster who had covered the space program from its beginnings to date, reminisced about the space program during an interview with Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News. Cronkite recalled that news coverage in the early 1950s was done from the beach with very little official information. “All we had were tips from engineers and others we met in bars.” By Alan B. Shepard’s 5 May 1961 launch, things had improved only slightly; coverage took place from the back of a station wagon with a microphone, monitor, and very little incoming information. Later launches had seen drastic changes. “We’ve got so much information today that it’s the traffic cops’ job to take care of the flow, whereas before it was more imagination and fill-in-the-blanks.” Asked if he would be interested in riding aboard the Space Shuttle, Cronkite said, “I think newsmen will go on the Shuttle. . . . Just as soon as we prove out the equipment. ... I would guess that somehow or other we’re going to see that a pool man gets aboard, and I hope it’s Regarding the apparent apathy of the American public toward the space program, Cronkite stated that it would be difficult in this age to sustain the “high intensity of feeling about the space program, the race to the moon, [and] landing on the moon. ... We don’t have an attention span in the modern world, with so much going on, that permits us to remain at that high level of excitement.” (Spaceport News, 24 July 75, 6)
NASA’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Chester M. Lee said at a NASA Headquarters press briefing that a number of modifications had been made on the Apollo command and service modules to accommodate the special requirements of the July U.S.—U.S.S.R. ASTP mission. Changes to the command module included a modified umbilical to accommodate docking-module functions, an additional TV camera and recorder for coverage of joint activities, modified controls and displays for new equipment and experiments, additional equipment for communications and TV coverage via Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974), modified stowage, added intervehicular intercom, and additional VHF-FM communications capability at the U.S.S.R. frequency. Changes in the service module included added heaters and insulation of propellant systems for solar inertial attitude, added propellant storage module for increased attitude-control and backup deorbit capability, and deletion of the unused main propellant tank. The docking module would be carried in the same position in which the lunar module had been during lunar landing missions. It would be extracted in the same manner, by separating the CSM from the booster once in orbit, turning around, and pulling out the docking module with the nose of the CSM. In response to questioning, Lee said that the U.S. cost of the ASTP mission would fall within the $245-mi]lion congressional authorization. Although the Soviets had not quoted a specific amount, Lee believed that the launch of the two unmanned Soyuz spacecraft to check out modifications made for ASTP, the launch of a manned mission, and the preparations for two complete spacecraft and crews would indicate that the Soviets were investing “at least the equivalent” in resources. (Transcript)
President Ford, in a White House ceremony, presented the National Space Club’s Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Skylab 4 Commander Gerald P. Carr on behalf of the nine astronauts who inhabited the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 14 May 1973) during periods in 1973 and 1974. The astronauts were cited for their “exceptional accomplishments in the Skylab program .... When the entire mission was jeopardized the first crew, through uncommon ingenuity, saved the mission. The scientific content of the program is of extraordinary significance, in all disciplines. The demonstration that men can live and work in space for extended periods sets the stage for future exploration of space.” At the Space Club’s 18th annual Goddard memorial dinner, the following awards were presented: Award Recipient (Affiliation) Citation Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Memorial Trophy NASA Skylab Astronauts Charles P. Conrad Joseph P. Kerwin Paul J. Weitz Alan L. Bean Owen K. Garriott Jack R. Lousma Gerald P. Carr Edward G. Gibson William R. Pogue For their exceptional accomplishments in Skylab program Astronautics Engineer Award John M. Thole (NASA) For direction of the OSO and ATS programs Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award NASA-Fairchild Industries Ats 6 team For demonstration of a significant advance in space communications Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship Dr. Bruce F. Smith (NASA) For demonstrated abilities in addressing, theoretically and experimentally, a broad range of astrophysical problems Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Scholarship Alice K. Babcock (Georgetown Univ.) To continue higher scientific education Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Historical Essay James E. Oberg (USAF) For essay, “Russia Meant to Win the Moon Race?” Nat’l Space Club Press Award Roy Neal (NBC) For resourcefulness in reporting the U.S. space effort {PD, 14 April 75, 372; program)
A group of 28 scientists, engineers, sociologists, and economists concluded a 10-wk (16 June— 22 Aug.) NASA— Stanford University study at Ames Research Center by recommending that the U.S. adopt a space colonization program using available technology. The “city in space” envisioned by the study group could be a 1.5-km-wide wheel-shaped habitat for 10 000 persons positioned on the moon’s orbit at a point 385 000 km from both earth and moon. Costing an estimated $100 billion, the 454-million-kg wheel, or torus, would rotate around its hub at 1 rpm to simulate earth’s gravity. The rim would house inhabitants as well as shops, schools, light industry, and closed-loop agriculture; heavy industry could be located outside to take advantage of weightlessness and high vacuum in space. A major commercial activity of the first colony would be to construct solar-power satellites. Placed in geosynchronous orbit above the earth, the satellites would collect and convert sunlight into energy and beam it to earth as low-density microwaves. The space colony would have several advantages that might make it self-supporting: weightlessness for manufacturing and transportation, massive use of lunar minerals, and continuous natural sunlight for increased agricultural productivity. The study group had considered social, cultural, safety, and ecological difficulties of a space colony, but had found “no unsurmountable problems that would prevent humans from living in space.” (NASA Releases 75—229, 75—249; ARC Release 75—41; Dunstan, W Post, 23 Aug 75)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Donald K. Slayton, and Vance D. Brand participated in a 9-hr exercise at Kennedy Space Center to test the Apollo spacecraft’s internal systems, earth-landing systems, and instrument packages. The astronauts climbed into the Apollo, which was inside a huge altitude chamber, to test the systems at simulated altitudes of up to 61 000 m while cabin pressure was maintained at 34 474 newtons per sq m. Pressure inside the cabin was also lowered to zero to test the integrity of the astronauts’ space suits. On 16 Jan. the U.S. backup crew for the mission, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma, participated in a similar exercise. (/VASA Activities, Feb 75, 11; KSC Release 5—75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two 9-mo contracts for parallel design studies of a biological holding facility for Spacelab. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. received $242 640 and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received $177 360 to develop conceptual designs of habitats for live biological specimens supporting life-sciences space flight research programs. The habitats—consisting of the structure and the environmental-control, food and watering, waste-management, lighting, and instrumentation systems—were to be suitable for a wide variety of specimens with emphasis on the adult rhesus monkey and the adult laboratory rat. (MSFC Release 75-133) 25 June—3 July: The countdown demonstration test, a step-by-step dress rehearsal for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, was successfully completed at Kennedy Space Center. The rehearsal culminated in actual fueling of the Saturn IB and a simulated launch of the Apollo at 3:50 pm EDT on 2 July. The cryogenic propellants loaded for the “wet” portion of the test were off-loaded and the final portion of the count repeated with crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton aboard the spacecraft. A second simulated ignition and liftoff occurred at 2 pm EDT on 3 July. During the test, a leak detected in Brand’s spacesuit was traced to one of the pressure-sealing slide fasteners. Modifications were made and the spacesuit was successfully retested. {Spaceport News, 26 June 75, 1;KSC Release 115—75;Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology, announced the appointment of Dr. Bruce C. Murray as Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, succeeding Dr. William H. Pickering who was retiring after 21 yr in the position. Dr. Murray, a Caltech professor of planetary sciences for 15 yr, had also been a researcher on JPL space missions for more than 10 yr. He was completing scientific descriptions of Venus and Mercury from Mariner 10 data, gathered during a February 1974 encounter with the planet, and comparing the surface histories of Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the moon with the history of the earth. Dr. Pickering had been with JPL since 1944 and had served as its Director since 1954. As Director, Dr. Pickering led JPL in designing and building the first orbiting U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958). Also under his leadership, JPL had designed the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner spacecraft that were launched to gather information on the moon and nearby planets. (NASA Release 75—179)
NASA and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had agreed on a joint tour of the U.S. and the Soviet Union by the 5 crew members of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission [see 15—26 July], U.S. astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton would join Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov on 21 Sept, in Moscow for a 2-wk tour of the U.S.S.R. Plans for the U.S. tour were not disclosed. (NASA Release 75—230) In another paper Rango reported that low-resolution meteorological satellite data and high-resolution earth-re sources satellite data had been used to map a snow-covered area over Wyoming mountains. Predictions based on satellite data of the April through June 1972 streamflow were within 3% of the actual total. Also, composite results from 2 yr of data over the mountains indicated that Landsat snowcover observations could be useful in predicting runoff and seasonal streamflow. James C. Barnes of Environmental Research and Technology, Inc., reported that the earth resources experiment package (EREP) flown aboard the 1973—74 Skylab Orbital Workshop missions had provided the first opportunity to examine reflectance characteristics of snowcover in several spectral bands from the visible to the near infrared. Results indicated that near-infrared methods could distinguish between snow and water droplet clouds and could detect areas of melting snow. (NASA Hq WB, 28 Feb 76, 2; NASA SP—391, text) The evidence was consistent with calculations made in 1971 by Canadian astronomer Dr. Michael W. Ovenden. Dr. Ovenden’s studies of irregularities in the orbits of planets, especially Uranus and Neptune, suggested that a major disruptive event had occurred in the solar system approximately 16 million yrs ago. He had arrived at this time by age-dating carbon-bearing meteorites that had fallen to earth, and theorized that the event could be explained by the explosion of a huge planet 90 times the size of earth. During the meeting Dr. Stuart Bowyer, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, surprised the 740 astronomers attending the meeting by reporting that a Univ. of Calif, telescope flown aboard the Apollo spacecraft during the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—26 July] had picked up the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation of a star. EUV, a small segment of the spectrum between normal ultraviolet and x-rays, had been considered by astronomers as practically invisible because of probable absorption by interstellar dust and gas. Dr. Bowyer said that the EUV had come from a white dwarf star 300 light yrs away in the constellation Coma Berenices. (NASA Gen Mgmt Review Rpt, 18 Aug 75, 9; Alexander, LA Times, 26 Aug 75)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
Dale D. Myers, president of Rockwell International Corp.’s North American Aircraft Operations, announced appointment of Bastian Hello as president of Rockwell’s B —1 Bomber Div. Hello, who had been vice president of the division since 1973, was succeeding Robert E. Greer, who was retiring. Before joining the B—1 Div., Hello was vice president and general manager of Rockwell’s Space Div.’s Apollo launch operations organization at Kennedy Space Center. (RI Release LA—2)
The Political & Security Committee of the U.N. General Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution seeking wider adherence to international agreements on the peaceful uses of outer space. The resolution called for continued U.N. work on space agreements, including one covering natural resources of the moon; on principles governing direct TV broadcasting by satellite; and on legal issues arising from remote sensing of earth and its resources from space. (SBD, 29 Oct 75, 300)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph H. McConnell told a stockholders’ meeting that ComSatCorp was finalizing a contract with Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s Marisat maritime communications satellite scheduled for launch in summer 1975. McConnell also said that ComSatCorp had agreed to lease one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium led by Phillips Petroleum Co. Marisat would make available, for the first time, reliable voice, data, teletype, and facsimile communications to ships at sea and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell said that the success of the Marisat program would depend on the Navy’s use of the system and on ComSatCorp’s ability to develop a substantial market in the commercial shipping industry. (Snider, W Star, 14 May 75, FI) 13 —14 May: More than 500 representatives from government, industry, and universities attended a 2-day conference at Lewis Research Center to review progress in aerospace propulsion. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that high-speed performance was no longer the top priority among the propulsion researchers, emphasis having switched to quiet, clean, and fuel-conserving engines. Presentations and panel discussions included aircraft noise-reduction technology, fuel-conservative engine technology, upper-atmosphere pollution-measurement programs, and engine systems and component technology. LeRC’s John B. Whitlow reported that new technology generated by NASA’s supersonic cruise airplane research (SCAR) would develop an engine far different from the afterburning supersonic turbojet that was to have powered the first U.S. supersonic transport. A potential new engine might be a duct-burning turbofan with features such as a variable-geometry fan that allowed the engine to move as much as possible between straight turbojet and straight turbofan operational cycles. Other objectives for future NASA-developed SST propulsion systems included a 7400-km range with outstanding economy at speeds from mach 2.2 to mach 2.7, good subsonic cruise characteristics, good hold endurance and economy, and low takeoff noise. Whitlow stressed that, because of noise limitations, future SSTs would not be straight turbojets, and SCAR researchers were concentrating on low-bypass-ratio turbofans. As bypass ratio also affects engine weight, fuel consumption, drag, and cost-effective performance, no single bypass ratio of a conventional engine could meet all desired goals simultaneously. Thus SCAR researchers were developing variable-cycle engine technology that could tailor the bypass ratio and perhaps the fan/pressure ratio for optimum performance. Candidate engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass supersonic turbofan, a duct-burning turbofan, and a rear-valve variable-cycle engine. (LeRC Release 75—19; Yaffee, Av Wk, 14 July 75, 46- 49) 25.5 hr into the simulated mission. With both Soviet and U.S. crewmen participating in simulators in their respective countries and control centers fully manned, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft were “launched” and put through various maneuvers. Communications between the two control centers included voice, teletype, datafax, and TV. During the simulation, a technical problem prevented observers in Houston from hearing the two Soviet cosmonauts; NASA officials said later that that problem should not happen during a real flight. No other major problems were reported. A second simulation begun at 6:30 am CDT 15 May and continuing for 56 hr rehearsed Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, docking, crew transfers, and undocking and final separation. A third simulation, begun at 6:30 am CDT 19 May, was cancelled when the command module simulator in Houston did not work properly. The simulation, a 9-hr rehearsal of rendezvous and docking, was successfully completed 20 May. Final simulations by Houston and Moscow control centers and crewmen were scheduled for 30 June and 1 July. (NASA Release 75 — 141; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 16 May 75, Ul; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285; UPI, NYT, 14 May 75, 69)
Pope Paul VI told a crowd of 5000 at the papal palace near Rome that he was enchanted by the unique encounter of the Apollo and Soyuz crews in space [see i5—24 July]. He said, “We too, our eyes dazzled by sky light or wide open toward the depths of nighttime space, will shout out, long live the heroic men of such a fantastic feat. Man has won and we cannot refrain from foretelling more wonderful advances in the dominance of nature beyond the heavenly sphere. Man will win.” (ASTP air-to-ground transcripts, 20 July 75)
Scientists were calling for names for the thousands of mountains, craters, and chasms being found on planets faster than they could be named, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The two Viking spacecraft scheduled to reach Mars in 1976 and the two Soviet Venera spacecraft scheduled to approach Venus in October would no doubt uncover a host of new unnamed features. Names for known features on Venus, Mars, and the moon would be officially chosen at the August 1976 meeting of the International Astronomical Union (IAU), world clearinghouse for solar-system nomenclature. (Jones, CSM, 7 Aug 75, 2) ...
New members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, led by Committee Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), made an orientation tour of Kennedy Space Center. In addition to visits to Launch Complexes 36 and 39, the KSC industrial area, and the Visitors Information Center, the committee members viewed the Apollo spacecraft being readied for the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Viking lander being prepared for the August twin mission to Mars. The members also received special briefings on Center activities^ (KSC Release 11—75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $59 950 contract to Abbott Laboratories for living human kidney cells to be used by U.S. astronauts in the German electrophoresis experiment during the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Abbott Laboratories would provide the cells as part of an experiment to find a way to isolate effectively the one kidney cell in 20 that produced the enzyme urokinase, an enzyme capable of dissolving blood clots. Because gravity made such separations difficult on earth, scientists hoped to develop new technology in the zero-g environment of space. The experiment was being developed, built, and tested by West Germany’s Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm Gmbtt. (MSFC Releases 75- 7, 75-13) mobile launcher inside the Vehicle Assembly Building on 13 Jan. Engineers began electrical and mechanical systems tests on the first stage and installed flame curtains and panels to shroud the outboard engines. The Saturn IVB second stage was mated to the booster 14 Jan. and the instrument unit added to the stack 16 Jan. A boilerplate unit simulating the Apollo command module was added 17 Jan. The boilerplate would be removed and replaced with the actual spacecraft, and the rollout of the entire vehicle to the launch pad was scheduled for March. The docking system and docking module were mated 17 Jan. after combined systems tests. The complete unit would be placed into the spacecraft adapter in February. Swing-arm launch-control center integration was completed 21 Jan. (KSC Release 165—74; MSFC Release 75—19; Spaceport News, 23 Jan 75, 3; 6 Feb 75, 3; Marshall Star, 2 Jan 75, 2)
The U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution [see 29 Oct.] calling for wider observance of international agreements on peaceful uses of outer space, and providing for continued U.S. work on new international accords relating to space. Among these were a moon treaty, principles governing direct television broadcasting by satellite, and legal issues involved in remote sensing of earth from space. The resolution also called for continuing review of ways to help developing countries apply space technology. (SBD, 26 Nov 75, 140)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
Final joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. simulations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crews and flight controllers began at Johnson Space Center and at the Moscow Mission Control Center at 6:30 am CDT. The simulations picked up the count at 47 hrs 10 min into the mission and continued for 56 hrs, covering the joint portion of the mission including rendezvous, docking, crew transfers and joint activities, and undocking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. U.S. and Soviet crewmen participated in simulators in their respective countries while both flight-control centers were fully staffed. The U.S. crew would also participate in the countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center on 3 July. (JSC Release 75—61; Ezell eta/., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
Contracts involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space Flight Center during the month totaled nearly $200 million. Among them were awards to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Inc., for $67 500 to develop the capability of predicting radiant heating at the base region of the Space Shuttle, and for $49 971 to continue a two-phase study of flow effects on Space Shuttle plume simulation. Lockheed also had received $59 740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount data obtained during the Skylab mission. A $29 945 contract had gone to Northrop Services, Inc., to continue studies on Space Tug recovery of a spinning satellite. The U.S.'Army Engineer Div., Ala., had received two contracts. A $2-million contract had been awarded for construction at MSFC of the structural test facility for the Solid Rocket Booster and a $2.93-million contract has been awarded for construction and modifications to the Dynamic Test Facility for vibration testing of the Space Shuttle in the vertical positions. The contracts also included a $152.6-million award to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the Space Shuttle external tank, including six flight units and test hardware. MSFC had awarded the Dept, of Commerce $60 000 for an atmospheric measuring program. Bendix Corp. had received $99 736 for a Skylab control-moment gyro anomaly investigation, and the University of New York had received $36 253 to continue data analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75— 39) February 1975
An overactive sun and excessively bright moon had caused brief shutdowns of instruments aboard Intelsat (International Telecommunications Satellite) communications satellites, the New York Times reported. Showers of particles during solar flares on 11 March and 13 Oct. 1974 had built up excess electrical charges on satellite surfaces that had not been electrically grounded. Noise from the resulting electrical discharges confused readings of which way onboard antennas were pointing, causing the antennas to point away from the earth and temporarily cut off communications. A similar problem occurred 27 March when a spinning comsat interpreted infrared light from an exceptionally bright moon as coming from earth. Because of this, the satellite’s controls were receiving an earth indication twice as often as usual, thus commanding the pointing system to compensate by despinning at twice its normal rate. Communications were blacked out because the antennas were spinning relative to the earth rather than remaining stationary and pointing toward earth. The NYT quoted Communications Satellite Corp. engineers as saying that these occurrences pointed out the need for more knowledge about the exact behavior of Intelsat satellites in space so that changes could be made in the design of future satellites. The solar-particle problem had led to more thorough electrical grounding aboard the newest Intelsat satellites. (McElheny, NYT, 1 May 75, 83)
The Los Angeles Times discussed the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission in an editorial: At the instant the Apollo and Soyuz docked, “the two ships ceased to be two and became one. And at that moment, the common fate of the five adventurers was indissolubly linked for the next 44 hours, symbolic of the shared destiny of the 4 billion passengers on the mother spaceship 140 miles below.” That the passengers were from two different countries was of no significance. “They communicated in each other’s language, and they saw the lovely blue earth across the vistas of space through the same eyes, with the same perception. It is a vision that is desperately needed by earthbound statesmen.” (LA Times, 18 July 75)
The lung condition of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, who had inhaled nitrogen tetroxide fumes during Apollo reentry [see 15— 24 July], had improved, NASA Flight Surgeon Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian told reporters at a crew-status briefing. The astronauts had been transferred from the intensive-care unit of Tripler Hospital to other hospital quarters. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s x-rays showed a 70 to 80% improvement in the condition of his lungs; astronauts Vance D. Brand and Thomas P. Stafford had improved, but not as much. (ASTP Transcript PC—58)
Jackson M. Balch, director of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL)—formerly the Mississippi Test Facility—announced plans tO'retire. As bead of the test facility for 10 yrs, Balch managed testing of Saturn V rockets for both the Apollo and Skylab programs. (NASA anno, 22 July 75) 22 —23 July: Nearly 200 NASA managers, engineers, and scientists— headed by Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Research Center Director, and Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.—met at Kennedy Space Center for the Viking launch-readiness review. Those attending—including Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science—heard status reports on the launch vehicle, spacecraft, and launch and tracking preparations. Everything was “in excellent shape” for the 11 Aug. launch of the nation’s first mission to land unmanned spacecraft on Mars, said Martin. “We still have three weeks of work ahead, but time to do it in an orderly fashion, and no significant open items.” Viking—A would be mated with the Titan— Centaur launch vehicle on 28 July, followed by specialized tests, including an operational readiness test 6 Aug. during which the entire NASA and contractor Viking team would go through the countdown and several hours of simulated flight. Problems discussed during the review included the x-band radio on the Viking—B Orb iter in which a defective coaxial cable had been replaced. A leak discovered in the Viking—A gas chromatograph mass spectrometer after sterilization was found to be so small— 0.000864 cubic centimeters per day—that it would not affect the mission. (NASA Releases 75—210, 75—216; KSC Release 156—75)
Studies of the heavy particle cosmic-ray exposure received by the astronauts during the nine Apollo lunar orbital missions revealed a significant variation in exposure as a function of the amount of shielding and the phase of the solar cycle, Science magazine reported. The command module pilot, who remained in the spacecraft while the two other crew members landed on the moon, had received the least exposure. The ankle, the least shielded part of the body, received a higher exposure than the chest, which had greater shielding. A sharp rise in exposure had been evident beginning with Apollo 14 when mission times increased. Observed variations in flux from mission to mission—the flux during Apollo 16 and 17 was 2.4 times higher than Apollo 8 through 12—was attributed to solar modulation of the primary cosmic ray beam. Data obtained during the Apollo missions would be used for planning long-range missions and for estimating expected biological damage. (Benton et al., Science, Vol. 187, 263—5)
The Space Shuttle orbiter might travel by ground rather than air from Rockwell International’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., to Edwards Air Force Base for its approach and landing tests, a Rockwell official said as the orbiter made its first appearance for the press. Original plan had been to send the orbiter piggyback on NASA’s Boeing 747 scheduled to launch the unpowered craft during its tests at Edwards. Travel on the ground would take 6 hr to go about 32 km, using an off-the-road vehicle inherited from the Apollo program, and would cost less. (NASA Release 75— 293; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 107)
Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. representative in the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, transmitted its twelfth annual report to the President, covering the activities of ComSat from 1 July 1974—30 June 1975. Two more Intelsat IV satellites had been orbited, Intelsat IV F—8 21 Nov. 1974 over the Pacific Ocean and Intelsat IV F— 1 22 May 1975 over the Indian Ocean. A third satellite, Intelsat IV F—6, failed to achieve orbit when the launch vehicle malfunctioned. By 30 June 1975 a network of 112 antennas—27 more than last year—at 88 earth stations was providing 379 ComSat pathways, with 107 countries leasing satellite services, an increase of 7 over the previous year. Comsat General Corp., a subsidiary, had entered into a joint venture with the European Space Agency and the Government of Canada on 3 Dec. 1974 to provide satellite capacity for an Aerosat (aeronautical satellite) communications test and evaluation program. Comsat General and International Business Machines Corp. had notified the Federal Communications Commission that they would seek to enter the domestic satellite business with one or more partners. ComSat’s earth stations in Connecticut and California neared readiness for Marisat (maritime satellite) communications services in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean areas. ComSat reported a net income of $44 918 000, or $4.49 per share, up from $36 299 000 or $3.63 per share in 1973. (Text) During August: “The importance of space to our defensive military effort can only increase in the future,” Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, retiring commander of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA’s Apollo Program Director from 1964— 69, said in an interview. Gen. Phillips speculated that aircraft, including the B— 1 bomber under development by the U.S., would be an important part of the military force “for as many decades ahead as anyone cares to project.” However, he saw energy scarcities increasing the need for training simulators and alternative aircraft fuels. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 75, 1) September 1975
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived at its new operating station at 35° east longitude over equatorial East Africa where it would relay communications from the docked Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft during the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Upon completion of ASTP, Ats 6 would be used by India to transmit educational TV programs to several thousand remote villages. The satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one of the three momentum wheels used to control spacecraft attitude. A group of hydrazine gas thrusters was being used as a backup system for stabilization while ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center were analyzing the problem and developing remedies. (NASA Release 75 — 194)
The Washington Post reported that, after launch of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, more than 1800 persons would lose their jobs. With the liftoff came the end of the Apollo and Saturn programs which had begun 25 May 1961 with President Kennedy’s request for a national commitment to a lunar-landing program. Layoffs would cut the Kennedy Space Center workforce to less than 8500, down from a peak of28 000. Of those who would lose their jobs, 1100 worked for NASA contractors— Rocketdyne Division pf Rockwell, Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—who built and mated the stages of the Saturn launch vehicle to the Apollo spacecraft. Another 700 worked for contractors such as International Business Machines Inc., TRW Inc., Grumman Corp., Aerojet General Corp., and Rockwell International Corp. Only 100 launch-operations contract employees would remain to help plan the launches of the Space Shuttle. The Shuttle launch force would begin to increase in size in 1977, but would never reach the size of the Saturn team because of increased automation. (O’Toole, W Post, 15 July 75, A9)
During recovery operations of the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, the Apollo spacecraft would not be retrieved by helicopter as usual on Apollo missions, Dr. Donald E. Stullken, chief of Johnson Space Center’s Mission Support Branch, said during a press briefing. Instead, the recovery ship would steam up alongside the command module and haul it aboard using the ship’s boat and aircraft crane. Navy personnel would open the hatch and the crew would step out on the ship’s deck. Arnold D. Aldrich, deputy manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at JSC, said that the most extensive modification required for the ASTP mission was redesigning the Soyuz spacecraft to accommodate the newly added docking system. The front end of the Soyuz had been modified with respect to structural configuration, thermal design, and the requirement to fit all the new system under the launch shroud that covered the entire Soyuz during the boost phase. John E. McLeaish, JSC Public Affairs Officer, said that NASA would provide U.S. and Soviet air-to-ground communications, air-to-air communications, and U.S.- and U.S.S.R.-originated commentary for newsmen during the mission. All Russian would be translated simultaneously into English, using a “voice-over” technique; a few communication lines would transmit raw Russian with no translation. The U.S.S.R. would provide an interpreter to assist newsmen in the U.S. with interpretation or explanation, if necessary. Questioned about the political significance of the ASTP mission, U.S. crew member Donald K. Slayton replied, “I think we’d be naive to assume that this program is going to end all conflicts between our two societies, certainly. I think . . . it’s a step in that direction, but there’s little doubt in my mind that we’re going to continue to have conflicts in many different areas. However, if we can kind of break the ground and get at least one area where we continue to work constructively on something, we’re certainly not going to end up in any major confrontation.” (Transcripts)
The U.S.S.R. had turned down a U.S. invitation to participate in another joint manned space mission in 1976, Thomas O’Toole of the Washington Post reported a U.S. space official as saying. O’Toole reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low had suggested to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Vladimir Kotelnikov that two Soviet cosmonauts and three American astronauts dock with a Soviet Salyut space station and work together in earth orbit for up to 2 wk. However, the Soviets had replied that they would undertake a repeat of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to fly an Apollo-Salyut in any reasonable length of time. The Post quoted Dr. Low as saying, “Any second American—Russian space flight will have to wait until the 1980s.” The Post also quoted Dr. Low as saying that NASA had suggested an Apollo-Salyut mission as early as 1971, but the Soviets had requested a change back to an Apollo-Soyuz mission during a presummit meeting in April 1972 just before President Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. Low said that the Soviets had said that it was too expensive to modify Salyut to accept both a Soyuz and an Apollo spacecraft at the same time. (O’Toole, W Post, 14 July 75, Al)
NASA had selected Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, Tex., as the site for a remote storage facility for 10 to 20% of the 382 kg of lunar material brought back from the moon by the Apollo crews, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. All lunar material had previously been stored in JSC’s curatorial facility; the additional site would safeguard against any catastrophe that might affect the material at the main site. Samples at Brooks, a cross section of all lunar materials collected during the Apollo missions, would be held in “dead storage” to keep them in pristine condition for analysis by future generations. (JSC Roundup, 12 Sept 75)
A planet’s size and bulk might be more important than its location in the solar system in determining whether it can support life, Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said in a New York Times article. Conventional scientific thought had always been that the chance of life’s evolving on a planet was narrowly restricted by the planet’s distance from its parent star. However, planetology—the study of comparative geology of the planets, made possible by space probes such as Pioneer, Mariner, and Viking—provided evidence for the newer theory. The most important single factor in the geology of earth-like planets was the amount of internal heat left over from their birth. Planets as large as earth conserved heat, losing it very slowly through volcanic action over long periods of time. Molten volcanic material carried gases, including water vapor, that had been trapped below the planet’s surface; the vapors condensed into oceans, other gases formed an atmosphere, and life began. Mariner’s photos of Mars had confirmed the existence of volcanoes; but, because of the planet’s relatively small size, these exhausted their internal heat supply and died out rapidly about 100 million yr ago. During its active period, Mars must have had in its atmosphere large volumes of volcanic gases, including water vapor; Mariner photos had shown what were apparently dry river beds. When the volcanoes became extinct, the water and atmosphere leaked away into space and the small planet was left dry and nearly airless. Any life forms found on Mars by Viking or future space probes would probably be fossils. The study of lunar material added another example to the comparative geology of earth-like planets: The moon rocks brought back by Apollo astronauts had revealed volcanic activity on the moon; because the moon was smaller than Mars, this activity had stopped even earlier and the gases and moisture escaped even more quickly, leaving another dry, airless, and lifeless body. Scientists concluded that Mars was cold and lifeless not because it was farther from the sun than earth but because it was smaller and geologically inert. If the earth were moved out to the orbit of Mars, the average temperature of the earth would drop somewhat but its insulating atmosphere, continually replenished by volcanic gases for some billions of years longer, would maintain a livable temperature over large areas of the surface. (Jastrow, NYT, 24 Aug 75, E7)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project reflected the “progress made in the relations between our two nations and . . . the successes of the policy of peaceful coexistence, and promotes a further improvement of the international situation, and the strengthening of mutually rewarding contacts,” Acting President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Vladimir Kotelnikov said at a press briefing. General Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, told the newsmen, “While placing great emphasis on the importance of this joint flight, the Soviet Union also attaches great importance to its national space program, which at present centers on the establishment of long term manned orbital stations of the Salyut type.” He said that the success of ASTP along with that of Salyut 4 “testifies to the maturity of the Soviet space program, to the fact that it is able to man and launch several spacecraft at the same time and control their flight.” ASTP cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, who had been promoted from Soviet Air Force colonel to major general, said he had thought language would be the biggest problem during the joint session but “we understood each other very well.” He added, “we didn’t have problems during our joint operation.” When asked about future joint projects, Willis Shapley, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator, said, “For the future I see accomplishments in two directions. . . . On one hand we must jointly plan and execute further joint technical projects. At the same time we must further develop the areas of political understanding and cooperation between our two countries. . . . Preliminary discussions are already underway between specialists... from both sides.” (Soyuz crew press conf. transcript, Apollo news center, Houston, 24 July 75)
Former astronaut Alfred M. Worden, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Application Div., announced that he would leave government service, effective 5 Sept. Worden was also retiring from the Air Force after 20 yrs. During the Apollo 15 lunar landing mission (26 July— 7 Aug. 1971), Worden was command module pilot and, with fellow crewmen David R. Scott and James B. Irwin, spent 12 days 7 hr 12 min in space. Worden transferred to ARC in September 1972 as a research scientist in the Airborne Science Office. He was also Chief of the Systems Studies Div. before his appointment to the Application Div. In his announcement Worden said he would spend one year lecturing on “Spaceship Earth” and writing a book commissioned by the High Flight Foundation, an interdenominational evangelistic organization based in Colo. (NASA Release 75—248)
NASA announced early findings of the 3 Dec. 1974Pioneer II flyby of Jupiter. Data returned by Pioneer II (launched 5 April 1973, and renamed Pioneer Saturn following the flyby) suggested that Jupiter’s magnetic field might be created by a large ring current and many eddies deep within the planet. Earlier measurements from Pioneer 10, launched toward Jupiter on 2 March 1972, had indicated only a simple magnetic envelope with a single “ring current” much like earth’s. The more complex magnetic field could explain the Jovian field’s high-energy particle pattern as well as the bursts of intense radio energy observed emanating from the planet. Jupiter’s magnetic field stretched across 14 million km in some places and shrank in volume by three-fourths or more in others; inside this pulsating field were belts of intense radiation with trapped electrons 10 000 times more intense than those in earth’s Van Allen belts. Pioneer had experienced peak intensities of high-energy electrons that were moderately higher than those found by Pioneer 10, encountering 10 times as many electrons as predicted by earth-based studies. Peak intensities of very high-energy protons were 100 times stronger than predicted but concentrated in small shallow regions. Other early findings of Pioneer 11 included the observation that Jupiter’s cloud tops were substantially lower at the poles than at the equator and were covered by a thicker transparent atmosphere. Also, the clouds at the planet’s south pole were lower than those at the north pole. Although Pioneer 11 found much less evidence of rapid circulation at the poles than at the equator, the polar areas showed many small convective cells dwarfing similar earth disturbances such as thunderstorms. “Blue sky”—attributed to multiple moleculescattering of light by gases of the transparent atmosphere—was visible at the poles. Pioneer 11 accurately determined, for the first time, that the mass of Jupiter’s moon Callisto was 15 times that of earth’s moon. Seen for the first time was an extensive white south polar cap on Callisto. (NASA Release 75— 49)
Radio astronomers in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had intensified their search for possible civilizations out in space, Walter Sullivan wrote in theNew York Times. Little publicity had been given the search to prevent raising public expectation for “what is likely to be a prolonged effort.” Costs were minimal, because the observations had made use of equipment also used for other research. Dr. Hans Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, had told students at the Polytechnic Inst, of N.Y. that the search for other civilizations would become “one of the major scientific enterprises,” and cited his belief that “communicative civilizations” had been a natural consequence of biological evolution. Dr. Mark pointed out that the U.S. giant antenna at Goldstone, Calif., used for spacecraft communications, could pick up emissions only from the vicinity of the nearest stars. One American search is using the largest antenna on earth—the dish at Arecibo, P.R.—to scan the five nearest galaxies at 1420 mhz, the frequency of radio waves given off by hydrogen atoms, long considered a logical frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The Arecibo search had been conducted by two Cornell professors, Dr. Frank B. Drake and Dr. Carl Sagan. Another American search had been using the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., to scan 700 stars (resembling earth’s sun) within 80 light years of the solar system for signals at the 1420-mhz wavelength. No obvious signals had been detected, but the recordings had not been subjected to detailed analysis, according to Dr. Patrick Palmer of the Univ. of Chicago and Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of the Univ. of Md. The Soviet program, scanning the entire portion of the celestial sphere visible from the Soviet Union, had been using two networks with a total of eight stations spread across the vast width of the Soviet Union. The November issue of Icarus, international journal of solar-system studies, had carried a prospectus of the Soviet CETI (communication with extraterrestrial intelligence) program divided into two phases. CETI 1* scheduled from 1975 to 1985, included the whole-sky Scan by eight stations plus monitoring by two space stations and a survey of nearby galaxies like the one under way at Arecibo. Only the eight-station project had been initiated, as far as U.S. scientists knew. CETI 2, from 1980 to 1990, had been scheduled to continue satellite monitoring but would also use setnirotatable antennas such as the RAT AN—600 antenna 600 m wide, known to be located high in the Caucasus; the system consisted of numerous plates that had to be aimed individually* calling for hand alignment since no computer had been designed to perform this role. The Soviets also envisioned a monitoring station at the point beyond the moon where the gravitational fields of earth and moon would balance each other; a station at that point would be protected from the earth’s own radio emissions. Identical fluctuations of signal recorded simultaneously at widely separated points would be considered to have extraterrestrial origin rather than to result from a local manmade effect. (NYT, 29 Nov 75, C13) During November: An x-ray telescope assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center for the study of remnants of an exploded star had been shipped from England; where it had undergone payload integration, to the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia for launch. The project, called Skylark for the British sounding rocket on which the telescope would fly, was a joint British-Anierican undertaking to study a supernova remnant known as Puppis A for information on the evolution of stars and perhaps oil the formation of neutron stars. The flight would provide at least 3 min 20 sec for the 346.5-kg payload to make its observations above 120-km altitude. (NASA Release 75—287; MSFC Release 75—238)
The appearance of a supernova on 5 July 1054 had been recorded in primitive art by ancient Indians on the walls of a N. Mex. cave, the New York Times reported. Goddard Space Flight Center astronomer Dr. John C. Brandt, leader of the team of astronomers who had discovered the cave art, said that the date of the pictograph—a crescent moon with a nearby object variously described as a circle, cross, or asterisk—coincided with records of the Chinese Sung dynasty. The Chinese had reported that, on the morning of 5 July 1054, a minor star in the constellation Taurus appeared to explode into extraordinary brilliance. Ancient Chinese astronomers had described the event— which modem astronomers identified/as the supernova that had created the Crab Nebula—as visible in daylight for 23 days before fading and at night for another 633 days. Although the modern astronomers could not prove that the cave art depicted the Crab Nebula supernova, “What we have is circumstantial evidence that, to us, looks pretty good,” Dr. Brandt said. No other supernova of known date had been visible from North America near a crescent moon. The supernova pictographs were not the only evidence of astronomical observations by American Indians; Navajo gourd rattles and sand paintings often depicted the Pleiades and Orion constellations, and Hopi designs included representations of the Milky Way, constellations, sun, moon, and stars. Heaps of stones strategically placed centuries ago in Wyo. hills could have been used by Indians to sight stars and to predict and confirm the summer solstice. (Rensberger, ATT, 10 Sept 75, 39)
Pioneer 11, about a third of the way on its course toward Saturn, had successfully completed its riskiest course-change maneuver in response to signals from earth, 458 million km distant. Controllers at Ames Research Center ceased communications with the Pioneer for several hours, giving the spacecraft time to command itself into a change of position, fire its thrusters, and reposition itself with antenna pointing back to earth. The maneuver increased spacecraft velocity by 108 km per hr, to ensure that Pioneer would have a choice of approach as it neared Saturn: between the rings and the planet, or under the rings and upward outside them. Recent tests had shown the onboard camera working well; Pioneer 11 had been scheduled to take the first closeup pictures of Saturn and its rings upon arrival at the planet in 1979. If its course had been set inside the rings, Pioneer 11 should be able to look closely at Saturn’s sixth moon, Titan, which is larger than the planet Mercury. (NASA Release 75—319; ARC Release 75—69)
NASA announced the award of a $287-million contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen for the government’s East Coast requirements over a 12.5-yr period beginning 1 July 1975. The liquid hydrogen would be used primarily in Space Shuttle engine testing at the National Space Technology Laboratories and for Space Shuttle launches. (NASA Release 75—192) During June: Activities continued at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project launch in July. During the week of 2—6 June, KSC engineers and technicians checked the Apollo spacecraft for propellant leaks, filled the liquid-oxygen storage tank at the pad, loaded oxygen and nitrogen onto the docking module, and installed conax valves on the Saturn IB first stage. Spacecraft ordnance was installed 9—13 June and the command module was checked for leaks and prepared for hypergolic loading. Also during the week the liquid-hydrogen tank was filled. Prime crew members—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—and backup crew members—Jack R. Lousma, Alan L. Bean, and Ronald E. Evans—arrived at KSC on 10 June for command and docking-module crew compartment fit and functional checks. The crew also familiarized themselves with stowage arrangements. (Spaceport News, 12 June 75, 5; 26 June 75, 3)
A team of Federal and university scientists were using three instrumented aircraft and an elaborate ground network to construct a threedimensional map of the atmosphere’s electrical fields around Kennedy Space Center and to determine the conditions under which a launch penetrating these fields would trigger a lightning strike. By July the team hoped to be able to predict what the electrical conditions would be at the launch pad 10 to 20 min before liftoff. The project, directed by the Dept, of Commerce’s Environmental Research Laboratories and funded by NASA, included scientists from NASA, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Naval Research Laboratory, N. Mex. Inst, of Mining and Technology, and Univ. of Ariz. The experimenters would conduct a month of aircraft flights under and around various convective clouds, measuring electrical fields and making penetrations of frozen cloud anvils—cirrus clouds swept off the tops of thunderstorms by upper level winds. In addition, data from the mapping ground network—24 electrical-field-measuring stations installed around KSC by NOAA in 1973—were fed into a computer whose video component displayed a map of the area and ground stations, total electrical activity in nearby storms, weather radar contours of precipitation, electrical-field contours, and the positions of lightning strikes. The project was a continuation of one begun for NASA by NOAA after the Apollo 12 launch on 12 Nov. 1969 when lightning struck the spacecraft, shutting off the spacecraft’s electrical power and setting off numerous alarms. The spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while the crew restored the primary power system. (NOAA Release 75-91; A&A 69, 372-378)
Dust storms had been observed on the moon every sunrise and sunset by a three-axis microparticle detector left on the moon by Apollo 17 astronauts during their December 1972 mission, a Nature magazine article reported. The article, based on a report by scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, said the GSFC scientists suspected that the dust was being lifted from the lunar surface and then driven away from the rising or setting sun by electrostatic fields associated with the transition from day to night, or vice versa. The finding supported a theory advanced 20 yr ago by Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., who had suggested that electrostatic forces transported dust from lunar highlands to lowlands, accounting for the smooth appearance of the lunar seas. Although the Apollo landings had shown that those seas had been formed by lava flooding rather than deep dust accumulations, their surface was covered with very fine dust. Also, because neither wind nor rain existed on the airless moon, some other process must have been responsible for the evident erosion. Electrostatic levitation was being suggested as one possible explanation. Because the lunar vacuum acted as an insulator, the dust cloud hugged the surface, reaching only between 20 and 30 cm high, explaining why it had been detected from a low angle by instruments on the lunar surface but never by orbiting astronauts or earth-based equipment. (Hughes, Nature, 10 April 75, 481—2)
NASA’s Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May 1974 into geosynchronous orbit) began a 6-wk move from its position 35 900 km over the Pacific Ocean west of the Galapagos Islands to a new location above Lake Victoria in eastern Africa. The satellite, which was expected to reach its new location by 1 July, would be checked out in time to participate in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in mid-July. During that mission Ats 6 would track the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and relay TV and data from the two spacecraft to earth, marking the first time a satellite had been used to relay TV from a manned spacecraft. The new location also would bring Ats 6 within range of India for the 1-yr Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) scheduled to begin 1 Aug. During the experiment—a cooperative effort by NASA and the Indian Space Research Organization—the Indian government would relay daily educational TV programs to 5000 villages and cities throughout India. After the experiment, the satellite would be moved back to a position within range of the U.S., where it would be used for further experimentation. (NASA Release 75-153)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
The Aerospace Corp. had donated its $2-million San Fernando Observatory to Calif. State Univ. at Northridge as an educational center for solar research, Aerospace president Dr. Ivan Getting announced. The nonprofit company, which had used the observatory in support of flights in the Apollo and Skylab projects, was giving away the 7-yr-old facility because its planned solar research had been completed. (SBD, 3 Dec 75, 173)
Press briefings on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project were held at Johnson Space Center. ASTP participants would be conducting experiments in space sciences, life sciences, and applications, ASTP Project Scientist Dr. Thomas Giuli said at an experiments briefing. The five space-science experiments included a soft x-ray experiment to study radiation by scanning across the celestial mode, pointing at known discrete sources in the soft part of the spectrum from 2 kev to 0.1 kev, and investigating 10 specific x-ray sources known to emit only in regions below 2 kev. A helium-glow experiment would investigate temperature and density of the interstellar medium in the vicinity of our solar system by observing two special frequencies of extreme ultraviolet light emitted from the sun after they traveled into interstellar space, hit the interstellar medium, and were reflected back again. Other space-science experiments included a study of the sun’s outer atmosphere during an artificial eclipse created by maneuvering the Apollo spacecraft. During the “eclipse,” the Soyuz crew would photograph the sun’s corona. Among the earth environmental and applications studies was an experiment to measure neutral atomic oxygen and neutral atomic nitrogen of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Another experiment would try to devise a simple means of monitoring the aerosol content of the earth’s atmosphere. A water-resources management experiment, planned and coordinated with the government of India, would photograph the Himalayan area to map drainage patterns and water-reservoir locations. Life-science experiments included a study to observe optical sensations from cosmic rays experienced by the crew, an investigation of mutation in cells grown in space, and studies of the effect of space flight on the ability of microbes to infect humans and of changes in the human immunity system to resist infections under space flight conditions. . At a mission profile briefing, Kenneth A. Young of JSC’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div. said that plans called for a 9-day Apollo mission beginning 7.5 hrs after the launch of Soyuz by the U.S.S.R. The planned rendezvous period would be 2 days, with docking scheduled for the 30th inertial orbit, or third day in flight, of the Apollo spacecraft. Following much negotiation, U.S. and Soviet mission planners determined that the two spacecraft would dock over Soviet territory, providing real-time telemetry coverage for the Soviet Union, but at a location where NASA’s Ats 6 communications satellite could provide communications coverage to the U.S. The first handshake would take place over Spain. The spacecraft would undock on the 5th day and perform several joint experiments while separated. Soyuz was scheduled to land the following day. Apollo would continue unilateral experiments in orbit before landing at the end of the 9th day in space. Astronaut Richard H. Truly said, during a joint crew activities briefing, that while the Apollo and Soyuz were docked, all communications would be conducted in the language of the listener regardless of the nationality of the speaker. (Transcript)
The rocket-powered M2—F3 lifting body—a wingless vehicle that derives aerodynamic lift from its body shape—arrived for display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. In a flight program beginning in 1963 and ending in 1972, the three versions of tbe M—2 vehicle had demonstrated that a manned reentry vehicle could reenter from space, maneuver through the atmosphere, and safely make a deadstick landing. M2—F3 was the thjrd version of Ames Research Center’s M—2 lifting-body design. The first, M2—FI, was a lightweight plywood glider towed to altitude by a C-47 and released, whereupon the pilot guided the craft to a landing. A heavier version, M2—F2, was launched from underneath the wing of a B— 52 aircraft. After nearly a year of testing the unpowered vehicle, an XRL—11 rocket engine was installed in preparation for rocket-powered flight; on the second glide flight after engine installation, the vehicle crashed, badly damaging the vehicle and injuring the pilot. The lifting body was rebuilt, incorporating modifications, and designated M2—F3. The M2—F3 made more than 37 glide and powered flights with a jet reaction-control system that successfully demonstrated the feasibility of using a single system from orbit to landing. A lifting body design that had been considered for the reentry vehicle in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs was rejected in favor of a ballistic reentry design. The use by Space Shuttle of the maneuver-to-a-deadstick-landing concept was possible largely because of the confidence level built up by 9 yr of lifting-body flight tests. (NASA Release 75—199; A&A 62 through A&A 74)
Johnson Space Center’s Glynn S. Lunney, U.S. Technical Director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been named manager of the Space Shuttle Payload Integration and Development Program Office, JSC’s Roundup reported. The office had been created to plan and develop JSC payload for the Space Shuttle. The Apollo Spacecraft Program Office had been abolished, and personnel from that office and the Payloads Coordination Office had been reassigned to the new program office. Besides managing Shuttle payloads and components—including the Interim Upper-Stage low-cost modular spacecraft, long-duration exposure facility, and Large Space Telescope—the new office would manage JSC participation in international space activities, including any future U.S.-U.S.S.R. activities. (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 1)
NASA’s Airborne Infrared Observatory, a four-engine C—141 jet transport equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared telescope, was dedicated to the memory of Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, the founder and former director of the Univ. of Ariz. Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. The Kuiper observatory, based at Ames Research Center, would fly at altitudes up to 13 500 m with the telescope operating through a cavity in the aircraft’s fuselage. Dr. Kuiper, who had died in 1973, had been one of the foremost authorities on lunar science. He had played an active role in NASA’s Ranger and Surveyor programs and, as head of the Ranger scientific team, had directed the photographic analysis to select landing sites for the Apollo astronauts. He also had participated in the Mariner 10 mission, launched 3 Nov. 1973 to Venus andMercury, and the Pioneer 10 mission, launched 2 March 1972 toward a December 1973 encounter with Jupiter. (NASA Release 75—149; A&A 73, 350)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs since May 1974, would resign effective 30 August. Previously, Dr. Schmitt had been chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, at Johnson Space Center. Selected as a scientist-astronaut by NASA in 1965, he had been the lunar module pilot on Apollo 17 (7—19 Dec. 1972) and the only civilian scientist to walk on the moon. Dr. Schmitt planned to return to his home state of N. Mex. to pursue geological consulting and personal activities. (NASA anno, 11 Aug 75)
In a letter to Rep. Don Fuqua, chairman of the House of Representatives’ Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher summarized options for missions that could use the remaining Apollo-Saturn flight hardware. Options included an earth-orbital mission as an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project backup; a Skylab revisit; an Apollo geosynchronous mission; a lunar orbital mission; an earth-orbital mission to visit a Soviet space station; and a manned-satellite inspector. The hardware could also be used to launch a U.S. unmanned space station carrying a large U.S.S.R. payload, a large orbiting reflector, a space solar-power demonstration, a planetary probe, or multiple payloads. Another possibility might be to carry an Apollo spacecraft into space aboard the Space Shuttle to provide a crew-rescue capability or to serve as a habitable module, to demonstrate a Shuttle-serviced free-flying module, or to inspect and service orbiting satellites. Dr. Fletcher’s letter added that he did not foresee that funds would be available to support additional Apollo-Saturn missions in the period preceding the Space Shuttle operation. The subcommittee at a 25 March meeting had asked NASA to summarize the options when the agency had sought permission to dispose of surplus Apollo-Saturn equipment [see 9 April]. (Text, letter from Fletcher to Fuqua and attachment “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Satum-Apollo Hardware,” 15 Sept 75)
Luna 22, launched 29 May 1974 by the U.S.S.R., had been in lunar orbit more than a year. Tass reported that, after 3296 orbits of the moon. the planned program for a comprehensive exploration of the moon and near-moon Space had been fully carried out and additional exploration was continuing. All systems aboard the spacecraft were functioning normally. (Tass, FBIS-Sov, 18 June 75, Ul) 2— 7 June: Three NASA scientists and two Europeans conducted a Spacelab simulation mission aboard NASA’s Galileo II airborne laboratory. The series of five night flights was designed by NASA and European Space Agency representatives to permit Spacelab mission planners to evaluate experiment techniques and operations. The simulations, part of a study program called the Airborne Science Spacelab Experiments System Simulation (ASSESS), would provide valuable information on the interaction between scientific investigators on the ground and experiment operators aboard Spacelab and would aid in estimating the training needed by Spacelab experiment operators. Experiments flown in the simulation mission included infrared observations of the earth’s upper atmosphere, Venus, stars, and other celestial features, and ultraviolet measurements of planetary atmo-pheres. (NASA Release 75—177; ESA Releases, 27 May 75,18 June 75)
Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov* one of the Soviet Union’s leading space scientists, died in Moscow at the age of 80. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Commission for Space Research and head of the State Research Institute of Engineering Studies, was one of the key scientists responsible for launching the world’s first satellite, Sputnik 1, 4 Oct. 1957. Blagonravov had begun his career in the military and much of his early work was on the development of automatic infantry weapons. He later turned to the development of spacecraft, making major design contributions to the Soviet Union’s Lunik I, launched 2 June 1959, as the first man-made object to fly by the moon. Blagonravov also represented the U.S.S.R. in many international organizations: He had been vicepresident of the International Space Research Committee, permanent U.S.S.R. representative on the United Nations Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for the Peaceful Use of Space, and permanent deputy Soviet representative on the U.N. Space Committee. In 1962 Blagonravov held discussions with Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, during which details for exchange of satellite data were worked out. (Moscow Domestic News Service, FBIS—Sov, 7 Feb 75, Ul; WPost, 7 Feb 75, C8; McElheny, NYT, 6 Feb 75, 34)
The first radar probes of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede had been made by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Ganymede, at the time some 600 million km distant from earth, was found to have a rougher surface than the inner planets Mercury, Mars, or Venus. Dr. Goldstein scanned Ganymede three or four times on each of six nights in August 1974, using the 64-m antenna at JPL’s Goldstone station of the Deep Space Network; the radar employed a 400-kw microwave beam at a frequency of 12.6 cm. Writing in Science magazine, Dr. Goldstein and co-investigator George A. Morris said the most likely surface of Ganymede was rocky metallic material imbedded in a matrix of ice. Such a surface could be smooth with a top layer of ice rubble but would appear rough to the radar because the ice would be transparent to the microwave beam. The theory was particularly interesting in view of the finding by the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys (3 Dec. 1973 and 3 Dec. 1974) that Jupiter itself seemed totally gaseous, with no solid surface to produce a radar echo. The JPL scientists theorized that Ganymede was probably meteoritic in origin. (NASA Release 75 — 170; Goldstein et al., Science, 20 June 75, 1211-1212)
If NASA had unlimited funding, “I would mpve fairly quickly on a manned station because that will become an important outpost foy anything that we do in space,” Dr. Geprge M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an interview with the San Diego Union. Dr. Low added that he would move quicker in launching a space telescope and bringing back soil samples from Mars, “both enormously important from a scientific point of view.” Dr. Low expressed concern that “we really aren’t being inventive enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.” All NASA’s rockets so far, including the Space Shuttle, had Used conventional means of propulsion, and with it man was limited. Dr. Low said that the moon landing “was enormously difficult because we are tied to chemical propulsion systems.” NASA was experimenting with solar electric propulsion but to date no one had invented a fission or antigravity system. (San Diego Union, 8 June 75) On 14 June at 9:30 am local time (12:30 am EDT) Venera 10 was successfully launched toward Venus from Baykonur Cosmodroipe. Tass reported that “in design and purpose it is analogous to the ‘Venera-9’ station launched on June 8” and that all spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Venera 10 was also expected to reach Venus in October. In an interview 17 June with the Christian Science Monitor, Boris N. Petrov, chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of International Cooperation in the Study and Exploration of Outer Space, revealed that the Venera mission called for a landing rather than just a flyby. (GSFC SSR, 30 June 75;FBIS—Sov, 8—17 June 75; Pond, CSM, 17 June 75,1; W Post, 8—17 June 75; NYT, 8—17 June 75)
U.S.S.R. and India signed a 5-yr agreement on scientific exchange and cooperation between the Soviet Academy of Sciences and India’s Dept, of Science and Technology. The agreement provided for wider cooperation between the two countries in various fields of science and technology, and for the exchange of delegations and information. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 6 March 75, Jl) 19 February—19 March: Hairline cracks were discovered in the holddown fittings on the fins of the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Apollo spacecraft in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. After an earlier routine inspection at Michoud Assembly Facility had turned up one crack, a more detailed inspection at Kennedy Space Center 19 Feb. revealed 25-cm cracks on the fittings of two of the eight fins. A decision was made to replace the two fins. The cracks would not affect flight, but were in an area carrying the weight of the vehicle as it sat atop the mobile launcher. During a later inspection, cracks also were found in the remaining six fins, making it necessary to replace all eight. Replacement work began 11 March. Engineers strengthened the cracked areas by placing compressive stresses in the surface of the material, by pneumatically pounding it with a small bundle of rods. Six of the fins were replaced by 15 March. The spacecraft was placed atop the Saturn IB on 17 March and replacement of the remaining two fins was completed by 19 March. (KSC Release 27—75; NASA Release 75—50, 75—57\ Marshall Star, 19 March 75)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)
Charles M. Duke, Jr., an astronaut since 1966 and lunar mobile pilot on the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission (16—27 April 1972), announced he would leave NASA, effective 1 Jan. 1976. He would also resign from the Air Force after nearly 19 yr of service. DuringApo//o 16, Duke logged 11 days 1 hr 43 min in space, including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the lunar surface. He and John W. Young made 3 surface explorations of the Descartes region for a total of 20 hr 15 min of lunar excursion. Since April 1973 Duke had served as technical assistant to the manager for Space Shuttle systems integration. (JSC Release 75—74)
At an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew-status briefing, Richard S. Johnston, Director of Life Sciences, told reporters that Houston control could not make voice contact with the crew during Apollo reentry [see 15—24 July]. The first medical bulletin on the astronauts’ condition, received at Houston several hours later, had informed Houston officials of the crew’s eye and lung irritation. After splashdown, astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Donald K. Slayton had noticed that fellow crewman Vance D. Brand had passed out. He had revived after about 1 min when Stafford adjusted his oxygen mask and ensured a proper flow of oxygen. Johnston also said that preliminary diagnostic procedures had indicated that the crew did not have “any apparent medical problem at that time” but that x-rays had shown increased hylar markings originating from the center of the chest. The doctors elected to move the crew to sick bay and keep them under observation. The astronauts had been given cortisone to decrease the inflammation of their lung tissue and relieve the symptoms of cough and substernal discomfort. During the briefing, word came that the astronauts had arrived at Tripler Hospital in Hawaii where they would enter the intensive care unit. “They walked in smiling and they looked happy,” said JSC Public Affairs Officer Robert V. Gordon. (ASTP Transcript PC—56)
NASA was considering resuming exploration of the moon in 1980, using a low-cost unmanned satellite to map the entire lunar surface from orbit, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Marius B. Weinreb told United Press International in a telephone interview. The proposed satellite, together with a small communications relay satellite, would gather information needed by scientists to organize the vast amount of data collected during the Apollo lunar landing missions. One mission of the satellite would be to provide a detailed chart of the lunar gravitational field, including field variations, to tell scientists more about the composition of the moon and perhaps about its origin and evolution. Previous lunar orbiters had merely mapped and photographed the lunar surface. Although scientists had learned much from Apollo data about the gravitational field of the moon’s near side, they knew little about the far side. The proposed satellite— equipped with instruments including x-ray and gamma-ray sensors— and its accompanying high-orbiting comsat, which would remain in range of both the satellite and the earth at all times, would send back to earth data on the entire lunar surface. Weinreb told UPI that NASA administrators had considered including the proposed project in the FY 1977 budget. Budget restrictions might prevent NASA from initiating new projects. (UPI, NYT, 11 Sept 75, 11; interview, Weinreb, 13 June 78)
