First flight of a new fly-by-wire control system for jet aircraft was scheduled for 27 Aug. at Dryden Flight Research Center, NASA announced. The system would use 3 digital computers for primary control (and a 3-channel analog system for emergencies) to translate pilot signals to aircraft-control surfaces by lightweight wires instead of the conventional control systems, reducing the aerodynamic load as much as 20% and saving up to 10% in production costs. In Phase I of the program, a modified G-8 jet was flown 42 times to establish the feasibility of digital fly-by-wire control, using a single-channel digital computer developed for the flight-control system of the Apollo lunar module. Phase II would use a triplex system that could be modified to use Shuttle software, leading to a digital system with applications both to Shuttle and to other advanced transport systems. Project pilot Gary Krier would fly the checkout tests, scheduled to last through 1978 with about 30 flights planned. (NASA Release 76-150; DFRC Release 74-76)
Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO—the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—had been responsible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972 noted IMCO’s interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’s Maritime Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study and recommend a program of experiments and development work that would be necessary to form a new organization. The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety committee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international conference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite system. IMCO’s secretary general was to invite all UN member states and interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agencies and other organizations. The conference set up two working committees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second working group would consider procurement and financial policy. The conference concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council, type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procurement policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters within national jurisdictions. As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organizational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The arrangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed, however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, maritime unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed” organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT. The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of governments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also developed a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31 countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on “the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions. The international conference resumed in London in February 1976 with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agencies and international organizations. Texts of two documents—a convention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)—were adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to a third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory committee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT. The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was attended by delegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia, as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the convention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the conference. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77) As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the NYT. The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking 2 lander, which Martin said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.” Meanwhile, two of Viking 1 ’s three biological instruments repeated their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting that the nutrient was being metabolized) as the first trial had. The photosynthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first sample, however. The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia, nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobiologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life, they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable. {NYT, 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A— 1; WPost, 5 Sept 76, An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled many problems. {NYT, 6 Sept 76, 14) Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept, that what had appeared to be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2 landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic disturbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity. He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less active than the earth.” {W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3) As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S. Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center for the Viking missions managed by LaRC for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21) The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temperatures on the Utopia plains—warmer than at Chryse, where the nights were longer—were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photographs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of 14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or sulfates with other minerals in the soil. (W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
Two “pilots of note”—Gen. James M. Doolittle and Neil A. Armstrong— had announced plans to establish a Charles A. Lindbergh Memorial Fund to support the work of young scientists, explorers, and conservationists, the New York Times reported. Gen. Doolittle, leader of the first World War II air raid on Tokyo, and astronaut Armstrong, first man to walk on the moon, would head a drive to raise $5 million for the fund by 20 May 1977, the fiftieth anniversary of Lindbergh’s takeoff on the first solo nonstop flight across the Atlantic Ocean. Income from the endowment, expected to be about $400 000 a yr, would be distributed to Lindbergh Fellows who “combine qualities that made [Lindbergh] a unique human being,” said Doolittle at a press conference. He told reporters Lindbergh “would have been happier with a living memorial than one out of bronze and stone.” Lindbergh, who died in 1974 at the age of 72, had continued in aviation as a test pilot and airline executive but had branched out into medical technology research and wildlife conservation in his later years, the NYT said. The fund’s sponsoring committee included representatives of the Explorers Club and the World Wildlife Fund, as well as other areas of interest to Lindbergh: aerospace, ecology, exploration, and science and engineering. Announcement of selections for fellowships would be made yearly on 21 May, anniversary of Lindbergh’s arrival in Paris after his 33-hr flight in Spirit of St. Louis. (NYT, 20 Oct 76, 22)
Eight nations located on the equator had claimed sovereignty over the orbital locations of space satellites stationed above their territory, the Washington Star reported. The foreign ministry of Colombia listed the nations as Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Zaire, and Indonesia. (WStar, 11 Dec 76, A-4) , of the formation after an airlift to the site from the McMurdo Sound station. The body of rock in the Pensacola Mts., first reached by explorers in 1957 and first studied in the 1965-66 season, was a layered structure produced by eruptions from earth’s interior and “strikingly similar” to productive formations elsewhere in the world, such as the Bushveld complex of S. Africa, the Stillwater formation of Montana, and the Sudbury region of Ontario. A Soviet party in the Shackleton Range to the northeast, a similar area, reported findings which the leader of the USGS group, Dr. Arthur B. Ford, hoped to visit by air. Dr. Edward S. Grew of UCLA, who had spent the Antarctic winter at the Soviet Molodezhnaya base, had been working with the Russians from a temporary camp in the Lambert Glacier, near which “a mountain of iron” was reported recently. Meanwhile, a Natl. Science Foundation project that aimed at drilling a hole through the Ross Ice Shelf was proceeding with the participation of 10 nations, seeking to explore the depths below the ice for data on the Antarctic bottom water, indirectly responsible for much of the world’s oceanic food, and to learn whether the ice sheet might eventually slip into the sea, raising global sea levels by as much as 10 meters. Countries participating with the U.S. in the Ross Ice Shelf Project (RISP) were Australia, Britain, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, and West Germany. The NYT commented editorially that the Antarctic continent posed a number of scientific problems still unanswered in the age of space that had seen visits to and returns from the moon; close photographs of the moon and planets; and regular reports by man-made instruments on the surfaces of Mars and Venus. The RISP—an example of “continued, steady, quiet international cooperation” in Antarctic research—was “one of the great success stories of the post-1945 world,” encountering temporary setbacks that would be overcome in time as were those of the space program, the NYT added. {NYT, 12 Dec 76, 1-1; 19 Dec 76, 26; 20 Dec 76, A-22)
President Ford proclaimed 20 July as “Space Exploration Day” to coincide with the date 7 yr ago when U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to set foot on the moon. NASA’s Viking 1 lander was expected to touch down on the surface of Mars about 8 am 20 July,, reported nationally on network television; transmission of the first picture from the lander should be completed before 9 am. In his proclamation, the President said, “We begin our third century with ... the most ambitious of all deep space explorations . . . Wherever we reach, we will have come in peace for all mankind.” In an accompanying statement to NASA employees, Administrator James C. Fletcher said “the President has in effect commended all of you who work (for) the national space agency.” (Text; NASA Release 76-133; Fletcher anno, 20 July 76) First panoramic view of Mars surface from Viking 1, 20 July 1976: upper half of picture is Left half of view, lower photo joins it on the right. Upper view shows housing for Viking sampler arm; lower view shows (at right) high-gain antenna for direct communication with earth. (NASA 7§-H~557)
A component of the backpack worn by Neil A. Armstrong on the moon’s surface had been used by the former astronaut—now professor of aerospace engineering at the Univ. of Cincinnati—in bioengineering experiments testing better blood pumps for heart-lung machines and artificial hearts or kidneys. The Apollo double-diaphragm pump that circulated cooling water through plastic tubes in the astronaut’s space suit proved in the UC tests to be 10 or more times less damaging to red blood cells than pumps previously used. Blood, a delicate substance easily daniaged by prolonged mechanical pumping, had lost critical amounts of hemoglobin in procedures such as open-heart surgery when pumps had taken over the heart’s function for several hours. Armstrong, working on a team at the university’s Institute of Engineering and Medicine, recalled the Apollo pump’s efficiency from a power and weight standpoint and borrowed one from NASA for experiments with animals. The pump, designed to run on minimum power, created little turbulence in the flow of fluid and had no moving parts to damage the cells. It would be further modified for medical use. (NYT, 28 Mar 76, 64)
An article in the Baltimore Sun magazine reported that more than 3000 amateur radio operators—“hams”—in 90 countries had pooled their efforts to design, build, and finance the ham satellite series known as OSCAR, for orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio. The first OSCAR rode into space from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 12 Dec. 1961, sixtieth anniversary of the first transatlantic wireless transmission, as a piggyback payload on the Thor-Agena carrying the USAF Discoverer 36 into orbit. Oscar 1 weighed about 4.5 kg and consisted of a battery, a small transistor, and an antenna packed into a metal case; constructed by radio hams working for companies building satellites, it operated on a tenth of a watt power and transmitted the greeting “hi” in Morse code before it stopped functioning 3 wk later. NASA agreed to provide launches as deadweight ballast for government satellites to advance public interest in space science, after the hams pointed out the OSCAR’s potential use in educational programs and emergency communications. In 1959 the hams had formed the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. based in Washington and affiliated with the American Radio Relay League, national association of ham radio operators. After launch of Oscar 4, satellite activity shifted east, where AMSAT members working for GSFC and ComSat were eager to undertake assembly projects. By using volunteer efforts and parts donated as tax-deductible contributions by various companies, the hams could produce a satellite for about $60 000, compared to the commercial cost estimated at $2 million. Oscar 6, oldest active ham satellite, was about to celebrate its 4th anniversary; Oscar 7, most recent (and largest, at nearly 30 kg), had been in use for nearly 2 yr. Baltimore engineer Jack Colson, an employee of the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, had received an award as the first amateur to be in touch with hams in all 50 states; he took 8 mo to achieve this, 4 mo for Hawaii alone because the satellite path permitted communications with the islands for only 2 min every 3 wk. Colson had also talked with hams in 43 countries and had bounced signals off the moon; he estimated that his ham contacts over the past 25 yr numbered about 30 000. The 750 000 radio amateurs all over the world came from all walks of life and ranged in age from 8-yr-olds to elderly men and women; about 20 000 amateurs were joining the U.S. ham network every year, the article said. Use of the satellite was free to all hams, whether or not they belonged to an amateur organization; OSCARs had transmitted medical data, weather bulletins, and emergency communications such as search-and-rescue mission information. Although shortwave radio could outdo the satellite on sheer distance, its transmissions—unlike those of the satellite—could be upset by atmosphere conditions or solar emissions. To improve OSCAR’s time and distance limitations, AMSAT members were working on a new satellite that could transmit continuously over a greater geographical area for up to 10 hr, because of a higher elliptical orbit. Launch was planned for 1980. (B Sun Magazine, 29 Aug 76, 10) 30 August: The Peoples Republic of China launched its sixth satellite, referenced as China 6, from its facility at Shuang-Cheng-Tze into a highly elliptical orbit with 2147-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 69.1° inclination, and 108.7-min period. An announcement from the China press agency Hsinhua said the satellite was functioning normally, but gave no details on the spacecraft or its mission. (ATT, 31 Aug 76,7; SBD, 8 Dec 76, 203; SSR, 31 Aug 76, 31; SF, Feb 77, 78)
President Ford would name Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of the National Science Foundation for the past 4 yr, to head the recently reestablished White House Office of Science and Technology, the New York Times reported. The post had been abolished by President Nixon 3 yr ago “amid reports that he did not like the advice he was getting from it, particularly concerning antiballistic missiles and supersonic planes,” the Times said. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine had reported earlier that 4 conservative Republican senators had warned President Ford that Stever’s nomination would be an “affront” to Congress; the NSF had been a target of some congressmen because of funding projects that Congress considered questionable, Av Wk said. Other candidates for the position had shied away because of a possible change in administration after the forthcoming elections. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) urged quick action on the nomination; the Senate Appropriations Committee had just cut $1 million from a $3.3-million budget estimate for the Office of Science and Technology. (NYT, 22 July 76, 37; Av Wk, 5 July 76, 13) with pleasure at the accomplishment,” when “it was commercial time . . . and the 9 a.m. programs.” Viewers were “left wondering whether there was really an event of such magnitude being televised or more science fiction,” the Star commented. (WStar, 21 July 76, B-l) Commentary on the Viking landing on Mars: The Chicago Tribune hailed the mission as “an epoch-making success . . . The achievement is the greater because the world has known from the beginning what we were attempting to do. There would have been no way to hide a failure.” (C Trib, 21 July 76, 1-7) The Phila. Inquirer called the landing “another giant leap for mankind” that “underscores the sophistication of unmanned spacecraft . . . Risks can be taken . . . that could not be justified with persons aboard ... Its performance in the first hours on Mars speaks more eloquently than words.” (P Inq, 21 July 76, 5-A) The NY Times said the TV networks were criticized for their coverage; Dr. J. Richard Keefe, former NASA scientist now at the Univ. of Louisville, said the coverage was “downright disgusting . . . Talk about being blase about space exploration, this was just incredible ... I think the population has become apathetic about the whole space program. It’s kind of sad, I think.” Spokesmen for the network told the Times they had given 20 to 25 min of coverage, showing the 2 pictures transmitted by Viking 1 and released by JPL where the transmission was received. NBC said its New York City switchboard had about 30 calls asking for more; ABC reported 25, and CBS reported 8 or 10. ABC said the number of calls was significant “for the time of day.” “What they may not have understood was that we showed whatever we had,” the spokesman said. “That was it.” (NYT, 21 July 76, 12) The Wall Street Journal said in an editorial that it could not “speculate with any confidence on why yesterday’s Viking / landing on Mars was important. And yet we are confident that it was.” The TV networks that “spent tedious hours broadcasting the dullest political convention on record” a wk ago “were preoccupied with game shows” while Viking was sending back its first pictures of the surface of another planet. However, those who said the $1 billion cost of the project was wasted unless Viking’s cameras pick up “ something interesting, like a local resident,” would be missing the point, WSJ added. The project demonstrated application of the most advanced technology to a single objective, advanced managerial skills as “a triumph of human organization,” and left mankind with the psychic effects of the visit to another planet. “ . . . After each leap deeper into space, nothing is quite the same again.” (WSJ, 21 July 76, 22) A Washington Star editorial said that Viking 1 may have “ended generations of fanciful imaginings” about life on Mars, and asked if it was worth 7 yr of effort and $1 billion “to get a rather sobering view of what our imaginations told us was a fascinating planet.” Although it was much too early to predict the “ultimate scientific harvest,” the Star said “we have no doubt that the ultimate payoff will be more than adequate in scientific if not in fictional terms.” (W Star, 22 July 76, A-14) The first color photograph of Mars, showing a dramatic blue sky against a rust-red soil surface, was in error, Viking project scientists announced. Astronomer Carl Sagan said that someone had given the wrong weighting to the color filters in reconstructing the electronic image on earth, and that corrected photos would show a pinker sky. The seismometer on the Viking lander had apparently jammed and would impair detection of “marsquakes” unless corrected; Lou Kingsland, deputy mission director, said the proper command might not have been issued or the problem might be in the electrical circuits. {WStar, 22 July 76, A—1) Having successfully set down the Viking 1 lander in a safe spot, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., announced that Viking 2 would be sent to a region likely to be more scientifically interesting even with less assurance of safe touchdown. Cydonia, a region halfway between the Mars equator and north pole, was considered because of a greater likelihood of water, required for the presence of life as we know it. Viking project scientists said they were eager to survey a site as different physically from the desert Chryse site as possible. Viking 2, still more than 1.6 million km from Mars, would arrive in orbit there early in Aug. and land about 4 Sept, if all went well. Debate on the second landing site focused on possible hazards in the northern region, out of range of the radar signals that led to choice of the first site. Astronomer Carl Sagan said the first landing was “reasonably lucky,” with chances of success calculated at only 60%, and the northern site would be less promising. However, he and the other scientists voted overwhelmingly for Cydonia because, as Sagan said, “it is not only the probability of success but the significance of success” that merited consideration. (WStar, 22 July 76, A-6) Asked about the role of luck in the successful Viking 1 landing on Mars, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., replied, “I don’t plan on luck .... I believe that most of what you call luck you make yourself. It’s people doing that extra job ...” Martin’s management approach during his 8 yr with the Viking project had been to “get into the details of everything .... I’ve never known any other way to be successful .... It inspires and motivates the next level of management to get involved.” (ATT, 22 July 76, 24) The “most electrifying new information” received from Mars since the Viking 1 landing was that the Martian atmosphere contained 3% nitrogen, an element essential to life as we know it, said the NY Times. Until this week, the absence of nitrogen on Mars had been the most compelling argument against existence of life “in any form” on Mars; now this argument had been removed. (ATT, 22 July 76, 30) JPL scientists were still hedging on the color of the Martian sky, after announcing that photographs released earlier showing a blue sky might have been processed wrongly. Astronomer Carl Sagan noted that the “boos given to (the) announcement about a pink sky reflect our wish for Mars to be just like the earth.” Dr. Thomas Mutch, leader of the Viking imaging team, said computer verification of the filtered signals for color reconstruction could take another wk or two. (WStar, 23 July 76, A-l) Viking Mission Director A. Thomas Young told a news conference that the problem with the lander’s soil-sampling arm was probably an error in the computer command that failed to drop a locking pin near the arm’s “wrist.” A new set of commands to extend the arm further and free the pin would be sent 24 or 25 July. The arm would scoop up soil and drop it in a hopper on the spacecraft that would distribute it to 3 biology experiments aimed at detecting signs of life on the planet. Other scoops would be used for chemical analysis. (ATT, 24 July 76, 1) Besides the trouble with its soil sampler, the Viking 1 lander was having radio problems, said Project Manager Martin. One of two receivers getting direct communications from earth was not working properly, and the radio for relaying data from the lander to its orbiter was operating in a low-power mode. Also, the instrument for detecting “mars-quakes” had not been released from its “caged” position on the lander despite repeated commands. A special scientific team was checking to see if all the problems were related, perhaps in the computer signals to the electrical circuitry. ( W Star, 23 July 76, A-3) Mars was a very much richer and larger planet than the airless and waterless moon, said a NY Times editorial, with a firm surface and virtually every essential required for life. Barring the catastrophe of a nuclear war, Mars could be sustaining a human population “by the time of this nation’s Tricentennial,” the paper said. (NYT, 25 July 76, A— 16) “I really do not know what the fuss is all about—landing on Mars, I mean. I landed there 40 years ago,” said Buster Crabbe, who played both Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers in movies of the 1930s. Crabbe, who won the 400-m freestyle swimming gold medal in the 1932 Olympic games, was hired by Paramount Pictures to do a Tarzan film, and wentron to star in space pictures. “People still remember old Flash,” the 68-yr-old Crabbe said. “Here I am still around, no ill effects from my space travel .... I do feel sorry for our space people though, having to go through all the things we did years ago. I don’t think they know what’s in store for them. Just wait till they run into the clay men and the hawk men and the shark men.” (NYT, 25 July 76, E17; Tucson Ariz. Daily Star, 30 July 76, A-19) Viking 1 did not relay any picture of life-sized Martians to earth because it landed in the wrong place, charged columnist Art Buchwald in the Wash. Post. Buchwald reported his friend, a science-fiction buff, as saying the scientists were interested only in finding “a smooth place to set down the camera.” If the/Martians sent a camera to earth, the smoothest place to land it would be the Sahara desert. “If you lived on Mars you wouldn’t pitch a tent on some barren spot where nothing was happening,” argued the friend. “If Viking had landed next to one of their canals, the Martians would have sailed their tall ships up to it and given us the greatest show ever seen on television.” (WPost, 25 July 76, H-l) A series of simple commands from earth freed the mechanical arm on the Viking 1 spacecraft reported to have jammed 22 July. The extendable arm would be able to dig into the Martian soil as planned, and the second Viking spacecraft would be able to land in Cydonia now that the Chryse area could be explored. The Viking was commanded to extend its arm twice as far as previously and to rotate it several times to free a locking pin inserted to protect the arm from vibration during its flight in space and landing on Mars. The command was timed to precede transmission of a spacecraft camera image taken soon after receipt of the command; the boom would not be in the picture if it had not responded to the order to extend itself in front of the camera eye. When the picture came in a half hour later, the mechanical arm was in clear view, and a surface shot clearly showed the locking pin had fallen free. Flight directors had not succeeded in uncaging a seismometer, composed of 3 delicate balancing beams to detect movements in the planet’s crust, that had been wired together for protection from vibrations. Spacecraft computer signals to electrify and burn the wire were not received, and a second command bypassing the computer apparently failed also. Detection of marsquakes might have to depend on Viking 2, scheduled to land in the Cydonia basin about 4 Sept. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) The atmosphere of Mars was once 10 times thicker and richer in gas than it is today, and “we could breathe that atmosphere” if it were richer in oxygen, said Dr. Tobias Owen of the State Univ. of N.Y., a member of the project science team at JPL, where the first samplings by the Viking 1 mass spectrometer were analyzed. Mars’s atmosphere was now 95% carbon dioxide, 2 to 3% nitrogen, 1 to 2% argon, 0.3% oxygen; earth’s atmosphere is 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9% argon-40, and 0.03% carbon dioxide. “Mars is an intermediate planet between the earth and the moon,” said Dr. Owen. “We do not see a hugely abundant biology, but that doesn’t say there’s none at all.” Color pictures of the Martian surface near the Viking lander revealed a soil even redder than in the original picture received last week. Rocks strewn over the desert sands exhibited a red coating laid down years ago when Mars’s atmosphere was richer in oxygen and water, “through oxidation of the iron and hydration of the minerals,” said Viking geologist Alan S. Hinder. “We propose to test the hypothesis by cracking open one of the red rocks ... to see if there is any rust inside.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-l; W Star, 27 July 76, A-3; C Trib, 27 July 76, 5) Viking 1 ’s mechanical arm scooped its first sample of the Mars surface 28 July, leaving a sharp-edged trench clearly visible in a picture transmitted afterward by the unmanned lander. The 3-m arm, a tube about 38 mm in diameter, ended in a sharp-edged scoop that could dig into the surface with a force of about 13 kg if necessary. When the cover snapped shut on the sample, the arm retracted and swiveled to sift the sample into a funnel feeding into the “biology box.” This container, about the size of a large milk carton, encased the 3 experiments designed to detect life. Two other experiments, also located under funnels, were the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to detect organic molecules and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer to identify inorganic materials, Sensors inside the funnels would tell whether the samples were sufficient. The 3 biology experiments were the “pyrolytic release” experiment of Dr. Norman Horowitz, to look for microorganisms that used the sun as a source of energy like photosynthesis on earth to build organic compounds, through exposure of the sample to radioactive carbon dioxide under artificial sunlight; a “labeled release” experiment by Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., to look for signs of microbial metabolism by tracing radioactive organic compounds injected into the Mars sample to see if they were consumed, releasing gaseous wastes that could be detected; and a “gas exchange” experiment by Vance Oyama of NASA’s Ames Research Center to provide a rich variety of foods in a liquid form—“chicken soup”—to the Mars sample and iook for changes in gas composition inside the experiment chamber that would indicate the food was being used. The biology-box samples would incubate for from 5 to 12 days before results were announced, and a positive finding would be confirmed by subsequent control experiments. The science team anticipated a long wait for any kind of answer, as well as the possibility that the answers might be contradictory. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief scientist for Viking, pointed out that results would be difficult to interpret: “you have to put yourself on the level of a microbe,” he added. The microbes might drown in the liquid, ingest the wrong food, or burn up in the warm experiment chambers. (W Star, 28 July, A-l, A-5) One of the five soil-testing experiments on Viking 1 did not receive enough soil to actuate it, project officials announced, and two attempts to start the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer working on a sample apparently failed. Project Manager Martin said the flight engineers were not yet able to determine what went wrong, because the sampling arm apparently worked as planned but the sample never got into the instrument. The motor driving a stirring rod to brush particles through a strainer did not come on, and scientists speculated the sample might still be sitting on the strainer. A photograph of the trench dug to obtain the sample had shown that the soil was surprisingly cohesive, “like wet sand,” according to Princeton Univ. scientist Dr. Robert B. Hargraves. After delivering soil to the experiments in the biology box, the mechanical arm made 2 attempts to dig and deliver a sample to the mass spectrometer but the instrument did not signal receipt of the sample either time. It was not clear, Martin said, whether the arm lost the soil on the swing back or was off the mark when it deposited the soil, or the soil in the hopper never filtered down to the instrument. The arm responded properly to the following command and delivered a spoonful of soil to the x-ray spectrometer with no difficulty. (ATT, 29 July 76, 1; W Post, 29 July 76, A-3; W Star, 29 July 76, A-3; WSJ, 29 July 76, 1) Viking project scientists debated the makeup of the Mars soil sample that might have been too thick to filter into an instrument opening. Dr. Ronald Scott said that, although the material was somewhat cohesive, “certainly something must have gotten through.” Deputy Mission Director Kingsland said the most likely causes of the apparent malfunction were failure of the mechanical scoop to obtain a full sample, or failure of the “level full” indicator in the instrument to signal properly. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, chief of the gas chromatograph experiment, said the arm might have come up empty from the trench after scooping for the biology experiments, and that a repeat attempt next week would take both possible explanations of the problem into account. Kingsland said the material seemed to have a consistency “something like wet clay.” Dr. Scott emphasized that this did not indicate water in the soil. The other instruments seemed to be processing their samples normally, and results from the inorganic-chemistry sampling in the x-ray spectrometer should provide the first assay of Martian soil as early as tomorrow. (ATT, 30 July 76, A-22; WStar, 30 July 76, A-5; CTrib, 31 July 76, 2) The first experimental results from Mars, returned 30 July by Viking 1 ’s lander, showed that the surface consisted of iron, calcium, silicon, titanium, and aluminum, in amounts that would be determined within a few days. The entire surface around the lander was covered with a very thin coating of vivid orange-red iron oxides that gave the plant its red or rusty appearance. “Mars is a painted desert,” said Dr. Gerald Soffen, one of the project scientists. Dr. Priestly Toulmin, leader of the inorganic-chemistry team, noted that Mars soil up to now could be analyzed only by long-distance methods such as light reflections from the surface; Viking had “picked up a piece of Mars and put it into an analytical instrument.” Dr. Benton Clark, also of the inorganic-chemistry team, said that Viking had not detected trace elements like vanadium or molybdenum considered essential for plant growth on earth; this did not mean the elements were not present, nor had elements like arsenic been detected that would make earth soil sterile. The results “do not rule out the possibility of some form of life,” Dr. Clark added. Results from the 3 biology experiments would be transmitted to earth within a few days. (NYT, 31 July 76, A—1)
Johnson Space Center announced “the most successful balloon flight of its type ever conducted” when a football-field-sized balloon carried a scientific instruments package at a 40-km altitude across the central Texas night sky for 12 hr to gather information on far distant giant and super-giant stars. The 589-kg package known as BUSS—for balloon-borne ultraviolet stellar spectrometer—gathered data on 16 separate stars, including Arcturus, a giant star in constellation Bootes; super-giant Antares (alpha Scorpii); Vega (alpha Lyrae); and Spica (alpha Virginis), super-hot star and one of the brightest observed during the flight. Of special interest was super-giant Deneb in constellation Cygnus, 1400 light years distant, whose light recorded by BUSS was emitted before the Anglo-Saxons settled in England; Deneb was so large that, if the sun were located in its center, the earth would orbit the sun entirely within the star’s outer limits. The BUSS payload was the culmination of a 3-yr international collaboration between JSC and the Space Research Laboratory of Utrecht in the Netherlands. Dr. Yoji Kondo of JSC was U.S. coprincipal investigator, with Dr. Thomas H. Morgan and Dr. Jerry L. Modisette of Houston Raptist University; the Dutch team was led by Dr. Cees de Jager. Purpose of the balloon flights in a series of star studies that began in 1971 was to evaluate the experiment systems for use on the Space Shuttle; the BUSS package was designed to obtain data on spectral variations of a variety of stars and aid scientists in determining their structure and evolution. Previous flights had obtained some information but only a fiftieth of the spectral range covered by the BUSS payload. The package was landed by a parachute about 26 m in diameter, similar to those used on the Apollo command module; the payload, chute, and balloon were recovered between Abilene and Ft. Worth by NASA engineers who returned the material to Houston. The data would be analyzed by the U.S. team and by the Dutch scientists, who had returned to Holland, in preparation for another balloon flight scheduled for the fall of 1976. (JSC Release 76-39)
A new political-economic battle between the U.S. and Britain was expected as bilateral talks were scheduled in London for Sept, on renegotiation of the “Bermuda Agreement” of 1946 regulating airline operations between the U.S. and Britain, in the Caribbean, and in and out of Hong Kong. Britain had announced 22 June it would withdraw from the agreement. The pact (which originally settled wrangling between wartime allies over peacetime air commerce, and served as model for more than 60 bilateral air-travel agreements between the U.S. and other nations) specified the routes the two countries’ airlines could fly and prevented competition on prices. At the time, U.S. carriers had the advantage of new equipment to fly the North Atlantic, and Britain and other war-poor European countries were looking to tourism to bolster their economies. Britain’s objectives in renegotiation would be an equal share of traffic instead of the present 65 to 35% split in favor of the U.S., as well as a cutback in the number of North Atlantic flights. Constantine Menges, director of the international division of the U.S. Civil Aeronautics Board, said the British were interested in equality of results rather than equality of competition, and warned that encouraging airlines to equalize their shares of the market would endanger consumer interests by allowing the airlines to neglect measures that would increase their markets. Political factors would govern any decision: most non-American airlines (including Britain’s) were state-owned and symbols of national prestige. On many international air routes, competing airlines pooled operations and shared revenues and expenses. This cartel philosophy had not applied to North Atlantic routes because of the Bermuda principles; however, Britain now wanted to reduce the number of flights (now involving 28 airlines) that had became destructively competitive, with an estimated equivalent of 8 jumbo jets flying empty between the U.S. and Britain every day. The British view was that restricting the number of flights would enable each nation’s airlines to fly more profitably, eventually benefitting the consumer by easing the pressure for higher fares. On the other hand, U.S. legislation that created the CAB in 1938 had exempted international routes from regulation by subjecting CAB decisions affecting them to presidential review, leaving room for political influences. Whereas the U.S. airlines would be sympathetic to restrictions on flight numbers, the U.S. ideological commitment would uphold free enterprise and unrestricted competition. However, renegotiation might offer the U.S. some advantages: changes on other transatlantic routes where it was now at a disadvantage against European national carriers, increasing the use of charter groups to fill empty seats on scheduled flights, and securing greater equality in so-called fifth and sixth freedoms that permitted European carriers to lure transatlantic passengers with cheap stopovers in and transport to and from other cities besides the basic destinations. Dr. Menges suggested that the U.S. might best negotiate with the European Common Market as a whole, instead of with any one nation; the British rejected this idea as an affront to national sovereignty. (NYT, 8 Aug 76, 3-1) a preset point in near-moon space; a braking operation 14 Aug. put the probe into a circular selenocentric orbit 115 km from the moon’s surface, with 120° inclination and 1 hr 59 min period. (NYT, 11 Aug 76, 37; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 9 Aug 76, 14 Aug 76; Spacewarn bulletin, 17 Aug 76, 1; P lnq, 10 Aug 76, 6; LC S&T Alert #3407, 31 Aug 76) At 6:36 GMT (9:36 Moscow time) 18 Aug. the probe landed on the moon in the Sea of Crises (Mare Crisium) at 12°45/N and 62° 12/E, about 40 km from a northern isthmus between the moon’s 2 seas, where the oldest rocks (about 4.5 billion yr) on the moon might be sampled. The area differed from the Sea of Felicity—site of landings by Luna 16 (1970) and Luna 20 (1972)—not only in age but also in the presence of mascons, gravitational anomalies caused by mass concentrations of extremely dense materials. (The U.S. Lunar Orbiter 5 had discovered 5 such concentrations on the moon in 1968.) The USSR’s 8th successful unmanned landing on the moon in 6 yr was expected to make up for the failure of Luna 23, which sustained damage when it landed on the moon 8 Nov. 1975 and was unable to carry out its mission. The U.S. had not probed the moon since 1972, date of the last of 6 manned lunar landings. Luna 24 weighed 1880 kg upon landing; early reports contained no description of the probe, but photographs of it appeared in Oct. in Aviation WTc and Space Technology magazine, with comparisons of the earlier probes. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 18 Aug 76, 13 Oct 76; UPI, Denver Post, 19 Aug 76, 14-F; NYT editorial, 26 Aug 76; Science News, 28 Aug 76; Av Wk, 11 Oct 76, 53) Tass announced 19 Aug. that, after being on the moon 22 hr 49 min, Luna 24 had blasted off the moon’s surface at 5:25 GMT (8:25 am Moscow time) and was on its way back to earth with a sample of moon soil obtained by a device that drilled to a depth of about 2m and put the core sample into a hermetically sealed container in the return module. The bulk of the spacecraft remained on the moon’s surface; the New York Times noted there was no mention of a robot vehicle like the Lunokhods landed previously. Lunokhod 1 (on Luna 17) had spent 10 mo on the moon in 1970-1971, traveling about 10 km; Lunokhod 2 (on Luna 21) roamed the Lemonnier crater in the Sea of Serenity for 6 mo in 1973. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 19 Aug 76; NYT, 20 Aug 76, A-19; UPI, Denver Post, 20 Aug 76, 10; LA Times, 20 Aug 76, 3) On 22 Aug. the Luna 24 return craft parachuted to earth in a “forest site” 2400 km northeast of Moscow, soft-landing at 17:55 GMT (20:55 Moscow time). The landing craft and sample were flown to Moscow from the site. Research on the comparatively large moon sample would proceed at the Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow, where lunar samples returned by Luna 16 and Lunar 20 had been studied. Pravda was quoted as stating that the 1970 mission of Luna 16 brought back particles of lunar iron that “does not rust”; learning how to manufacture such a metal under earth conditions “would repay all the expenditures for space study,” the newspaper said. Metallurgy stations might be established in space or on the moon to make nonrusting iron in commercial quantities, a process requiring a powerful vacuum like that in space which would be difficult to establish on earth. The gray-brown lunar material was said to resemble the Luna 16 sample, also taken from a lunar “sea” area. Mineralogists studying the top of the 30-cm-wide column of material said they expected to find the same Mendeleyev elements existing on the moon as on the earth, but in different proportions because of fewer volatile materials. Scientists would search the lunar sample for any sign of water vapor, regarded as important “not only for space physics but also for the future exploration of space,” Tass said. The Luna 24 landing craft, still on the moon, would continue to function and flight controllers were still communicating with it. (FBIS, Moscow Tass Inti Serv in Russian, 21 Aug 76; Tass in English, 25 Aug 76; CSM, 24 Aug 76, 1; B Sun, 24 Aug 76, 5; SBD, 31 Aug 76, 223)
Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr., second person to walk on the moon, told an audience at Orange, Calif., that he had become an alcoholic several years before the 1969 Apollo 11 moon mission and stopped drinking only 2 days before the flight. He had resumed drinking shortly after the mission. Aldrin said that, as a West Point cadet, he had been “caught in the alcohol trap”: having decided to give up alcohol when he was sent to Korea as a combat officer, he resumed drinking when he perceived that his military image was measured by “who could drink the most.” Aldrin spoke at a hospital where he stayed during a month-long recovery program in the summer of 1975; he had not mentioned his alcoholism in his 1973 book “Return to Earth” although he did discuss his post-Apollo psychiatric treatment, confirmed by the Air Force in 1972. (W Star, 3 Aug 76, A-2; ATT, 3 Aug 76; W Post Parade, 26 Sept. 76, 6)
plane that flew around the global poles had previously been carried around the world on a balloon that came down in Central Africa, where a French member of the World Health Organization found it hanging in a tree and returned it to NASA; after the airplane trip, the unit served another year on a buoy before being retired from service. A 1914 Model T Ford originally scheduled to carry the tracking device [see 15 Feb.] was withdrawn from the race by its owner. (NASA Release 76-126) 17-19 July: Project scientists said the high proportion of argon in the Mars atmosphere might damage the life-detection instruments on Viking 1. In March 1974, a spectrometer pump on a Mars-bound spacecraft failed to work properly and Russian scientists concluded the problem was caused by argon, an element reluctant to form chemical compounds; the Russian pump apparently could not handle the high argon content of the Mars atmosphere. Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer contained filter material to screen out carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide in the search for organic compounds in Mars air and soil samples, which would be heated in the instrument to produce gas for analysis by the chromatograph; the high argon content might interfere with the readings. (NYT, 17 July 76, 24) JPL flight directors were checking out the instruments on Viking 1 for its Mars landing scheduled for 20 July. Immediately upon landing, the spacecraft would measure air temperature and pressure and wind speed and direction, and would detect any interior motions of the planet such as moving lava or shaking of the crust. It was also scheduled to take 2 photographs, one downward to record the terrain of the landing site and the other a panorama shot to show the general surface of Mars. Life-detection experiments would not begin until about a wk after the landing. (W Post, 18 July 76, A-10) Commands from JPL to turn on the $ 153-million instrument package to be landed by Viking 1 on the Plains of Chryse took between 17 and 18 min to reach the spacecraft nearly 346 million km away from earth. First spacecraft responses to the signals indicated the instruments and navigational equipment were in working condition. Landing was scheduled for 8 am EDT on 20 July; Viking 1 would separate early in the morning into 2 components, 2300-kg orbiter and 590-kg lander. The orbiter, powered by purple solar cells on panels, would remain in orbit to serve as a radio relay for the lander and to photograph nearly half the Martian surface over the next 12 mo. The lander, powered by an atomic battery, would coast for about 3 hr, slowed by a parachute and braking engines, and land on 3 aluminum legs at about 8 kph, more gently than most parachutists land on earth. (W Post, 19 July 76, A-3) Odds were heavily against existence of any form of life on Mars, said a Washington Post editorial, and against Viking 1 ’s finding evidence of it even if it were there. The Viking flights were “in some ways more remarkable an undertaking” than the Apollo flights because the spacecraft was on its own with no humans to correct errors and a sizable time lapse between sending and receipt of radioed instructions. The mission, said the Post, was “already a stunning accomplishment.” (W Post, 20 July. 76, A-16) The Viking spacecraft was “a breed apart,” the Wash. Post reported, as different from previous spacecraft “as a Cadillac from a Pinto.” Almost nothing on the lander had flown in space before; almost everything had to be built super-small to save weight. As the first tl.S. spacecraft to land on another planet, the Viking had to be designed to withstand chemical and heat sterilization to avoid contaminating Mars with earth organisms. The tape recorder, for instance, had to be made of bronze coated with phosphor, because no plastic tape could have survived the heat. (W Post, 20 July 76, A-2)
About 3000 people attended a ceremony dedicating the Space Hall of Fame at Alamogordo, N.M., honoring men and women involved in space exploration. Original inductees, numbering 35, included U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong and Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. Nine of the 35 were from the Soviet Union; eight each from the U.S. and West Germany; three from Austria, two from France, and one each from Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Romania, and Switzerland. Dr. Frederick Durant of the Smithsonian Institution announced the names of the pioneers, nominated by the Inti. Academy of Astronautics in Paris with final selection by a committee appointed by the governor of N.M. for the Hall of Fame. Lubas Perek, head of the UN’s outer space affairs division, told the audience that the choice of persons to be honored “will surely reflect the grand international character of outer space research.” (W Star, 6 Oct 76, 2; NYT, 10 Oct 76, 26; Inti Space Hall of Fame, media release; Alamogordo Daily News, 3 Oct 76, dedication edition)
Former astronaut William A. Anders, serving as chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, was appointed U.S. ambassador to Norway by President Ford. Anders, 42, had served at NRC since Dec. 1974 and had told the President he wished to remain in the post for only a yr. Selected as an astronaut by NASA in 1963, Anders was one of the 3 crewmen of Apollo 8 to orbit the moon at Christmastime 1968. Anders left the corps of astronauts in 1969 to become executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, a White House post abolished by President Nixon 4 yr later; he then was appointed head of the Atomic Energy Commission (whose functions were reorganized in 1974 into the Energy Research and Development Administration and NRC). He had turned down an offer of reappointment at NRC for a 5-yr term. {WSJ, 9 Mar 76, 3; W Post, 8 Mar 76, A-20)
Pure carbon materials originally developed as ablative heatshields on the Apollo spacecraft were being used at medical centers across the U.S. in research on artificial limbs and implants in human tissue. The inert tendencies and high degree of purity exhibited by the carbon materials made them suitable for implantation without causing infection or rejection. Northwestern Univ. in 111. and the Rancho Los Amigos hospital center run by the Univ. of Southern Calif, at Los Angeles had studied the materials in skeletal fixation devices that used carbon-button implants to connect the devices to nerves. Other projects included carbon implants to control pain (especially in the lower back) and neuroelectric stimulators to relax contracted muscles in paralyzed patients. Much of the technology used in purifying the carbon materials originated at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. (MSFC Release 76-45)
A 2-mo study this summer at the Ames Research Center would bring together a specially chosen panel of a dozen scientists—“authorities on every aspect of space exploration”—to make an in-depth examination of problems anticipated in the colonization of space. Sponsored by NASA, the group would also consider whether satellite power stations for earth could be built by space colonists. In a report by James Barron for the Washington Star, Princeton physicist Gerard K. O’Neill detailed his ideas for a kilometer-plus-wide cylinder with living quarters for 10 000 colonists on its outer rim, the length to be determined by the number of colonists desired; O’Neill emphasized that the colony could be ready by 1990 using existing technology and materials mined from outer space. O’Neill last year took his theories to a NASA-sponsored study group at Stanford University that included 28 physicists, engineers, and social scientists; the panel recommended that the U.S. move toward the colonization of space, saying that it “would represent ‘cashing in’ on the scientific information returned to us by Apollo.” (W Star, 18 June 76, A-l)
The Apollo lunar scientific experiment package (ALSEP) left on the moon’s surface during Apollo 14, reported dead [see 18 Jan.] when transmission ceased last month from unknown causes, came to life just as unexpectedly 19 Feb. with transmitter, receiver, and experiments functioning very well. One experiment—the charged-particle lunar environment experiment—had previously been unable to perform during lunar daylight because temperature variations had degraded its power supply; since the revival, the experiment had been sending good data during lunar daylight. JSC scientists and Bendix engineers who designed the ALSEPs had no idea what happened to the Apollo 14 station, one of 5 transmitting data from the moon; one possibility cited was a relay in the power system that had stuck and then became unstuck. Estimated remaining life of the Apollo 14 station was once again 2 to 3 yr; all the stations had performed well, with the oldest—from Apollo 12—nearing its 7th year. ALSEP experiments were still providing data on conditions inside the moon and on moonquakes; scientists were still hoping for seismic signals from a large meteor impact that would identify the moon’s core. (NASA Release 76-34; JSC Release 76-17)
Dr. Harrison H. (Jack) Schmitt, astronaut on Apollo 17, was the victorious Republican candidate for the U.S. Senate from New Mexico, defeating Democrat Joseph M. Montoya, who was seeking a third term. Now a consulting geologist, the 41-yr-old Schmitt had a 3-to-2 lead in the returns. CBS commentator Walter Cronkite noted in a news broadcast at 10:25 p.m. EST on 2 Nov. that astronauts constituted only 2 ten-millionths of the U.S. population, yet there would now be two U.S. senators who were astronauts—Schmitt and John Glenn (D-Ohio)—which was “representation out of all proportion.” (W Post, 3 Nov 76, A-17; broadcast, 2 Nov 76)
William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut who became the first chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 197 4, was sworn in as U.S. ambassador to Norway [see 9 Mar.]. (NRC Release 76-93)
Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, last man to leave footprints on the moon’s surface when he commanded Apollo 17 in 1972, would leave government service 1 July. Cernan, a Navy captain, would complete 20 yr in the Navy in June and would retire from both the Navy and the astronaut corps. Selected as a NASA astronaut in 1963, Cernan had had 3 space missions (including 2 (lights to the moon) and was the second American to walk in space, when he was pilot of Gemini 9 in June 1966. As lunar-module pilot of Apollo 10 in May 1969, he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had flown the module within about 15 km of the moon’s surface in a full-scale rehearsal of all but the final moments of the first lunar-landing mission 2 mo later. In Dec. 1972, Cernan and Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt landed at Taurus-Littrow during the last scheduled manned lunar mission. In 1973, Cernan became special assistant to the Apollo program manager, working on the joint U.S.-USSR Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; in Sept. 1975, he became chief of training operations in the astronaut office. (NASA Release 76-47; JSC Release 76-20; W Star, 16 Mar 76, A-2)
Marshall Space Flight Center and Dryden Flight Research Center officials signed an agreement to conduct jointly a comprehensive program of tests on the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster. The program, to begin early in 1977, would consist of drogue-parachute tests and main-parachute tests, using single parachutes, and test deployment of the 3-parachute cluster (actual flight configuration) to be used in recovery of the solid rockets, largest ever flown. The parachutes, some 36.5 m in diameter, would be the largest used in the space program; Apollo spacecraft parachutes were about 24.5 m in diameter. The Dryden center would provide the B-52 aircraft for the test drops, as well as the flight and maintenance crews, and would perform the tests over the National Parachute Test Range about an hour’s flight from Edwards AFB in Calif. MSFC engineers would evaluate the test data to determine the adequacy of the system. (NASA Release 76-94; DFRC Release 6-76; MSFC Release 76-87)
Dr. Michael Duke, curator of lunar samples at NASA’s Johnson Space Center, returned from Moscow with two half-gram samples of moon soil brought to earth in Aug. 1976 by the USSR’s Luna 24 spacecraft. The samples were part of a 2-meter-long core of lunar material obtained by a hollow drill from the surface of Mare Crisium, a region of the moon from which the U.S. had not had any samples. This was the third time U.S. scientists had obtained a Soviet sample in exchange for material collected by Apollo astronauts from other places on the moon. Other members of the U.S. scientific delegation to Moscow this week were Dr. Charles Simonds, Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., and Prof. Gerald J. Wasserburg of the Calif. Institute of Technology. The small size of the sample would not detract from its usefulness, according to Dr. Bevan French, chief of NASA’s program of research on extraterrestrial materials; methods routinely used for extracting information from samples of meteorite or deep-sea basalt could produce hundreds of chemical analyses from a single tiny crystal or determine the age of a fragment smaller than an aspirin tablet. (JSC Release 76-75)
The Apollo lunar scientific experiments package (ALSEP) set up on the moon in Feb. 1971 by astronauts Alan B. Shepard and Edgar D. Mitchell during the third manned exploration of the moon ceased transmission, probably because of failure of electronic components, engineers at Johnson Space Center said. The Apollo 14 instrument, one of five stations on the moon, had provided scientists with lunar seismic data in combination with stations set up during the Apollo 12, 15, 16, and 17 missions. Originally designed with a 1-yr lifetime, the ALSEP 14 was first of the stations to fail completely, although it had lost its ability to receive commands a year previously. The remaining stations continued to provide data on the moon’s seismic activity, heat flow, interactions with earth’s magnetic field, and the solar-wind and cosmic particles that continuously bombard the lunar surface. Findings based on ALSEP data included measurement of moonquakes, mostly at about 4 on the Richter scale; indications of a lunar core at or near the melting point; a thick lithosphere that probably prevented mountain-building on the moon; and a tenuous atmosphere deriving from solar-wind particles. The seismic instruments on the ALSEPs were the most sensitive in existence, and the remaining stations were estimated to last for another 3 yr. (JSC Roundup, 13 Feb 76, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Science Applications, Inc., of Los Angeles and Rockwell Inti. Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study space industrialization. The study program would lead from Shuttle Spacelab and early space-station experiments to permanent, practical, commercial use of space. The space-industrialization accomplishments so far achieved would be expanded into disciplines other than communications and meteorology; the study program would attempt to define a balance between future opportunities (satellite power systems) and relatively immediate benefits (space processing of materials). Possible areas of activity would include development of new techniques and materials, new development of earth resources, and eventually the movement of people to space for tourism or medical purposes, and the industrialization of the moon. The parallel studies would proceed in two phases, each requiring about 8 mo, and would cost about $200 000 each. (MSFC Release 76-160)
The board of directors of Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) declared a quarterly dividend of 25 cents per share payable 15 Mar. to all shareholders of record at close of business 13 Feb. The group’s 22nd consecutive quarterly dividend would be the 7th at the 25-cent rate. (ComSat Release 76-1) system for providing solar power to the transmitter: a pair of accordion-pleated solar arrays to be extended by thin steel booms to a wingspan of 7.5 m each, that could provide 1 kw of power over Cts's 2-yr lifetime. A 3-axis stabilisation system would keep the panels pointed toward the sun for power while the satellite antennas aimed accurately at the center of target transmission areas, about a timezone wide. The large-diameter low-profile spacecraft would be turned over to the Canadian Department of Communications for operation after the spacecraft reached synchronous orbit. Apogee-motor firing at 3:41 pm £ST 20 Jan. put Cts into a synchronous orbit at 35 888 km altitude, with final station at 116°W over the equator reached 29 Jan. Cts was the result of a 5-yr international program of cooperation between NASA and CDC to pioneer in new methods of providing communications services by transmitting high-quality color TV and other data to small user-operated ground stations in remote areas. It carried a high-efficiency 200-w traveling-wave tube amplifier developed at LeHC that would operate at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than those of previous satellites, permitting the use of smaller and less expensive ground equipment, and in a new frequency band providing microwave signals in the 12-ghz region. In 1971, the World Administrative Radio Conference had begun assigning frequencies between 11 and 14 ghz and 18 and 30 ghz to signal-relay and broadcast satellites of the future, in hopes of averting a communications jam in orbit in the 1980s. The satellites could provide any country with a means of transmitting its own TV programs and settiifg up medical and educational consulting services in sparsely settled regions by using small, inexpensive—even portable— ground stations. (NASA Release 76-9, 75-316; MOR E-610-76-01 [prelaunch] 22 D^ii) 75, [postlaunch] 28 Jan 76, [postlaunch #2] 13 Feb 76; ESA news releases 16 Jan76,6 Feb 76; WStar, 18 Jan 76, A-2, 21 Jan 76, All; NYT, 30 Jan 76, C 11) 18 January; Ats 3, launched 5 Nov. 1967 primarily as a comsat, went into semiretirement::when the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration turnetj off its multicolor spin-scan cloud camera that had taken the first colof: photograph of the earth from space. During its 8 yr of orbiting 35 800 km in space synchronously with the earth’s rotation, Ats 3 helped prove the theory that continuous viewing of earth’s cloud-cover would prjovide meaningful weather information. Ats 3 transmitted thousands of photographs of hurricanes, tornado-bearing thunderstorms, and other life-threatening weather phenomena, including the timely warning of Hurricane Camille before its assault on the Gulf Coast in Aug. 1969. Besides weather pictures, Ats 3 had relayed live TV coverage of events such as the Apollo missions, Pope Paul’s visit to Colombia, and the 1968 Olympic games in Mexico City. Although superseded by more sophisticated geostationary spacecraft such as Sms l and 2 and Goes 1, which offered better visual transmission and provided nighttime imagery through infrared sensors, Ats 3 would continue to relay data as part of NOAA’s worldwide weather-facsimile broadcast system, and would be used by NASA in communications demonstrations such as medical and educational experiments. (NOAA Release 76-5)
A press briefing following the 7th lunar science conference at Johnson Space Center [see 22 Feb.] featured the cochairmen, Dr. Larry Haskins, chief of planetary and earth sciences at JSC, and Dr. Robert Pepin, director of the Lunar Science Institute, and Dr. Deter Hayman of Rice Univ. Dr. Haskins said the conference aimed at broadening the planetary view of people working with lunar samples and data; a substantial interest was developing in the lunar polar-orbiter mission among people more interested than before in planetology, and aware that orbiting and remote-sensing missions would be the principal source for studying geoscientific evolution of these bodies. As an example, long-range operation of the lunar-surface packages had produced information that resulted in a lowered value for lunar heatflow; this in turn “constrained” the composition of the moon and its evolutionary history—“Whatever history it has, the amount of heat in the interior has to match the present heat loss from the body.” Also, said Dr. Haskins, lunar data were being used widely by scientists not previously concerned with lunar research: for example, archived data would be used to tell whether the moon was differentiated only in its outer extent, or more than 50% of it had undergone chemical separation or even developed a core. Another example would be the matching of seismic with magnetic data to get a better overall picture of lunar evolution. Dr. Pepin noted that 740 people had attended the conference, many more than the previous year; the program committee had purposely included discussions of other planetary and meteorite investigations that revealed much about the first 500 million yr of solar-system history, whose clues still exist in the moon (although hard to interpret) but no longer exist on earth. Experience with other planets had been insufficient to say if they had preserved early solar-system records; “best chances are not,” he added. Early solar-system history, especially of the inner planets, was characterized by enormous bombardment of all solid surfaces by objects now referred to as meteorites, but on a scale in those days “that almost suggests we should call them something else.” These huge objects clearly left their mark, with evidence that the bombardment took place more than 4 billion yr ago, then rapidly tapered off. Data from Mercury, Mars, and Venus would be expected to show that the historical record had been erased by time, constant impact, and geological activity in which the surface was pounded, dispersed, or remelted. The intense bombardment had wiped out earth’s early geological record too; terrestrial geologists had tried to put the age of the oldest earth rocks farther and farther back, getting in gradual stages as far back as 3.7 billion yr in a large anorthosite deposit in Greenland.This boundary condition for earth geology was one reason for the growing interest in lunar and general planetary studies: the flow of information had been not only from planetary to terrestrial scientists, but also in the other direction. Lunar scientists had begun to examine terrestrial craters such as the 60-km impact phenomenon called Manicouagan: what would have been referred to 5 yr ago as remnants of a Manicouagan volcano had now been established as an impact, mainly because the ease of sampling (greater there than on the moon) had permitted study of energy partition and formation of rock, glass, and melt material in a large-scale impact. Comparative planetology means applying results of studying one planetary surface to explain phenomena on other planetary surfaces. Earth, unlike other planets we know about, continued as a thermally active planet with volcanism, mountain upheaval and wearing down, and had obliterated much of its earlier record. The early stages of the lunar and planetary program focused attention outward; now these studies had provided knowledge applicable to earth, and the generation and development of lunar-surface morphology as a result of external bombardment was only one example of this application. Over the next 2 to 3 yr, a group of 50 to 100 scientists would be studying in detail the phenomenon of volcanism on all the terrestrial planets as a fundamental stage of planetary development, in a pilot project to define comparative planetology and relate it to a specific aspect. Mercury apparently had basalt flows; Venera pictures suggest recent activity on the surface of Venus that produced what seem to be basalts. Mars clearly had basalts: it had the largest volcano in the solar system, “an enormous structure that would . . . cover the state of Kansas if . . . plunked down there.” In 2 or 3 yr, Dr. Pepin said, we should be able to give an integrated picture of the issuing of basalts from the interior onto the surface, an extremely important process in the development and evolution of a planet. Life in the solar system was an exciting subject now, said Dr. Hayman, and discoveries were coming in at a pace that would make today’s theories outmoded by the time they got into print 6 mo from now. The task of scientists, he said, was to include the general public in the excitement, and to make it filter through to the colleges and universities, to high schools, and even to grade-school levels. One thing that had changed in the past 20 yr since the days of Harold Urey and Hans Seuss was the concept of the solar nebula and the formation of planets and satellites by accretion. The problem was the noncondensable material in the nebula, and where it went: the solar physicists explained its absence by the theory of a solar upheaval that cleaned out the inner parts of the solar system by a superstorm of ions. Applying thermodynamics to this theory made it possible to calculate which compounds would condense out at what temperature. The Allende meteorite that fell in Mexico in 1969 contained compounds similar to what had been predicted as a result of condensation of the solar nebula at high temperatures. Then, 2 or 3 yr ago the idea arose that the sun and planets had formed not only from gases but also from so-called presolar grains, which had not been specifically identified; their identity on the earth and moon would have been lost over time because of geological processes. So the search shifted to meteorites. Although none of the grains had been definitely identified, the conference had heard 2 reports that might be interpreted as finding presolar grains. Metallic nuggets in the Allende meteorite were found to consist of platinum-group metals in extraordinarily small fragments, a millionth of a meter, that did not vaporize or melt readily and might be presolar grains (although it would take a lot of work to settle the question, Dr. Hayman said). Also, a group from Berkeley had dissolved carbonaceous meteorites in hydrofluoric acid to get rid of the silicates; the carbon residue was found to be full of gas called “planetary” because its composition differed from that of the sun and was much more like that of earth. The question was how carbon material could have been of planetary origin under the solar-nebula theory: speculation was that the carbonaceous material might predate the formation of the sun and have originated elsewhere. It could not have undergone great heat without being destroyed, so the objects containing the material must have been created farther out, not in the inner region of the sun and terrestrial planets but in the region of the giant planets. If the heavier elements were synthesized in the stars by nuclear processes, especially in explosions of novas and supernovas that produced all sorts of elements as they blew away their outer envelopes, all the elements are probably represented in this expanding envelope. With rapidly dropping temperatures, the condensation of presolar grains would occur within 10 yr. It would be possible to look at the product of a single event to extrapolate the total of many such events of which all the elements around us would be the product. Dr. Haskins said in summary that developments in methodology and the availability of more precise measurements would make it possible to supplant earlier measurements. Geophysicists were learning to extract information from bits of material instead of bucketsful or large chunks as they had done in the past. The Apollo program had been responsible for a steady progress in the field of measurements: “there simply was not the funding and interest correlated together to do it prior to that time.” Asked what the scientific community had learned about the moon in the 3 yr 3 mo since the last moon mission, Haskins said they were beginning to understand the major stages in the evolution of every planetary body composed of rocky material; the moon had passed through stages that the earth had not reached, and had preserved a record of what had happened—for example, a preview of the kind of rock that would be formed later in earth history. The findings provided a broad framework in which more and different questions could be asked, not just investigation of the more obvious characteristics of the many materials brought back. Queried on the lunar-sample curatorial facility, Dr. Haskins said that moon rocks from the Apollo expeditions were housed in a leaky, flimsy facility that would not protect them for use of future generations of scientists. A new facility was desperately needed, because the present building was not fireproof and the roof leaked; within the building, the rocks had been kept in nitrogen-filled cabinets and handled only in clean-room conditions, to prevent contamination. However, moisture in the surroundings might have led to erroneous deductions regarding the moon environment when scientists analyzed the lunar samples. (Transcript, 7th lunar science conf. press briefing, 19 Mar 76; NASA Release 76-25; JSC Release 76-15; Science, vol. 185, 346; W Post, 21 Mar 76, A-3)
The Marshall Star reported on a Bicentennial celebration at MSFC’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., that included planting of a “moon” tree to commemorate the 7 th anniversary of the first Apollo landing. Michoud was the place where giant Saturn moon rockets were fabricated. Participating in the program were Lt. Gov. James Fitzmorris of La.; MSFC Director Dr. William R. Lucas; and Robert Littlefield, manager of the Michoud facility. The tree was a pine grown from seed carried to the moon and back in 1971 oh the Apollo 14 mission as part of research into effects of weightlessness on seed germination. The U.S. Dept, of Agriculture had planted the returned seeds, and the seedlings had been set out in various public areas over the U.S. such as in Philadelphia’s Washington Square. As the tree was planted in front of the Michoud administration building, a time capsule was deposited to be opened during the nation’s Tricentennial in 2076. The capsule contained documents, tapes, and pictures relating to the space program. (Marshall Star, 21 July 76, 4)
An asteroid more than 3 km across was photographed near earth 27 Jan., about 7.5 million km distant, by the Mt. Palomar Observatory, the Calif. Institute of Technology reported. The asteroid, of the type that made giant craters on planets of the solar system, was closer to earth than any known celestial body other than the moon. The institute said there was no chance that the asteroid—called 1976 AA—would collide with the earth on its present path, as the orbits of the earth and the asteroid did not touch. (ATT, 4 Feb 76, 2l)
Col. Stuart A. Roosa, 42, an astronaut since 1966, announced in Houston that he would retire from the Air Force and from NASA on 1 Feb., one day after the 5th anniversary of the launch of his only space flight, Apollo 14. Roosa had piloted the command module while Capt. Alan B. Shepard and Cdr. Edgar D. Mitchell had made the third moon landing, and had previously been on the Apollo 9 backup crew. Roosa told associates he was exploring “companies involved in new procedures.” (NYT, 30 Jan 76, 34; W Star, 30 Jan 76, A-2)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, professor of planetary science at California Institute of Technology and geologist by training, succeeded Dr. William H. Pickering as director of Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After earning bachelor’s, master’s, and doctor’s degrees at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Murray became a geologist and later served in the Air Force. At the USAF Cambridge Research Lab., trying to expand knowledge of the earth’s shape and gravity field by the use of earth satellites, he became interested in space technology. First faculty appointee at Caltech in the field of planetary astronomy in 1960, Dr. Murray and Prof. James Westphal were in 1962 the first observers of infrared emission from an object outside the solar system (a star) and did infrared mapping of the moon, Venus, and Jupiter. Dr. Murray was the author or coauthor of 4 books and more than 60 scientific papers, including the recent book “Navigating the Future.” (Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1; Glendale News-Press, 1 Apr 76, 1; Montrose Ledger, 1 Apr 76, 1)
A proposal for consolidating about 60 current federal programs— in areas such as health, education, child nutrition, and social services—into “block grants” to the states, with few strings attached. Proposed spending for defense represented a turnaround of sorts: defense spending had fallen for a while after Vietnam, then rose again in FY 1975 with the end of the draft and conversion to higher priced all-volunteer armed forces with an upward pressure on wages. The outlay in FY 1977 would be for weapons; more than half the recommended increase would go for procurement, research, and development. Defense at $101.1 billion would constitute a fourth of the total budget, as in recent years, and Social Security about another fifth. Interest on the public debt would add a tenth; these three items would account for more than half. Five other basic budget items—Medicare-Medicaid, unemployment compensation, civil service retirement, and veterans benefits—would make up three fourths of the total, leaving only a fourth of the total budget for all remaining government spending. Science, represented by $23.5 billion in federal R&D spending proposed for FY 1977, would use more than half that amount for military projects; the space program would get $3.6 billion, only 4% more than the current year and much less than price escalation. Highest priorities for increases in civilian spending on science would be colleges and universities, which would get $2.6 billion in research funds, and the National Science Foundation, which would get $812 million. NASA, under the proposed budget, would postpone purchase of one of the Space Shuttles for a year, and would drop its plan for a Mars-Jupiter-Saturn explorer. At the height of spending for the Apollo program 10 yr ago, civilian and nonspace science got 20% of R&D funding; in FY 1977, it would get 37%. (W Star, 21 Jan 76, A-l, A-10, A-ll; W Post, 22 Jan 76, A-l, A-l4, A-15, A-16; NYT, 22 Jan 76, 1, 24, 25, 26) At a hearing on solar power from satellites conducted by the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Deputy Administrator George M-Low and Dr. John M. Teem, ERDA’s Assistant Administrator for Solar, Geothermal, and Advanced Energy Systems, were questioned closely by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky), subcommittee chairman, on the ERDA and NASA responsibilities for the program. Testimony revealed that ERDA had prime responsibility for solar, as well as other, power-generating concepts, and that NASA had not requested funds for developing an independent program but was working on solar-power ideas to use in satellite missions. Primary goal of ERDA’s program, Dr. Teem testified, was development and demonstration of terrestrial solar-energy applications that were commercially attractive and environmentally acceptable: solar thermal electric, photovoltaic, wind, and ocean-energy conversion. Dr. Teem pointed out that the FY 1977 budget included no direct funding for energy R&D for NASA, as the basic responsibility rested with ERDA. Dr. Low added that, when ERDA decided that research should proceed, NASA would do the work with ERDA funding. (Text, pp. 192-227)
The Viking 1 orbiter photographed a tiny moon of Mars called Phobos at a distance of just over 8000 km, providing a picture so clear that more than 100 craters were visible on the surface only 22.5 km across. At least 6 craters measured nearly 2 km across, meaning that meteorites the size of small towns had crashed into Phobos during the last 3 or 4 billion yr. The face of Phobos in the picture released by JPL was the same one photographed in 1971 and 1972 Mariner 9, first spacecraft to orbit Mars. “This means that Phobos always shows its same side to Mars,” said Dr. Thomas C. Duxbury of JPL, as earth’s moon always shows the same side because of the pull of earth’s gravity. Another Viking 1 picture showed small channels in the Argyre basin of Mars’s southern highland that were the best evidence yet for heavy rainfall on the planet in past ages. Present atmospheric pressure on Mars was only about 7.7 millibars, 1/200th of that on earth and insufficient for liquid water to form or rain to fall. (W Post, 28 July 76, A-8)
The Viking 1 lander touched down safely on a plain at the western edge of the Chryse region of Mars at 7:53 am EDT, 11 mo to the day after its journey of more than 700 million km through space began at KSC Launch Complex 41. Landing was within 17 sec of the predicted time; velocity at impact, predicted to be 2.4 ± 0.9 kps, was actually 2.49 kps. Within minutes of the landing, the Viking began relaying a photograph of one of its footpads on the nearby surface up to the Viking orbiter for transmission to earth; a panoramic view of the landing site followed. Distance from earth to Mars at landing time was more than 322 million km, and radio waves took 19 additional minutes to travel back to earth to signal touchdown. Spacecraft controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory broke into applause and cheers when the data arrived showing a successful landing; telemetry showed the descent curve fitting preplanned values as the lander’s aeroshell, supersonic parachute, and terminal descent engines braked the descent to the surface of Mars. The site at Chryse Planitia was chosen for the landing after Viking orbiter data and the giant telescope at Arecibo, P.R., showed that the primary landing site and the first alternative were too hazardous. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, who was at JPL for the landing, said that the intensive search for a safe landing site “really paid off.” The Mars landing came on the 7th anniversary of man’s first landing on the moon 20 July 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. President Ford, who telephoned JPL with congratulations after the landing, asked Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC if there were plans for a Viking 3. Martin replied that there were not, but that his team was “ready to take on Viking 3 plus Viking 4, 5, and 6.” The Viking 2 was expected to go into orbit around Mars about 7 Aug. (Mission Status Bulletin 35, 20 July 76; Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 1)
Return of the USSR’s Luna 24 to earth with a load of material drilled from nearly 2 m below the surface of the moon might be a dress rehearsal for a round-trip Mars probe to offset world headlines gained by Viking 1, said the Christian Science Monitor. The question why the Soviets would expend more effort on moon samples when they already had three sets (two from previous probes, Luna 16 and Luna 20, and one from the U.S. Apollo program) would be answered if the Luna 24 mission were being used to perfect techniques for obtaining Mars samples, a move “which would vault the Soviet Union back into the lead in planetary research,” said the CSM. The USSR had landed unmanned spacecraft on the surface of Venus and obtained information for a short period, and had sent to the moon in 1973 an unmanned vehicle Lunokhod 2 that crisscrossed the Lemonnier crater for 6 mo, reporting back data on magnetic fields and laser direction-finding. The CSM noted that, although the USSR automated machines worked well, the Soviets still lacked boosters to propel cosmonauts to the moon. (CSM, 30 Aug 76)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, who commanded both the Gemini 7 and Apollo 8 missions and who currently was president and chief executive officer of Eastern Air Lines, was elected chairman of the board for EAL replacing Floyd D. Hall, who had resigned to become permanent chairman of the executive committee of the International Air Transport Association (IATA). (Av Wk, 29 Nov 76, 20)
Fred W. Haise, Jr., astronaut on the Apollo 13 lunar mission of April 1970 that nearly ended in disaster, would command the first free-flight test of the Space Shuttle, Johnson Space Center officials announced. A research pilot for NASA since 1959, Haise worked at Lewis Research Center and the Flight Research Center before his selection as a civilian astronaut in 1966. He was technical assistant to the manager of the Shuttle orbiter project from April 1973 to January 1976. With Haise on the test Shuttle flight would be Air Force Lt. Col. Charles G. Fullerton, appointed astronaut in 1969, who had never flown in space. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly piggyback in 1977 on a modified Boeing 747 jet transport, then in free-flight testing and landing after release at about 8-km altitude. Haise and Col. Fullerton would guide the Shuttle to an unpowered landing at the Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, to demonstrate handling and reusability. (B Sun, 25 Feb 76, A-7; W Post, 25 Feb 76, B 5; NASA Release 76-35; JSC Release 76-17)
Thermal protection fabrics developed for use in the Apollo and Skylab programs would be the basis for research into improved clothing and equipment for firefighters, under a contract signed between NASA and the Department of Commerce’s National Fire Prevention and Control Administration. The agreement assigned management responsibility to Marshall Space Flight Center for a 3-yr program funded jointly by NASA and NFPCA at a cost of $300 000 in the first year. The program would emphasize weight reduction, performance, and cost of equipment to improve the chances of a firefighter’s surviving any fire uninjured, in a job described as the most hazardous in the U.S. (MSFC Release 76-31)
A Stanford Research Institute study requested by Ames Research Center of ways to detect possible intelligence signals from outer space reported that the most effective and economical technique would be use of a hemispheric antenna more than 3 km in diameter, orbiting the earth opposite the moon but shielded from earth’s radio emissions. The orbiting antenna would occupy one of the points in the moon’s orbit where the gravity field of earth and moon would balance one another. Two other strategies assessed in the study were an “orchard” of parabolic antennas (similar to that suggested in 1971 for Project Cyclops, a joint ARC-Stanford proposal to use massed 100m antennas for signalseeking and for radio astronomy), and a group of antennas in craters on the far side of the moon shielded from earth interference to sweep the entire range of the heavens during each month. Choice of the best strategy would depend on estimates of how far the system would need to look to find another technological civilization; Walter Sullivan noted in the NY Times “a strong suspicion that the nearest possible civilization may be 500 light years or more away.” {NYT, 3 Nov 76, 70)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel, one of the world’s leading authorities on the sun and its corona, died at Mass. General Hospital after a long illness. During his lifetime, he had viewed 15 total solar eclipses, leading expeditions to distant places like the Sahara (1973) and Siberia (1936), where the Soviets provided a parlor car of the Trans Siberian Railroad for his equipment and camping gear. Dr. Menzel had taught for nearly 40 yr at Harvard; Dr. Fred L. Whipple of Harvard, a colleague and former student of Dr. Menzel, noted that many of the best-known astronomers in the U.S. had also been taught by Dr. Menzel. The Minor Planet Center of the Inti. Astronomical Union recently named an asteroid Menzel in recognition of his contribution to astrophysics. In 1938, Dr. Menzel developed the first coronagraph in the U.S. to permit study of the sun’s corona without an eclipse; in 1933, he had collaborated with J.C. Boyce in establishing the presence of oxygen in the solar corona, and in 1941 he had worked with Winfield W. Salisbury on the initial calculations that enabled the first radio contact with the moon in 1946. He had received a Ph.D. in astrophysics at Princeton in 1924, writing science-fiction stories to help pay his expenses, and had taught at the Univ. of Iowa and Ohio State Univ. before becoming professor of astrophysics at Harvard in 1939. He was director of the Harvard College Observatory from 1954 to 1966, when he was named research scientist at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge. He had retired from the university in 1971, but had continued to do research there. (ATT, 16 Dec 76, 50)
NASA announced plans for a seventh Lunar Science Conference to be held 15 to 19 March at JSC, bringing together scientists in geology, chemistry, physics, astronomy, engineering, and biology under joint sponsorship of JSC and the Lunar Science Institute of Houston. Discoveries about the moon would be applied to problems of the origin and early history of the solar system, for instance using lunar data to interpret craters and volcanoes photographed on the surfaces of Mercury and Mars. Other papers would discuss meteorites, satellites of Jupiter (about the size of earth’s moon), and use of earth-based telescopes to measure chemical composition of asteroids. Lunar science conferences had been held yearly since 1970, when the first such assembly heard scientific results from the Apollo 11 moon-landing mission. More than 700 scientists from as far away as Australia attended the 1975 conference. (NASA Release 76-25)
Vandals who damaged the moon rock on display at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., were not successful in obtaining a piece of the rock, said the Washington Post. The lunar sample, a 40-gram triangular chuck of basalt, had been imbedded in a block of glass so that it might be touched by museum visitors; about 2 cubic mm had been chipped away and a missing corner of the triangle and a scratch over the surface had become visible in the single beam of light that illuminated the sample. NASA had sent experts to photograph the damage and to vacuum the exhibit area for any dust or small chips that might have come off the sample. Electronic security measures were being increased, and a fulltime guard had been stationed near the display, as a result of the incident. (WPost, 12 Sept 76, B-3; Av WTc, 27 Sept 76, 16)
Moon rocks—prime celebrities 5 yr ago—had become has-beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astronauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg of lunar material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments returned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 51 U.S. governors; chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is. had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said, although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwindled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved. Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and 2, Sterba wrote. (ATT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
MSFC reported an unprecedented amount of data distributed to and used by the scientific community as a result of rapport, established under an arrangement known as the Skylab solar workshops, among principal investigators in the Skylab Apollo telescope mount (ATM) project and other scientists. The workshops, supported by NASA, had provided a means of “intense interaction and collaboration” by the participants, MSFC said. The first workshop, held in Oct. 1975 on coronal holes, was attended by 60 scientists representing 19 universities and other institutions; a second workshop in Feb. and the last this wk would conclude the series. The workshops met near the High Altitude Observatory at Boulder, Colo., under fairly isolated conditions; the scientists were together most of the time, passing on information, explaining discoveries, and talking shop from breakfast until late at night. Jack Zirker of the Univ. of Hawaii’s Institute of Astronomy, director of the first workshop series, said the workshop procedure was “an ideal way to deal with the topic” because participants collaborated closely between meetings, planning and carrying out projects that otherwise might have languished. The next workshop in the series, on solar flares, was scheduled to begin with a first meeting in the last week of Oct. 1976. Discussions at the first meeting would define the total effort; participants would return home to work on individual pieces of the problem. A second meeting 4 or 5 mo later would be a midterm status review and working meeting, with participants contributing information relevant to the total project. At the final workshop, participants would sum up their findings and identify unsolved problems, preparatory to publishing their results. The workshop would produce a monograph summarizing the state of the art at that point. Scientists taking part in the solar workshop series said the system could be adapted readily to research in other scientific fields and was highly productive. (MSFC Release 76-145)
A “mysterious force” on the moon had made one of the remote-controlled stations set up by Apollo astronauts behave peculiarly, Royce Rensberger reported in the N. Y. Times. After operating without interruption since its placement on the lunar surface in Feb. 1971, the station went dead, returned to life spontaneously a few weeks later, then went dead again. Engineers at JSC were waiting to see if the unknown influence would switch the station on again. Called ALSEPs, for Apollo lunar scientific experiment packages, the five stations deployed on the moon at intervals since Nov. 1969 had been sending a steady stream of scientific data on moonquakes, heat flowing from the moon’s interior, and the nature of particles in the solar wind; the atomic power supplies, designed for a 1-yr lifetime, had proved more durable. The faulty station, left by the Apollo 14 mission, stopped receiving ground commands in March 1975 when its receiver failed; on 18 Jan. 1976, its transmitter stopped; on Feb. 19, the entire station came back to life—both receiver and transmitter working—and one experiment that had never operated during lunar daytime began working flawlessly night and day. Then, exactly a month later, the entire station shut down again. One theory was that the starts and stops might relate to extreme temperature changes on the moon, varying from 121 °C at lunar noonday to — 184°C at lunar midnight. However, as day and night had not originally affected the station’s operation, scientists could not explain why temperature change did not produce failure from the start. (NYT, 9 Apr 76, 4)
NASA announced selection of 8 scientists as a team to develop experiments for a proposed unmanned lunar mission in 1980, under study at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The mission would use a low-cost instrumented polar-orbiting spacecraft with a smaller companion subsatellite, launched together from Cape Canaveral on a single Delta vehicle, to orbit the moon for a yr and examine nearly the entire lunar surface from pole to pole, on both near and far sides, to expand knowledge gained from the small areas visited by previous U.S. and Soviet missions to the whole of the moon. This first U.S. lunar mission since Apollo 17 in 1972 would also be the first global survey of a body other than earth. The 8 experiment areas would provide measurements for scientists to determine the moon’s gravity, magnetism, and heat flow, and the chemical and mineral composition of the moon’s surface. Advanced remote sensing—gamma-ray, x-ray, and reflection spectroscopy—would be used in 3 of the experiments to create chemical maps of the lunar surface; a fourth experiment, spectrostereo imaging, would provide photographic data to match these maps with individual features of the lunar landscape. Magnetometer and electron reflector experiments would map electrical and magnetic properties of the lunar surface and subsurface; the remaining 2 experiments—heat flow and gravity field—would provide information on the deep interior of the moon. The gravity field would be mapped by tracking the polar-orbiting spacecraft circling at an altitude of 100 km above the lunar surface; the subsatellite, in a higher orbit up to 5000 km, would track the orbiter when it was hidden from earth by the moon. Mascons (mass concentrations) on the near side of the moon had been discovered by analyzing similar tracking data during the early lunar-orbiter flights in the l960s; the proposed experiment would determine whether such mascons existed on the far side of the moon, besides providing information on the lunar interior. Principal investigators named were: gamma-ray spectrometry, Dr. James R. Arnold, Univ. of Calif, at San Diego; spectrostereo imaging, Merton E. Davies, RAND Corp.; electron reflection, Dr. Robert P. Lin, Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley; infrared spectrometry, Dr. Thomas B. McCord, MIT; microwave radiometry, Dr. Duane 0. Muhleman, CalTech; gravity and altimetry, Dr. Roger J. Phillips, JPL; magnetometry, Dr. Christopher T. Russell, Univ. of Calif, at Los Angeles; x-ray spectrometry, Dr. Jacob L. Trombka, Goddard Space Flight Center. Each of the 8 principal investigators would be accompanied by groups of coinvestigators; the 71-member science team would be aided by JPL staff members. JPL scientist in charge of the study was Dr. T.V. Johnson. (NASA Release 76-119)
The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn, Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site—now marked by a granite monument—and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar landing. The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of 56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen. By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over 110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about the Auburn flight ... In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the 1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to supersonic. Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass, ceremonies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the scheduled helicopter could not fly. (ATT, 16 Mar 76, 16; W Post, 17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar 76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club, 19 Mar 76)
Veteran astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Apollo commander of the U.S.-Russian Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975, received the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1975, the Natl. Geographic Society announced. Gen. David C. Jones, USAF Chief of Staff, presented the award, honoring the late Air Force Chief of Staff and given annually to the member of the Air Force, military or civilian, who contributed most significantly in the preceding yr to U.S. progress in aerospace. Maj. Gen. Stafford’s citation noted “outstanding contributions ... by his participation in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . [He] was instrumental in establishing the necessary rapport and spirit of cooperation vital to the success of the mission. Under his leadership, the Apollo crew laid the basic groundwork for future international technological achievements in space and proved that the United States is the acknowledged leader in space exploration.” Attending the ceremony with Stafford’s Air Force colleagues and officers of the Natl. Geographic Society were former astronaut Michael Collins, now director of the National Air and Space Museum, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, formerly Secretary of the Air Force and Deputy Administrator of NASA, now Administrator of the Energy Research and Development Administration. (NGS release, 30 Sept 76) During September: Ames Research Center’s Astrogram published an interview with the center’s first female aircraft mechanic: a co-op student, Maria-Elena Sanchez, enrolled in a airframe and power mechanics course at the College of San Mateo. She was one of four females in the program, whose total enrollment was about 200. As a mechanic at ARC, Ms. Sanchez was performing general maintenance and upkeep on Lear jets and the Cessna 402; for her work at Ames, she was receiving both monetary compensation and college credit. The college program required a student to attend for about 30 mo a school approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, then pass a written, oral, and practical test to receive a license in Airframe and Power Plant Mechanics. Ms. Sanchez, who held a commercial pilot’s license and had been flying since 1971, said she hoped to complete the program and obtain the A&P license within a yr. (ARC Astrogram, 9 Sept 76, 1)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
NASA announced appointment of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program office at JSC, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Hq, replacing Dr. William C. Schneider. Dr. Schneider had been assigned as director of project management at GSFC. Lunney’s NASA career began at LeRC in 1958; he transferred to the Space Task Group at LaRC in 1959, and moved with that group to JSC. He was manager of the Apollo spacecraft program in 1972, and served as technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 76-183; JSC Release 76-71; JSC Roundup, 19 Nov 76, 1)
Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator of NASA, announced that he would leave government service at the end of June to become president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, where he received his bachelor’s degree in aeronautical engineering in 1948 and master’s in 1950. He had been a trustee of the institute since 1971. In 1949 Low became an aeronautical research scientist at NACA’s Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in Cleveland. When NASA was formed 9 yr later, he came to Hq^ as Chief of Manned Space Flight and was chairman of the committee that planned the Apollo lunar landing program. He became Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight before transferring to the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston in Feb. 1964 as Deputy Director. In April 1967 after the Apollo 204 fire, Low became manager of the Apollo spacecraft program; under his leadership, the spacecraft was redesigned, manned space missions resumed 23 mo later, and Apollo 11 made the first manned lunar landing in July 1969. Appointed Deputy Administrator of NASA by the President in Dec. 1969, Low negotiated the agreements with the USSR that led to the Apollo-Soyuz flight and other cooperative space projects. (NASA Release 76-54; Admr’s letter, 19 Mar 76; NYT, 20 Mar 76, 17; Marshall Star, 24 Mar 76, 1)
NASA announced that it would modify equipment and facilities used in the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz programs for use in future space programs, and that it would dispose of remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware that had no future application. Disposal would eliminate storage costs, free storage space, and make facilities available for ongoing programs, the agency said. The action marked the transition of U.S. manned space activity from use of expendable vehicles to use of the reusable Space Shuttle, scheduled to undertake its first mission within 3 yr. Although NASA, at the request of Congress, had kept its remaining Saturn-Apollo flight hardware since April 1975 in minimum-cost storage, to be able to restore it to flight condition if needed, the backup Skylab workshop and Apollo-Soyuz backup docking module had been transferred to the National Air and Space Museum; twenty-two H-l rocket engines from Saturn stages had been transferred for use in Thor-Delta vehicles. Much of the remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware would probably be turned over to the Smithsonian Institution, and other equipment would be screened for use in the Shuttle or other programs. (NASA Release 76-206)
Timing the rebound of laser pulses aimed at reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts had served to reinforce Einstein’s theory of relativity, according to a study in Physical Review Letters reported by the New York Times. The equivalence principle—that objects of different weight fell at essentially the same speed—was tested in the 16th century by Galileo, who showed that all bodies responded similarly to gravity regardless of size or composition. Einstein’s theory was based on a related assumption, that the mass responsible for an object’s inertia was equivalent to the mass responsible for the gravity that it generated. However, if the gravitational pull of the earth were influenced by the sun’s gravity, the relationship between a body’s inertia and its gravity would not always be uniform, and the report described experiments to test a theoretical departure from equivalence. An eclipse of the sun in 1919 had been used to test Einstein’s theory, and showed that light from distant stars was bent—as expected—as it passed through powerful gravity near the sun. Other experiments—bouncing radar beams off Venus and Mercury to see if the beams were bent or lengthened by the sun’s gravity, or monitoring round-trip signals to Mariner 9 as it sailed behind the sun or radio emissions from quasars in that direction—had narrowed any deviations from Einstein’s formulation to a small margin. The experiments reported recently were independent analyses of 1389 measurements of round-trip travel times of laser pulses aimed at moon reflectors, to detect changes in earth-moon distance to within 127 mm. If earth gravitational energy were influenced by the sun’s gravity, the effect would alter the earth’s gravity more than that of the moon, and the moon’s motion about the earth would deviate by as much as a meter from conventional predictions. The experiments showed no such effect. (NYT, 16 Mar 76, 17)
Scientists using a NASA S-band radar obtained the first detailed pictures of the surface of Venus, NASA announced. Installed at the Arecibo radar observatory in Puerto Rico under a $3-million NASA contract, the S-band system was 50 times more sensitive than equipment previously available for radar observations of Venus. Optical telescopes had been unable to penetrate the dense cloudcover of Venus, but the Arecibo radar had produced high-quality photograph-like images with a clarity like that of optical photographs of the moon taken from earth. Data were obtained during a series of daily 2-hr observations in the months before and after the close approach of Venus to the earth in late August 1975. Radar echoes of the signal from a powerful transmitter operating at a 12.6-cm wavelength were measured for strength, precise frequency, and time of arrival by a 330-m radiotelescope at Arecibo and an auxiliary 30-m telescope about 10.5 km distant; the two telescopes constituted an interferometer that enabled mapping of areas with detailed definition and precise location of the echoing regions. Venus features as small as 19 km could be distinguished. In the area about 10.25 million sq km mapped by the radar, scientists had observed a large basin bordered by ejecta suggesting its formation by impacts like those that created the maria on the moon, as well as a very bright area “about the size of Oklahoma” tentatively named Maxwell (for the 19th-century physicist) which appeared to result from processes internal to Venus— possibly a large eruption of lava—with long parallel ridges unlike features on either the earth or the moon. (NASA Release 76-153; A^IT, 10 Sept 76, A-l)
Charles W. Mathews, NASA Associate Administrator of Applications, retired after 33 yr of government service with NASA and its parent organization, NACA. As a member of the science staff at the Langley Research Center since 1943, he was chairman of the group that developed specifications for the Mercury spacecraft before NASA was established. When Mercury became an official program in 1958, Mathews transferred to Houston (now the Johnson Space Center), serving as manager of the Gemini program. Upon completion of Gemini, Mathews went to NASA Hq as director of the Skylab program (then known as Apollo Applications Program); in 1968, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and remained in that position until 1971. Awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson in 1966 for contributions to the manned space program, Mathews received the award a second time in 1969 for contributions to the first manned lunar landing. At his retirement, he stated that he would “continue to devote effort to the further realization of the tremendous potential of space . . .” (NASA Release 76-38)
Atomic reactor waste buried in the Ural Mountains had exploded in 1958, killing hundreds and affecting thousands with radiation sickness, according to an exiled Soviet scientist whose article in the British New Scientist was reported by Associated Press. Zhores Medvedev, a biochemist and geneticist who had been a wellknown dissident in the Soviet Union, had been allowed to go to Britain in Jan. 1973 but became an exile when Soviet authorities refused to allow him to return. His article said that reactor waste buried for many years in a deserted area had overheated and erupted “like a violent volcano,” and that strong winds had blown the resulting radioactive clouds for a long distance; however, no one had been evacuated from the area until after symptoms of radiation sickness appeared. Many Ural towns with medium to high levels of radiation had never been evacuated, he said, adding that the area was among several that were off limits to Western correspondents. Medvedev said several biology research stations had been built in what was “the largest area of gamma radiation in the world” to study the damage to plant and animal life. In 1974, a Soviet official denied reports of explosions at the the Shavchenko nuclear power station on the Caspian Sea, at the same time that Pravda, the Communist Party newspaper, was assuring the public that radioactive wastes had been stored safely. Another Soviet disaster had occurred in Oct. 1960, Medvedev said, when then-Premier Nikita Krushchev ordered the launch of a moon rocket to be timed with his arrival in New York City for a session of the UN General Assembly. When the ignition button was pushed, nothing happened; under normal procedures, Medvedev said, workers would drain the fuel from the rocket before inspecting to find the cause of the failure. However, Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, then head of Soviet rocket forces, felt himself “under an obligation to fulfill the ambitious order” issued by Krushchev and decided to investigate immediately. While dozens of engineers and other experts were examining the rocket and its support systems, the ignition suddenly started to work, but the rocket could not take off because of “the forest of inspection ladders.” The rocket toppled over and turned the Soviet cosmodrome into a holocaust, killing many persons in the area, including “some of the best representatives of Soviet space technology,” Medvedev said. AP noted that the Soviet media routinely ignore all disasters, whether natural or manmade. (WPost, 7 Nov 76, A-1; WStar, 7 Nov 76, B-8; Av Wk, 15 Nov 76, 20)
Instruments left on the moon’s surface during the Apollo program were continuing to transmit information from 13 experiments, JSC announced. The Apollo 12 mission (Nov. 1969) accounted for 2 of the experiments; Apollo 15 (July-Aug. 1971), for 3; Apollo 16 (April 1972), for 3; and Apollo 17 (Dec. 1972), for 5. Findings included the discovery that the moon did in fact possess an atmosphere, only about a millimeter thick and composed of ions of light minerals, and that the first two layers below the moon’s surface consisted largely of basaltic rock and silicon. Data transmitted by 5 of the nuclear transmitters still operating were sent to stations at JPL, Pasadena, Calif., and GSFC, Greenbelt, Md., where they were analyzed by 10 scientists. (NYT, 7 Nov 76, 45)
Food preparation and packaging techniques developed by NASA to feed Apollo and Skylab crews during space flight had been used in a pilot program to provide balanced nutrition to elderly persons living alone, the Johnson Space Center announced. The program, called Meal Systems for the Elderly, was part of JSC’s Technology Utilization program to apply space-developed technology to solution of earthbound problems. The goal was to provide a meal system that could be opened, cooked, eaten, and cleaned up by older people living alone; each meal would provide at least a third of the daily diet allowance for an older person, and a field demonstration had been scheduled that would evaluate the meal design and delivery methods by the end of 1976. The JSC team developing the program would aim at a shelf-stable, multimeal package that could be distributed by several methods—even parcel post—to senior citizens living beyond the range of hot-meal delivery or to those in areas where meals were not provided. (NASA Release 76-6; JSC Release 76-02)
A giant Air Force antenna at Hamilton, Mass., that had shared in transatlantic communications with the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England by way of moon reflections would be dismantled and moved to Westford, Mass., for use by the Lincoln Laboratory of MIT in radar studies of earth’s upper atmosphere, the AFSC Newsreview announced. The big dish, nearly 46 m in diameter, had been used by the USAF Geophysics Laboratory since 1962 for ionospheric and radioastronomy studies, as well as in auroral studies using satellite beacons. Continuing USAF research at Hamilton’s Sagamore Hill Observatory would use the facility’s 25.6-m antenna and smaller receivers. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 76, 10) October 1976
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, published a book, Tektites and Their Origin, which noted that a piece of the moon could be purchased for a small amount. Tektites, the glass pebbles that fall from the sky, are ejecta from lunar volcanoes and not debris of meteorite impacts on the moon or the earth as previously suggested. Lunar missions that discovered tektite-like glass in the dust at some sites, the study of microscopic tektites from the bottom of earth’s seas, and the volcanic appearance of some layered tektites caused the change in ideas. (Goddard News, July 76, 3)
Commercial supersonic transatlantic transport service began with the arrival of Concorde aircraft from London and Paris at Dulles airport near Washington, D.C. The Anglo-French plane had been barred from New York’s John F. Kennedy airport under a ruling by the Port Authority of N.Y. and N.J. after Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, British Airways Concorde rolling out at Dulles Airport near Washington, D.C., after first touchdown 24 May 1981. (Photo courtesy British Airways) Jr., granted limited scheduled flights into the U-S, for a trial period not to exceed 16 mo [see 5 Jan.-4 Feb.]. The Concordes arrived at Dulles 2 min apart, British Airways arriving at 11:54 am EDT and Air France at 11 ;56, taxiing into a nose-to-nose position in front of the main terminal building. About 8000 persons were on hand for the landing, many of them leaving their cars and walking in on the limited-access highway because of the traffic backup; of the crowd, airport officials estimated that only about 20 were there to protest the Concorde landings. The French flight carried 80 passengers, the British flight 75; both Air France and British Airways had limited passenger payloads to 80 on Concorde flights until they gained more experience with the aircraft’s fuel consumption. The two carriers had selected Monday for the inauguration of North Atlantic service because neither would ordinarily offer a Washington-bound flight that day. Air France planned 3-per-wk flights, leaving Paris on Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday and returning to Paris on Monday, Thursday, and Saturday. British Airways would offer 2 trips per wk, leaving London’s Heathrow on Thursday and Saturday and returning on Friday and Sunday, One-way fare London to Washington would be $633.60; Paris-Washington, $827. The difference would arise from fluctuations in currency exchange. The trip took 3 hr 50 min for the Air France plane, spending 2 hr 53 min at supersonic speeds on the way. The British plane timed on its return flight took 3 hr 57 min. The Federal Aviation Administration had instrumented the Dulles airport with 8 permanent and 5 portable recorder units to measure the perceived noise in decibels (pndh) for a data base on all airport noise and especially Concorde noise. {NYT, 25 May 76, 1; W Post, 25 May 76, A-1, Av Wk, 24 May 76, 27; 31 May 76, 22) universities were resource persons for 4 news briefings per day, each scheduled for an hr or more, and 5 science workshops, meeting in the morning and afternoon each day, with a wrapup session the afternoon of the third day. Topics discussed were Jupiter’s atmosphere and weather; magnetosphere and radiation belts; origins, characteristics, and composition of the planet and its moons; origin of life on the planet; and Pioneer 11 targeting toward Saturn upon its departure from the vicinity of Jupiter. Pioneer findings about Jupiter—characterized by low density and high mass, 318 times that of earth, containing three quarters of the planetary material in the solar system—included discovery that Jupiter’s Great Red Spot, three times the size of earth, was not the only such spot; several smaller ones detected in the atmospheric flow around Jupiter moved in and out of the area occupied by the Great Red Spot without losing their own identity. Pioneer measurements of Jupiter properties— internal heat, composition of its moons—permitted the first detailed calculations of the process that formed the planet. Its history was apparently that of a failed star: it went from a gas cloud to a body heated red-hot by gravitational contraction, then to a 4.5-billion-yr cooling, still in process, that made it resemble a “white dwarf.” The four planet-size inner moons—Jupiter’s “Galilean” satellites—proved scientifically the most interesting; they exhibited a regular density gradient and composition that constituted the best direct evidence for Jupiter’s history. The protostar phases deduced for both Jupiter and Saturn indicated that the outer solar system underwent 2 different periods of relatively high temperature. Jupiter had retained for 4 billion yr its primordial heat, which could be neither radiated nor conducted away because of the planet’s composition. A “new metal”—liquid metallic hydrogen, simplest of the alkaline metals—identified only inside Jupiter is thought to constitute the planet’s interior, beginning about of a quarter of the distance from the surface to the center. As the substance has low thermal conductivity and is opaque to radiated energy, the heat cannot be dissipated, and the temperature at Jupiter’s center is about 30 000°, 6 times that of the surface of the sun. As Jupiter’s liquid regions are too hot for life, living organisms would have to exist in its gaseous atmosphere. Between the temperatures for freezing and boiling water, Jupiter’s atmospheric pressure increases with depth from 5 times earth’s atmospheric pressure to 10 times. Pioneer data suggest slow atmosphere-turnover times of months or years that would permit survival of atmosphere-borne life, said Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma of the Univ. of Md. Jupiter was 1000 times as large a region for forming complex organic molecules as earth, and a wide variety of environments would be available. The origin of life on a planet would depend less on huge time periods than on how often nature mixed the proper ingredients in the proper environment, Dr. Ponnamperuma said; enough billions or trillions of attempts could produce a highly complex molecule able to replicate itself. The fact that Jupiter’s atmosphere might provide hospitable sites for life raised the problem of contamination of that atmosphere by earth organisms riding on atmosphere probes launched by the U.S. and other countries. Pioneer also found that Jupiter acted as a giant vacuum cleaner, sucking small dust particles from a vast region of space (comparatively little dust was present in the Asteroid Belt), and 170 times as many meteoroids were striking Jupiter’s atmosphere as struck the earth in areas of similar size. Concentrations of these particles at Jupiter would be the result of the planet’s enormous gravity field. Jupiter’s magnetosphere—a million times the volume of earth’s—was found to leak high-energy electrons; Jupiter was the major source of such electrons in the solar system, and the sun and Jupiter were the only known important sources of high-energy particles in the solar system. The energy of these particles was constantly increased by recirculation through the planet’s radiation belts, said Dr. James Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa. Earthorbiting satellites and other spacecraft had detected Jupiter electrons as far away as Mercury, said Dr. John Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago; an input of more than 100 billion watts would be needed to maintain the observed energies. Jupiter was also known to be the strongest radio source in the sky, except for the sun; the massive radio bursts were caused by the moon Io moving through the Jovian magnetic field, said Dr. David Morrison of the Univ. of Hawaii. Scientific detective work revealed that the bursts occurred every 21 hr—half of Io’s orbital period—and one of 3 places on Jupiter’s visible surface had to face the earth, which Pioneer data proved to be true. (NASA Releases 76-80, 76-91; NYT, 31 May 76, 14)
The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifications to McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a 1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lockheed L-101 Is and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near Paris of a DC-10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a 1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976—without Me Lucas’s knowledge—but all U.S. airlines flying DC-10s had agreed to comply with the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 31 March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. (WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9) During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that, during the 69th annual general conference of the Federation Aero-nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FAI gold space medal was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for duration, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and execution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space. (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)
An enormous radiotelescope “the size of the earth” to be used in studying the process of star formation in earth’s galaxy had been constructed by linking installations in Washington, D.C., California, Australia, and the Soviet Union, the Naval Research Laboratory announced. Four large radiotelescopes distributed around the world had joined in using very long-baseline interferometry (VLBl) to record microwave signals received at each antenna on videotape, and comparing the recordings. The resultant huge antenna would be able to resolve a source less than 2 ten-thousandths of a second of arc, comparable to the thickness of a human hair at a 161-km distance, or a man’s footprint on the moon. An instrument this size would be needed to study primordial clouds in the constellation Aquila containing water-vapor molecules that emit intense microwave radiation through maser amplification, analogous to the operation of optical lasers. These water-vapor masers seem to be associated with star formation taking place in giant clouds in the galaxy; sizes of the individual masing sources, which may number more than 100 in a single cloud, range from half to 3 times the distance between the sun and the earth. The masing radiation offered a way to study the clouds that obscure radiation at other frequencies and to estimate the physical conditions that surround star formation. Installations in the experiment were NRL’s 26-m antenna at its Maryland Point, Md., observatory; NASA’s Deep Space Network 64-m antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia; the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory’s 22-m antenna at Semeiz, USSR; and the Calif. Institute of Technology’s 39-m antenna at Owens Valley, Calif. The maximum spacing achievable is the earth’s diameter (12 600 km), a distance approximating the separation between the Md. and Australian antennas (12 091 km). (NRL Release 45-7-76B/HF; NYT, 20 July 76, 13)
A device used in training Apollo astronauts was adapted to assist persons incapable of supporting their entire weight with their legs. Developed at Langley Research Center, the flying lunar-excursion experimental platform would exert a constant weight-relieving force during any vertical movement by the patient; the supporting force would be selected for a particular patient, and could be changed as the patient’s condition improved. Besides its application as a device for exercise during rehabilitation, the apparatus showed potential for use in warehouses and storage facilities where heavy equipment was handled. The project was directed by LaRC’s Technology Utilization Office. (Langley Researcher, 5 Mar 76, 7)
The USSR would probably put men on the moon within 10 yr to do more ambitious exploration than that done by U.S. astronauts, according to a report on Soviet space programs 1971-1975 by the Science Policy Research Division of the Library of Congress’s Congressional Research Division. Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, II, chief of the Science Policy Research Division, stated in the report that the USSR did not abandon lunar plans when Apollo 11 got to the moon in July 1969, but that the Soviet program had been plagued with “hardware and systems . . . quite inadequate by our standards.” In a summary of Dr. Sheldon’s report, the Washington Star noted his statement that the “race for the moon” was closer than many believed at the time; “the Soviets probably wanted to send the first manned flight around the moon by November 1967, when a test failed.” Although a Soviet Apollo would probably not appear for the next 3 yr, Dr. Sheldon said, “within the decade there will probably be a Soviet landing on the moon that will be a generation beyond the Apollo flights . . . .” Describing the extensive Soviet military uses of space in addition to scientific and economic purposes, the report noted “the seriousness and steadiness with which the Russians are adding to their space facilities and their space operations, building versatility and experience in depth.” The report did not mention the absence of this element in the U.S., the Star noted. The report would be published later in 1976 by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, for which it was prepared. (WStar, 2 June 76, A-3)
A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences, named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a 2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regulate fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15% a year, about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal. An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone, meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the Univ. of Mich, report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr. The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone reduction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the Univ. of Mich, had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons. Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Lawrence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H. Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the chemistry were pinned down, the effect of SST operations could not be determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratospheric processes, the team said. (NYT14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14; W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-l; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49) The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity. Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms. After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated 180° instead of 45° as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday, 17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument. At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33% more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20 times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample, apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber. Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accompanied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, considered the least ambiguous of the detectors. Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest, earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher, therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother, considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared on the moon and on earth. {WStar, 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2; WPost, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-l; 17 Sept 76, A-4; ATT, 17 Sept 76, A14; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
Endorsed by the state of Colo, as a bicentennial project, a mobile space museum prepared by the High Flight Foundation—a nonprofit religious organization founded in 1972 by Apollo 15 astronaut Col. James R. Irwin—would tour the U.S. to give residents of 30 cities a chance to see a large exhibit on national accomplishments in space. The exhibit would include tools and photographs, miscellaneous objects and films. During the tour, various state governors participating in bicentennial celebrations would receive from the astronauts state flags that had been flown to the moon. With Col. Irwin on the board of the High Flight Foundation were astronauts Col. William R. Pogue (Skylab 3) and Col. Alfred M. Worden (Apollo 15). (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 8)
MSFC announced development of a new system of vehicle mobility that could greatly extend unmanned explorations on the surface of Mars and other planets. The concept grew out of work on the successful lunar roving vehicle that carried astronauts and equipment on extended exploration of the moon, far from the lunar module’s landing site. Scientists had regretted the lack of mobility of the Viking landers on the surface of Mars, because the data on atmosphere and terrain had been limited to the landing site. The new idea, called Elastic Loop Mobility System (ELMS), would use a continuous elastic-loop track in place of the landing pads; the track would distribute lander weight uniformly over a relatively large area, with suspension and drive systems on the spacecraft combined into a single lightweight package. The geometry of the loop would serve to provide “excellent mobility” on soft soils and smooth rides over hard and rough terrain. Tests on models revealed slope-climbing capability, high maneuverability, and power to surmount obstacles and cross crevasses. Combining the ELMS with existing Viking hardware would produce a mobile laboratory that could conduct scientific missions on the Mars surface for 6 mo along traverses up to 150 km. Recent reviews of a possible mobile-Viking mission to Mars, using the ELMS concept, considered extending the mission to 2 yr along traverses up to 500 km. The low ground clearance of the Viking spacecraft, together with the low ground-pressure tolerances on soft Martian soil, ruled out the use of wheels for mobility, as well as the use of conventional tracks because of high energy consumption and low operational reliability. Besides use of the MSFC-developed ELMS for planetary exploration, the U.S. Marine Corps had considered the system for a new generation of amphibious landing vehicles for the 1980s, a MSFC spokesman said. (MSFC Release 76-191)
Comet West, one of the few such objects visible to the unaided eye in daylight, reached maximum visibility in the eastern sky before sunrise this week. Having skirted the sun a week ago, the comet had become less brilliant as its distance from the sun increased, but was more easily seen as it moved away from the sun. The comet was said to be the brightest such object since Comet Bennett’s appearance in 1970. The comet had appeared in photographs taken in August 1975 at an observatory in the Chilean Andes, but was not identified until Richard West, a Dane working in Geneva, studied the photographs. Comets are of special interest because they are thought to be composed of materials from the outer fringes of the solar system. Reports from Italy, Switzerland, and elsewhere described the comet’s tail as 2 to 4 times the apparent diameter of the moon, unusually short for so bright a comet. NASA reported extensive observations of the comet using rockets, highflying aircraft, and ground-based instruments; smog or clouds might make ground observation difficult. (NYT, 2 Mar 76, 17; 9 Mar 76, 43; B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
Gerald D. Griffin, Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in NASA Hq’s Office of Space Flight, had been named Deputy Director of the Dryden Flight Research Center effective 1 May, NASA announced. Griffin joined NASA in 1964 and served as a flight controller at Johnson Space Center during the Gemini program before being named an Apollo flight director in 1968; he served in that position on all 11 Apollo missions, and was lead flight director on Apollo missions 12, 15, and 17. He went to NASA Hq in 1973 and had previously been Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs. He had served in the Air Force and was an aerospace engineer with Lockheed and with General Dynamics before coming to NASA. (NASA Release 76-66; DFRC Release 5-76)
