U.S. interplanetary spacecraft had confirmed that the planet Jupiter was emitting high-energy electrons over a vast region of space, Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times. The spring meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C. heard Dr. John A. Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago and others describe the Jupiter emissions as similar to pulsars—electromagnetic radiation appearing as pulses sweeping through space like airport beacons—but carrying the “signature” of the planet’s spin rate, picked up every lOhr as a rotation was completed. Dr. Simpson said Jupiter was not a direct analogy of pulsars but would offer common features that might provide clues to an understanding of both. Observations of the Jupiter emissions had come from Pioneer 10, which had passed Jupiter in Dec. 1973 and was now beyond the orbit of Saturn, and from Pioneer 11, which had first passed Jupiter in Dec. 1974 and was scheduled to approach Saturn in Sept. 1979. The volume of Jupiter’s magnetosphere had been estimated as 5 times that of the sun’s; lo, innermost moon of Jupiter, had an orbit within the magnetosphere and its radiation belt (a greatly intensified version of earth’s Van Allen belt), and the unusual brightness of lo on emerging from Jupiter’s shadow had been attributed to particle activity. The 2 Voyager spacecraft to be launched this yr toward Jupiter and Saturn would be programmed to investigate further when they arrived nearby in March and July of 1979. (NYT, June 2/77, B4)
The Apollo program was a tough act to follow, Space Shuttle pilot Lt. Col. Charles Fullerton said in a Today wire service report. Acknowledging the declining public interest in space, Fullerton noted that, after Apollo, “Everything else has to be anticlimactic.” {Today, Apr 4/77,1A)
NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
The U.S. should orbit solar-power stations Emd mine the moon for raw materials, science fiction writer Isaac Asimov told President Csirter in an open letter printed in the Chicago Tribune. Citing the benefits of orbitsd stations capable of transmitting solar energy in microwaves to earth stations, Asimov stressed the need for international cooperation in using space and in preventing the extinction of humanity. (C Trib, Mar 26/77, 1-7)
Johnson Space Center confirmed that NASA would turn off science instruments on the lunar surface and would dismantle the JSC control center for Apollo lunar-surface experiment packages (ALSEP) as of Sept. 30. The five stations still operating were put there by Apollo missions 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17. In July 1969 the original moonwalkers of Apollo 11 had left behind a prototype station with a design life of only 14 days; it had survived for 45 days and quit when its power supply failed. Specifications for the remaining five had included a lyr design life for 4, and 2yr for the Apollo 17 station; the Apollo 12 station was “well into its eighth year,” NASA noted. Built to record and transmit long-term lunar-surface data, the stations with their long life had provided researchers with a real bonus: instead of data from only one seismometer at a time, for instance, the group had operated as a sensor network, greatly enhancing available information on the moon’s internal temperature and magnetic field, charged particles in its environment, and especially moonquakes and meteoroid impacts. Although the experiments would be terminated, the transmitters would continue to operate, serving earth as an astronomy reference point. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use the signals in deep space work such as astrometrics and spacecraft navigation or monitoring the motion of the lunar orbit against a background of extragalactic stars to test gravity theories. The lunar stations had had problems: The Apollo 14 ALSEP ran for 4yr, quit for 2 days in March 1975, started up again, and had repeated this 6 times since. Understanding the trouble (temperature fluctuations resulting from the sun’s position had caused short circuits) would help in designing future science stations. (JSC Release 77-47; NASA Release 77-203)
Ames Research Center announced that NASA had chosen 29 experimenters for the atmosphere probe portion of the Jupiter mission [see Aug. 29]. The probe would carry 6 experiments into Jupiter’s atmosphere; 5 of the experimenters would be interdisciplinary scientists, and 24 would be assigned to the 6 experiments: helium interferometer, Dr. Ulf von Zahn, Federal Republic of Germany, principal investigator; mass spectrometer, Dr. H.B. Niemann, Goddard Space Flight Center; atmospheric structure, Dr. Alvin Sieff, ARC; nephelometer, Dr. Boris Ragent, ARC; net-flux radiometer, Dr. R.W. Boese, ARC; sferics receiver, Dr. L.J. Lanzerotti, Bell Laboratories. The probe would separate from the orbiter about 55 days away from the planet, continuing on a separate flight path for about 30min of highspeed descent while relaying information to earth through the orbiter. After the entry probe concluded its work, the orbiter would fly close to Jupiter’s moon Ganymede and near the large moons Io, Europa, and Callisto. ARC’S Dr. Lawrence Colin would be project scientist for the Jupiter probe; JPL would manage the Jupiter orbiter/probe project. (ARC Release 77-40)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
NASA reported that Dr. Herbert Frey, a NASA-Univ. of Md. scientist working at GSFC, had prepared a paper for presentation June 2 at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., suggesting that asteroid bombardment more than 4 billion yr ago that created earth’s ocean basins had resulted in the development of life on this planet. Building on the work of other scientists, including that of GSFC’s Dr. Paul Lowman on earth’s crustal evolution, Dr. Frey used data from Apollo lunar landings and photography from spacecraft studies of the moon, Mercury, and Mars to show that during the reference period all the inner bodies suffered heavy asteroid impacts which must have affected earth as well. The impacts led to geological changes on earth that resulted in plate tectonics and the formation of seabeds. If the presence of life had eventuated from catastrophic bombardment by asteroids, the paper noted, then life elsewhere might also depend upon such events. (NASA Release 77-105)
NASA announced it had appointed Gerald D. Griffin, deputy director of Dryden Flight Research Center since 1976, to be deputy director of Kennedy Space Center as of July 1. He would replace Miles Ross, who resigned from NASA in May. Griffin had worked at NASA Hq for 3yr, as asst, administrator for legislative affairs, then as deputy associate administrator for operations in the Office of Space Flight. At Johnson Space Center, Griffin had been a flight controller during the Gemini program, a flight director on all 11 Apollo missions, and lead flight director on Apollo 12, 15, and 17. Among his awards were NASA exceptional service medals for his work on Apollo 12 and 15, the presidential Medal of Freedom group achievement award for Apollo 13, and the Hq creative management award. (NASA Release 77-109; DFRC Release 20-77)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that President Carter had declared July 16-24 as a U.S. Space Observance, the dates chosen by Congress to coincide with the anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing as well as Apollo-Soyuz and the Viking 1 landing on Mars. Dr. Frosch said that the president’s recognition of NASA achievements “should serve as inspiration and encouragement to all of us.” (NASA anno July 14/77)
NASA announced that a test model of Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to reached Jupiter, would be on display at the Natl. Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., beginning Jan. 11. The actual spacecraft, launched March 3, 1972, had reached Jupiter in Dec. 1973 and was now about 1.6 billion km (about a billion miles) from earth headed for the orbit of Uranus, which it should reach in Sept. 1979, by the time its sister spacecraft Pioneer 11 would reach Saturn. Headed generally toward Aldebaran in the constellation Taurus, Pioneer 10 would reach the orbit of Pluto (about 4 billion miles out) in 1987, but radio-signal reception would be doubtful beyond the orbit of Uranus. The model of the first spacecraft scheduled to leave the earth’s solar system would appear in the Milestones of Flight hall with the Wright Flyer, the Spirit of St. Louis, and the Apollo 11. (NASA Release 77-1; ARC Release 77-1)
KSC reported that the number of visitors in the first 3mo of 1977 was 283 734; the number in March, 114 845, highest so far this yr was 2.8% below the March 1976 level. The 3mo total was 9.3% less than the first 3mo of 1976. The visitor center had displays, exhibits, space science lectures, and space movies, plus a new hall of history opened in 1976. Visitors could see the vehicle assembly building for Space Shuttle preparations and the Apollo Saturn on display nearby, drive around Pad A where Shuttle operations were in progress, and visit the Cape Canaveral Air Force station. (KSC Release 87-77)
JSC and the Lunar Science Institute announced plans for the 8th annual lunar science conference in Flouston, March 14-18. More than 600 scientists from around the world would discuss new data about the moon, derived from studies of lunar samples and from Apollo surface and orbital experiments, as well as new interpretations of previous models of lunar origin and history. Several Soviet scientists would attend, to give NASA materials from the Luna 24 mission for analysis. Dr. Michael G. Duke, acting chief of JSC’s Lunar and Planetary Sciences Division, and Dr. Robert Pepin, outgoing director of the Lunar Science Institute, would cochair the conference. The conference would also be the second meeting on “planetary” science, continuing the practice of the 1976 conference, where planetary interests were discussed for the first time as a result of the accumulation of data from NASA and USSR missions to Venus, Mercury, Mars, and the outer planets. The assembled data on planetary origin and evolution had proved of primary interest to lunar scientists. (JSC Release 77-09)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
KSC reported that the 10th anniversary of the maiden flight of Saturn V, world’s most powerful rocket, had passed without fanfare. Apollo 4 had lifted off Nov. 9, 1967, from KSC’s Complex 39A in a successful demonstration of Saturn V’s flightworthiness and the Apollo spacecraft’s ability to withstand the intense heat of reentry. (KSC Spaceport News, Nov 11/77, 2)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administration of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) for periods up to 24hr. The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release 101-77)
NASA announced retirement effective Dec. 31 of Gerald M. Truszyn-ski, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, after 33yr of service to NASA and its predecessor, NACA. In 1944, he had begun working at NACA’s Langley aeronautical laboratory as an engineer in instrument research and development, and had transferred 3yr later to the NACA station at Edwards, Calif., an instrument project engineer on the rocket-powered X-l, first airplane to surpass the speed of sound. In 1954 he had become chief of the instrumentation division at Edwards, heading development and operation of systems for NACA’s jet- and rocket-powered craft (X-l, X-2, D-558, and X-15) that pioneered supersonic and hypersonic flight. At NASA Hq after 1960, Truszynski occupied his present position in 1968, succeeding from the post of deputy that he had held since its creation in 1961. He had been responsible for planning, development, and operation of global tracking systems, networks, and facilities for communications and for data acquisition and processing in all NASA’s spaceflight programs. In 1969 he had received NASA’s highest award (the distinguished service medal) twice, for support of Apollo manned flights to lunar orbit and of the first moon landing. Upon his departure, Norman Pozinski would be acting associate administrator. (NASA anno Nov 5/77; NASA Release 77-248)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
The Washington Post reported on Sputnik 7's 20th anniversary as observed in the Soviet Union. Sputnik had set off a “search for nationhood in the United States even as it seemed to confirm it in the Soviet Union . . . Ask any Soviet citizen above the age of 24 and each can tell you exactly where they were and what they were doing when they heard ... a Soviet satellite was in orbit.” The U.S. search ended “in a symbolic and reeil sense” with the moon landing 8.5yr ago. However, the certainty of power that Sputnik gave the USSR “has never quite materialized out of the void of space.” The A-2, early main launch vehicle for the USSR “civilian” program, was still that today. U.S. experts in the joint Apollo-Soyuz project had been “dismayed by the crudeness of Soviet space hardware”: one compared the Soyuz craft to a “hot water radiator ... it works, but that’s about all you can say for it.” An aviation weekly, interviewing the experts, said they rated the Soyuz with the Mercury capsule, first U.S. manned spacecraft. “Their scientists are every bit as good as ours,” said one U.S. physicist, “but the technical gap is still huge.” The article noted that the U.S. had dropped its space medicine program in the early 1970s but the USSR had kept on with its, and had maintained large space stations in orbit since 1971 manned with crews up to 63 days at a time. The Soviet space program had had less trouble than the U.S. program “because of the closed nature of the system ... no citizens groups or congressional critics to question the need for a manned space program.” Competition for limited resources was the same in both countries, but “lack of public debate allowed managers luxuries of continuity not available to their counterparts in a democracy.” (WPost, Oct 4/77, A-l)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
KSC announced that the Thunderstorm Research International Program (TRIP) combining efforts of atmospheric physicists and lightning researchers from the U.S., Europe, and Africa would continue in 1978 as they had for the past 2 summers. At the recent meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, KSC had invited the researchers to continue their studies of electrical properties, origins, and effects of thunderstorms. The KSC Spaceport would benefit from the studies by applying the findings in Shuttle launch and landing operations; to have many investigators in the same area studying the same storms and exchanging data would offer more chances of gaining new knowledge than might come from isolated studies. The researchers had funded their own programs, KSC providing meteorological instrumentation, use of the local National Weather Service office, and normal support services such as power, communications, and file processing. KSC, hosting the program for a third consecutive yr, had unique meteorological facilities accumulated during the Apollo and Skylab programs, plus a large number of summer thunderstorms occurring normally in the area. Although KSC would not host the group after next yr, the 1979 study site for continuations of TRIP would be the Langmuir Laboratories at Socorro, N.M., for studies of mountain storms of the southwest. (KSC Release 217-77)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA administrator, announced that the planetary probes scheduled for launch Aug. 20 and Sept. 1 would be named Voyager 1 and Voyager 2. The two craft would view Jupiter, Saturn, and their respective satellite systems, and might also look at Uranus and Neptune. JPL had designed and built both probes. In March 1979 Voyager 1 would pass within 357 000km of Jupiter, the solar system’s largest planet, and go on to rendezvous with Saturn in Nov. 1980, passing within 209 000km of the ringed planet’s cloud tops and within 6430km of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon and the only satellite in the solar system known to have an atmosphere. (NASA Release 77-41)
NASA announced that Thomas C. Duxbury, a guest investigator at JPL, would use the shadow of Martian moon Phobos on Sept. 20, 24, and 28 to pinpoint the exact location of the Viking 1 lander on the planet’s surface. JPL explained that the spacecraft had landed within a known area but was too small for detection by orbiter cameras, which had been unable to tie in photographs of the site to the lander’s position. Duxbury had programmed both the lander and the orbiter to take a picture as the shadow of Phobos passed over the landing site; the time of the photograph and the exact position of the shadow on 3 occasions would permit calculation of the lander’s position. Duxbury was one of 20 chosen to participate in the Viking guest investigator program set up by NASA to offer experimenter opportunities beyond those originally planned for the mission. (NASA Release 77-199)
KSC announced it had awarded a $480 193 fixed-price contract to Reynolds, Smith and Hills of Jacksonville, Fla., for modifications to Complex 39B to adapt it for Shuttle launch operations as had been done to Complex 39A. KSC had used 39B to launch Apollo 10; Skylabs 2, 3, and 4; and the U.S. spacecraft of the Apollo-Soyuz mission. (KSC Release 125-77)
A new $1.6-million infrared telescope with a 92-in-dia. mirror (the world’s largest) to be installed soon in an observatory atop 9656-ft Jelm Mt. in Wyo. would be sensitive enough to measure the heat of a warm iron on the moon, according to Today newspaper. Professors Robert Gehrz and John Hackwell of the Univ. of Wyo. had supervised design of the telescope, which would incorporate a sensor also of then-design: a computerized device sensing heat energy collected by the large mirror and converting it to an infrared contour chart depicting heat intensity as a topographical contour map would depict terrain. Jelm Mt. was considered the best site for the observatory because of the low water vapor in the area, a requirement for good IR reception. The two scientists had persuaded the state legislature of Wyo. in 1975 to appropriate $975 000 for the project; remaining funds had come from the Natl. Science Foundation. (Today, June 12/77, 12A)
James B. Irwin, eighth astronaut to walk on the moon, remained in satisfactory condition after triple bypass surgery at the Texas Heart Institute. “He is still in intensive care but is doing very well,” said a spokesman at St. Lukes Episcopal Hospital in Houston. The operation consisted of replacing three vein segments with veins removed from Irwin’s legs. Irwin, 46, lunar-module pilot on the Apollo 15 mission July 26, 1971, had resigned from the astronaut corps in May 1972. (NYT, Jan 8/77, 17)
NASA announced that Dr. David R. Scott, director of Dryden Flight Research Center, would leave the agency Oct. 30 to form with others a firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer. Deputy Director Isaac T. Gillam would be acting director until a replacement was selected. Before becoming director of DFRC in 1975, Dr. Scott had been deputy director since 1973. He had left the astronaut corps in 1972, having flown on Gemini 8, Apollo 9, and as spacecraft commander of Apollo 15 (fourth manned lunar landing, during which he was first to visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been technical assistant to the Apollo program manager at JSC and special assistant in the Apollo spacecraft program office. (NASA anno Oct 12/77; NASA Release 77-217; DFRC Release 34-77)
The moon landing effort was possible only because the U.S. had laid the basic theoretical groundwork in the 1940s and 1950s, the WPost reported, quoting Richard C. Atkinson, new head of the Natl. Science Foundation. The man who “probably controls more basic research spending than anyone else in the world” said that Americans should not hope science would come up with an overnight solution to the energy crisis that would preserve their current lifestyle—“Science just doesn’t operate with those turnaround times,” he said. The fact that many people expected such solutions indicated “a basic incomprehension of what science is all about,” an ironic byproduct of the mind-boggling scientific achievement in the past 20yr. “After Sputnik . . . there was a big rush to catch up here . . . They put in a lot of high-powered curricula . . . Now we have a small core of students really well educated in science and a huge group that just [drops out] . . . Those people never have any exposure again. Even college graduates now are really poorly informed on science matters.” Liberal education, Atkinson said, should include solid grounding in basic sciences so that citizens could understand issues like the fate of nuclear reactors and the gene-manufacturing possibilities of recombinant DNA. “I worry,” he said, “that the nation may turn to applied research so strongly that it neglects basic research, and basic research remains our fundamental commitment.” {W Post, June 19/77, C-4) Earlier unmanned tests of the piggyback orbiter in Feb. and March had gone smoothly; since then, engineers had installed control systems, guidance instruments, and power units whose repeated malfunctions had delayed the manned tests originally scheduled to begin May 26. The June 18 test had been delayed for 24hr by problems with the entry hatch and by the failure of guidance-system computers. The astronauts reported trouble with a cabin-pressure valve and with radio communications, and said they had experienced more airframe surface noise than expected. NASA had scheduled a second “manned inert” test for June 28, with the first free flight set for late July or early Aug. (WStar, June 19/77, A-6; C Trib, June 19/77, 1-3; NYT, June 19/77, 19; W Post, June 19/77, A-18; June 20/77, A-6)
W Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole quoted administration sources as saying President Carter had chosen Dr. Frank Press, head of the department of earth and planetary sciences at the Mass. Inst, of Technology, to be White House science adviser. Press, considered one of the world’s leading seismologists, had been one of a team of geophysicists who first described Antarctica as a continent rather than as an island of ice floating on earth’s crust. He had also helped design and build the seismometers left on the moon by six crews of Apollo astronauts. A member of the Natl. Science Board, Press had been consultant to 7 federal agencies including DOD, the State Dept., and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Offered the job of science adviser to the president, Press apparently had not accepted it at once, and said by telephone from MIT that “nothing is settled.” (IVPost, Feb 11/77, A-2)
Central Florida officials who had counted on Space Shuttle employment to stimulate the local economy hoped it would differ from the boom-and-bust cycle of the Apollo program, the NY Times reported. The Apollo program had brought about 26 000 employees to KSC, but the economy declined with layoffs when the missions ended. NASA had estimated an 11 000-employee strength at KSC for the first Shuttle mission; the Shuttle program should continue for at least 5yr, agency officials said. (NYTApr 26/77, 13) April27: A series of Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified the existence of quarks, hypothetical fundamental pieces of matter possessing fractional electric charges, the NY Times reported. Dr. William Fairbank, professor of physics at Stanford, described the findings—first evidence of quarks since their theoretical exposition in 1964—at the Am. Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C. If matter consisted of protons, electrons, and neutrons (carrying charges of +1, -1, and 0, respectively), quarks—the building blocks of these particles—would have fractional charges of +1/3, -1/3, +2/3, and -2/3. Fairbank emphasized that the results were not final, and that the university had scheduled follow-up tests. (NYT, Apr 27/77, A18)
NASA reported KSC was preparing its facilities for next yr’s Space Shuttle arrival and prelaunch work, more than 3yr after it last launched a Saturn rocket from Complex 39. In Oct. 1978, Shuttle orbiter 102 would fly in from Calif, on its Boeing 747 carrier, with the main engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters due in Nov. and Dec. for assembly and test before launch March 1979. KSC’s orbiter landing strip had been completed in Aug.; support facilities to be completed by April 1978 would include a device to unload the orbiter, plus a microwave landing system to guide it to an automatic landing. An orbiter-processing facility to store fuels and handle payloads was the only new construction except the landing strip, the rest being modifications of Apollo facilities. (NASA Release 77-253)
MSFC reported NASA’s Michoud assembly facility had shipped the first of four major pieces of test hardware for the Space Shuttle external tank, an intertank structural-test article scheduled to arrive by barge at MSFC about Mar. 5. It would go from New Orleans to Huntsville by way of Mississippi, Ohio, and Tennessee Rivers, the route NASA had used to ship Saturn stages for testing during the Apollo program. The other test articles (liquid-hydrogen tank, liquid-oxygen tank, and another intertank) would arrive later in 1977. The external tank, one to be used for each Shuttle mission, would hold containers for liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen, connected by the intertank; the combined assembly would measure about 47m long. Test data would serve to verify the intertank’s structural integrity before static test firing of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories later in 1977. The test firings would use a full-size external tank, three Shuttle engines, and an Orbiter aft-structure simulator, attached to the test stand through the intertank. (MSFC Release 77-30)
Fifteen yr almost to the day after the U.S. placed its first man in earth orbit, NASA would begin flight tests of the Enterprise-first Space Shuttle orbiter off the assembly line—to be carried piggyback on a Boeing 747 on Feb. 11, 1977, for its first trip through earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb. 20,1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S. had accumulated 22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on 31 separate manned missions that included 9 trips around the moon, 6 moon landings, and 3mo earth-orbital missions on Skylab. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft Friendship 7 weighed only 1315kg, with barely enough room for the pilot and a few instruments, and had parachuted into the Atlantic after its one-time use. The orbiter would weigh 67 500kg empty, could carry up to 7 crew members, and was designed to land on a runway and be prepared for another flight within weeks. In contrast to Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by the Shuttle might last from 7 to 30 days. First of 6 orbital tests of the Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release 77-21; NASA pre-ALT rept Feb 11/77)
The NY Times reported that Capt. Edgar D. Mitchell, astronaut on the Apollo 14 mission, had taken 55 special stamp covers on his flight and had just sold the first for $4200. The San Francisco firm that auctioned the stamp earlier in Oct. said the buyer was a major stamp dealer in Italy. In 1972 NASA had reprimanded the Apollo 15 astronauts for smuggling 400 first-day covers to the moon and selling 100; the 300 covers not sold were turned over to the U.S. for “safe storage in the archives.” The Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 silver medals on the 1971 moon flight, keeping 150 for “private use,” but had not been reprimanded because none of the medals had been sold. The Calif, dealer said Mitchell, now a civilian living in Fla., had brought in the covers for appraised and was advised to find the market value by selling one. NASA said it knew Mitchell had taken the covers in his “personal preference kit”; when it asked about them, he replied “It’s,none of your business,” and a few days later had announced his retirement. Official NASA comment on the sale: “Unfortunate.” (NYT, Oct 23/77, 45)
Recent photographs of the inner Martian satellite Phobos, obtained by the Viking 1 orbiter in Feb., had revealed “the nature of that satellite in unprecedented detail,” said Scientific American. Earlier pictures by Mariner 9 or the Viking 2 orbiter were at a distance of 880km; the new pictures were taken at a distance of 660km to as little as 100km, with resolution that permitted distinguishing objects smaller than 10m across. The surface of Phobos was known to be pitted with craters from the impact of meteorites; the new images showed chains of irregular craters like those seen on the surface of the moon, although Phobos’s crater chains paralleled the plane of its orbit around Mars. Pictures from Viking 2 had shown grooves on Phobos concentrated near its northern pole; the new pictures defined the grooves as crater chains possibly caused by objects hundreds of meters across. Further study of the images should reveal more about the nature of Phobos, the magazine said. (SciAm, Apr 77, 57)
The U.S. superconducting magnet flown to a USSR magnetohydrodynamic facility near Moscow [see June 13] had been bolted into place June 20, ERDA reported. The successful installation, said Dr. William D. Jackson, head of ERDA’s MHD program, was comparable to the 1975 linking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecrafts. Final leg of the magnet’s journey had been a 10-mile trip on a U.S. truck flown in with the magnet on a USAF C-5 Galaxy aircraft, escorted to the facility by Soviet police. Operation of the system would begin in Oct., and about 20 U.S. scientists and engineers would take part in the 2yr experiment. (ERDA update, June 27/77)
The Washington Post reported that Charles Kowal of the Calif. Inst, of Technology had discovered “something out there in space that orbits the sun roughly 2 million miles out once every 115 yr or so,” but had not “the slightest idea” what it was. “You might say it’s a miniplanet,” far too small to be a conventional planet but as big as some asteroids, about 100 to 400mi in diameter; “It really doesn’t resemble anything else. It is definitely not a satellite of any planet or a comet. . . .” Kowal, a veteran at discovering new objects in the solar system, had detected the 13th moon of Jupiter and another object that might be the 14th; he had located the latest unusual body while working with the 48in telescope at Mt. Palomar Oct. 18-19 and had been trying to establish its orbit so that other astronomers could check it out. Researchers would need 2 or 3wk to determine the orbit, lying beyond Saturn and possibly both inside and outside the orbit of Uranus, “maybe going out as far as Neptune,” between 1.3 million and 2.7 million miles from the sun. If the object should be defined as a planet, Kowal by tradition would have the privilege of naming it. Final decision on whether or not it was a planet would be made by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge, Mass. (WPost, Nov 9/77, A-17)
The W Post reported that NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher would resign effective May 1. Appointed by President Nixon in 1971, Dr. Fletcher had headed the agency during the end of the Apollo project; the successful Skylab missions; the Apollo-Soyuz test project; and numerous unmanned missions including the launch of the earth resources monitoring system, Landsat, and the Mars probe Viking. Dr. Fletcher planned to return to private life after his resignation. (WPost, Mar 11/77, A3; NASA Release 77-48)
FBIS reported a Tass interview with Boris Petrov, chairman of the Intercosmos council, on the high points of the program, including cooperation with capitalist countries in exploration of space. France 1 lyr ago was the first capitalist country to cooperate; India’s satellite Aryabhata had orbited on a Soviet booster 2yr ago; Soviet-Swedish cooperation was developing; and the U.S. and USSR would work together on space biology, medicine, meteorology, environment, and the moon and planets. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)
About 300 people had assembled at Cape Canaveral, the W. Post reported, to celebrate the anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11, the mission that first landed humans on the moon. On July 16, 1969, a Saturn V rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center had carried 3 astronauts, none of whom attended the observance. (fV Post, July 17/77, A-18)
The Washington Post reported Senate confirmation of 11 high-level nominees to the new Dept, of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale D. Myers, former NASA associate administrator for space flight, as undersecretary of DOE. Myers, an aeronautical engineer with North American Rockwell since 1943, had joined NASA in Jan. 1970; he had been a vice president and manager of the Apollo program at Rockwell. (W Post, Oct 21/77, B-5)
Dryden Flight Research Center reported that Ralph “Buzz” Sawyer of its flight systems laboratory had made a “paper airplane” to test a theory of reducing elevator flutter and had come up with a new type of aircraft its builder named Skyjacker. Sawyer, working on radio-controlled models, decided to change their airfoils into booms but wanted to test the idea without risking the $600 radio systems. He made a foot-long cardboard model and “heaved [it] off the roof’ of DFRC’s heat facility; the “paper plane” had demonstrated amazing stability. Sawyer obtained a patent on the design and built a demonstrator 18ft long with an 18ft wingspan that he flew for the first time in Jan. 1975. With a 200hp fuel-injected engine and a 3-blade constant-speed propeller, the Skyjacker had “very good low-speed” handling, was easy to fly and land, and (according to the designer) would not stall or spin. The craft had “lift panels” 6ft wide instead of actual wings, but derived lift from its configuration just as DFRC lifting bodies did; the design had no compound curves, and its flat surfaces would make it inexpensive to produce. Possible applications would include crop dusting and firefighting. (NASA X-Press, Dec 2/77, 4)
NASA announced that preparations at KSC for launching the Space Shuttle had required only two new major constructions: an orbiter-landing facility, one of the largest runways in the world (roughly twice as long and twice as wide as an average commercial landing strip), with a microwave scanning-beam landing system to assist the orbiter to an automatic landing; and a large hangar called the “orbiter processing facility” with two high bays for checking out and servicing the orbiters immediately after landing. Existing facilities modified for Shuttle use were the Vehicle Assembly Building, 2 of its 4 high bays being altered for Shuttle assembly, and the launch-control center being equipped with an automated launchprocessing system developed for Shuttle checkout and launch, using a tenth of the manpower for Shuttle that had been used for Apollo: 45 persons, compared to more than 450. Final countdown for Shuttle launches would take only 2.5hr compared to the 28hr needed in countdown for an Apollo/Saturn V. Much of the work had been completed, NASA reported, and the eventual cost of the modifications would be about $240 million, less than a fourth of the 1960s cost of building the Spaceport for Apollo. (NASA Release 77-124)
