NASA announced appointment of Neil Hutchinson, Charles Lewis, and Donald Puddy, all of JSC’s Flight Operations Directorate, as flight directors at JSC for the first manned Shuttle-orbital flight, to plan and direct activities of the Mission Control Center during real-time Shuttle operations. They also would be responsible for integrating inputs from all elements of NASA, contractors, and the scientific communities. Hutchinson would manage all activities associated with the Shuttle-ascent phase; Lewis, the on-orbit phase; and Puddy, the orbiter reentry phase. All had served as flight directors during Apollo and Skylab missions. (JSC Release 78-16; JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 1)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would present a portrait of Virgil (Gus) Grissom on loan from NASA to the Grissom Library, Newport News, Va. The library, opened in 1961, had been named in honor of Grissom in Aug. 1961 after his historic flight as pilot of the Mercury-Redstone 4 (Liberty Bell 7) suborbital mission. Grissom, who had lived in nearby Stoneybrook Estates from 1959 to 1962, had kept in touch with the library by working with the children’s summer reading program. He had been killed in Jan. 1967 with Edward White II and Roger Chaffee in an Apollo spacecraft fire during tests at KSC. Grissom and Slayton, who were among the original seven astronauts selected by NASA in 1959, had trained and worked at LaRC during the Mercury program. (LaRC Release 78-52)
... We are here today to recognize and honor six American pioneers of the farthest and highest of all frontiers, the frontier of space. We honor them for individual human qualities, dedication, skill, extraordinary courage. But we do more than that. What those men have done is the most visible part of a vast and continuing collective accomplishment of many people. Tens of thousands of Americans, many of you, including scientists, engineers, administrators, skilled workers, others, have contributed directly to the success of the American space enterprise. They in turn have had the support of an entire nation and the good wishes of an entire planet. The glory that belongs to the six recipients this afternoon of the Space Medal of Honor belongs equally to those who helped them, and in a real sense, to all humanity who prayed for them and who supported them. “It is fitting that these ceremonies take place today on the 20th anniversary of the founding of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. And it is, of course, fitting that they take place here where the ships that took men to the moon were launched and where we will take our next great step into space with the first flight of the Space Shuttle, which I sincerely hope will be before my next birthday. . . .
The National Academy of Engineering elected 100 engineers to membership in the academy, including astronaut Neil Armstrong, the NYT reported. Election honored persons contributing to engineering theory and practice or pioneering in new or developing fields of technology. (NYT, April 2/78, 35; Bridge, Spring 78, 2)
NASA reported that President Jimmy Carter had named six astronauts to receive the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, first such medal ever awarded by the UlS. The six were Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; Charles Conrad, Jr.; John Glenn; Virgil Grissom (posthumous); and Alan Shepard, Jr. The President would present the medals Oct. 1 during a visit to KSC on the 20th anniversary of NASA’s establishment. Congress had authorized in 1969 the award “to any astronaut who in the performance of his duties has distinguished himself by exceptionally meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind.” Citations were as follows: —	Neil Armstrong, for actions during Gemini 8 in Mar. 1966 to overcome problems and land his spacecraft safely, and for “steady cool professionalism, repeatedly overcoming hazards” on the Apollo 11 mission in July 1969, when he became the first person to walk on the moon. —Frank Borman, who had commanded Gemini 7 in Dec. 1965 and Apollo 8 in Dec. 1968, both of which “significantly hastened and facilitated achievement of the manned lunar landing objective.” On Apollo 8 he had commanded the first manned spacecraft to escape the earth’s gravity. —	Charles Conrad, Jr., who from Aug. 1965 to June 1973 had participated in four spaceflights of increasing duration, complexity, and achievement. His contribution had culminated in the first manned Skylab mission in May and June 1973, when he commanded the crew that performed “lengthy, dangerous, and strenuous activities that were necessary to repair damage inflicted on the orbital workshop during launch and thereby save the two-billion-dollar program.” —	John Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth in the third manned mission of Project Mercury in Feb. 1962, when his professional handling of extreme difficulties with the spacecraft “demonstrated the value of the human pilot in space. ... He returned to a nation and a world that seized on him as a major hero. This difficult role he handled with the same polite dignity that he brought to all his assignments.” —Virgil Grissom (posthumous), second American in space who from July 1961 to Jan. 1967 had participated in Mercury and Gemini spaceflights and had lost his life during preparation for the first Apollo flight. Experience gained from the first manned Gemini flight in March 1965, which he commanded, led to “procedures necessary for the support of subsequent long-duration and rendezvous missions.”
Transportation USA, in a story on 75 years of powered flight, quoted the Dec. 17, 1903, telegram from Orville and Wilbur Wright to their father in Dayton, O.: “Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Success four flights Thursday morning. All against 21 mile wind. Started from level with engine power alone. Average speed through air 31 miles. Longest 59 seconds. Inform press. Home for Christmas.” Newspapers had not been impressed; not even the Dayton Journal had mentioned the achievement. Ridiculed by the press and snubbed by their government, the two brothers had taken their craft to Paris and London; when stories of their successes and honors reached the U.S., the two were finally prevailed upon to come home. Aviation had then become big business. The value of airline property and equipment, not counting general aviation, had reached $125 million at the end of World War II; by the end of 1955, the investment had multiplied tenfold to $1.4 billion. By 1965 it had reached $5 billion, and in 1977 $17 billion. In 1977 U.S. airlines carried 242 million passengers, and general aviation another 100 million. The FAA predicted that in 1987 U.S. airlines would carry upwards of 500 million passengers annually, and that privately owned aircraft would carry 200 million. The future might see aircraft using energy other than petroleum; of particular interest was hydrogen, having pound for pound 3 times the energy output. If storage were not a problem, hydrogen might make an excellent aviation fuel. The article concluded: “We’ve come an unbelievably long way in the past 75 years — from a fragile craft airborne for 59 seconds to walks on the moon. No telling where our lust for flight may take us in the next 75 years. The sky’s no longer the limit.” (Trsp USA, Summer 78, 3)
MSFC announced it had awarded to Mass. Inst, of Technology a $65 000 contract to study the economic and environmental advantages of large space-system material delivery and construction from extraterrestrial sources. The 7-mo study, assuming previous mining and preprocessing of the materials on the lunar surface, would consider final space processing to produce commercial-grade materials for manufacturing, and would explore manufacturing processes required to produce large space-system components. Past studies had postulated economic and environmental advantages to the use of lunar materials for large space systems because such structures would require tremendous quantities of materials. One satellite power-system structure, for example, could occupy a 3miJ area in space, and a large number of systems would be required to provide power to U.S. cities and towns. Materials mined and preprocessed on the moon and refined and manufactured in space would reduce the need to ferry large quantities of material from earth into space, avoiding the transportation costs and and potential environmental impact of heavy-lift launch vehicles passing through earth’s atmosphere. (Marshall Star, Aug 16/78, 2)
If research now in advanced stages went well, Space Shuttle orbiter crews would enjoy tasty and nutritious meals served in an attractive manner, NASA announced. Menus would be well balanced (3000 calories a day) with hot entrees, “reasonably cold” fruit beverages or dessert, and plenty of condiments. A typical daily menu on the Space Shuttle might be: breakfast—orange drink, peaches, scrambled eggs, sausage, sweet roll, cocoa; lunch—cream of mushroom soup, ham and cheese sandwich, stewed tomatoes, banana, cookies, and tea; dinner-shrimp cocktail with sauce, beefsteak, broccoli au gratin, strawberries, pudding, cookie, and cocoa. Many of the foods (breakfast bars, for example) would come off supermarket shelves. All meals would be prepared with variety in mind, so that a crew would have a different menu for sue successive days; on the seventh day the cycle would begin again. Dining would be from a food tray at a table in the galley, or the tray could be held in the lap or affixed to the wall. Ordinary eating utensils would be used. Foods planned for Shuttle crews included (thermostabilized) thermal/heat-processed foods canned or packaged in laminated foil pouches, such as cheese spread, tuna, beef with barbecue sauce; (intermediate moisture) foods preserved by controlling the available moisture, such as dried apricots, peaches, breakfast bars; (rehydratable) dehydrated foods reconstituted with water, such as scrambled eggs, beef patty, chicken and noodles, all beverages; (irradiated) foods exposed to ionizing radiation to effect preservation, such as bread, rolls, and beefsteak; (freeze-dried) foods with all water removed to be rehydrated, or eaten as is with saliva acting as the moistening agent, such as strawberries, shrimp, bananas; (natural form) foods such as nuts and cookies. All this was far from the space meals of an earlier era, when Mercury and Gemini astronauts had to squeeze various kinds of food into their mouths from tubes, or when floating crumbs had to be recaptured before they got into the instruments. Some of the same people who had pioneered space food preparation were still working at JSC putting together the Space Shuttle food systems. From the beginning of the national space effort, the topic of food had captured the attention of both observers and participants. On short spaceflights, food was not too important; it became a more serious consideration, then a vital one, as crews began to range farther and stay longer. First menus had included only the tubes of paste-like food served at room temperature, lukewarm dehydrated cubes, or a few freeze-dried items. By the time of the long-duration Apollo flights, the types of and systems of preparing space food had become more sophisticated, and new means of heating and cooling had brought improved palatability. A breakthough came during Apollo 8 when the crew was surprised with a home-cooked Christmas dinner: pieces of turkey with most of the trimmings, eaten with a spoon rather than squeezed from a container. The turkey and gravy was a thermostabilized product packaged in a laminated foil pouch, leading to the development of a “spoon-bowl” plastic pack for rehydratable foods into which water was injected through a valve. Contents were spooned out through a zippered opening. Main differences between Space Shuttle food and that served on earlier flights would be greater variety and larger amounts, more efficient handling of food, and more comfortable natural dining arrangements. (NASA Release 78-176)
JSC officials were puzzled after a weekend surprise, the Houston Post reported: 240 000 or so people came out to see the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise. With interest in the space program supposedly flagging, the question was why so many—some of whom walked for miles to get to the Space Shuttle orbiter—showed up to see an airplane-like craft just sitting atop a large airplane. The newspaper quoted a highway patrol trooper with 9yr of traffic-patrol duty: “Never in my life have I seen people come like that.” Largest previous crowd had been the 135 000 who turned up at Ellington Air Force Base for a 2-day Blue Angels show. Charles Biggs, JSC exhibits manager, said JSC had made no effort other than the usual press releases to attract a crowd, “no bands, no celebrities, no giveaways, just the orbiter sitting there.” A tour guide commented: “What I thipk is that this is different than Apollo and going to the moon. I think the Shuttle is coming closer to the people. It is something they can relate to. They wanted to know when they can go on it.” (Houston Post, Mar 14/78,3A)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
NASA announced 3 key personnel changes during April: Dr. William Schneider would become associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, responsible for planning, development, and operation of global tracking networks, facilities, and systems for communications and data acquisition and processing for all NASA spaceflight programs. Dr. Schneider had joined NASA and the Gemini program in June 1963, after 2yr as director of space systems at ITT’s Federal Laboratories. He had been mission director for 7 of the 10 manned Gemini missions, and had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his service as deputy director of the Gemini program. He had also been mission director and program deputy director for the Apollo mission, and had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his contribution to the success of the Apollo 8 mission. At the end of Apr., Clarence Syvertson had become director of ARC, where he had served as acting director and deputy director. Syvertson had begun with the NACA at ARC in 1948 as a research scientist and assistant branch chief, then chief of the Hypersonic Wind Tunnel Branch, and later was director of the Mission Analysis Division. In 1966 he had become ARC’S director of astronautics, a position he held until appointed deputy director. Syvertson had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for leadership of the joint DOT-NASA Civil Aviation R & D Policy Study, and in 1976 had been named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. R. D. “Duff’ Ginter, assistant associate administrator for energy programs in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, had announced he would retire in June after 28 years of government service with NASA and the U.S. Navy. Ginter’s contributions to space solar power, photovoltaic developments, wind energy systems, and automotive propulsion had placed him in the forefront of advanced technology applications. Ginter had begun his career with NASA in 1960 as chief of the Scout vehicle program. He later held several positions including director of the Centaur program, for which he received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal; director of the Technology Applications Division; director of the Energy Systems Division; and assistant administrator for energy programs. (NASA anno April 3, 10, 26/78; NASA Release 78-57, 78-65, 78-52; ARC Release 78-16)
NASA announced that, as of Oct. 1, it had transferred the USNS Vanguard, which had supported Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz manned-spaceflight missions for 12yr and was last of an original 5-ship tracking and reentry-coverage flotilla, back to the U.S. Navy for navigation and ocean survey work. Vanguard, built by General Dynamics Corp.’s Quincy, Mass., shipyards and commissioned Oct. 15, 1966, had been the last of three identical ships (Mercury, Redstone, Vanguard) specifically designed for and dedicated to manned spaceflight support. The ships had demonstrated their versatility by supporting automated scientific-satellite missions and their extensive capabilities, functioning as well as any ground tracking station. The Mission Control Center at Houston had transmitted and received voice commands, biomedical data, spacecraft-environment reports, and command/control functions directly through the ship, which had formed part of a tracking network to ensure communications with spacecraft out of contact with land tracking stations. Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) veterans estimated that fully half the Vanguard’s NASA lifetime had been spent in a mission-support status, the rest being in port, yard repair, or transit time. (NASA Release 78-157)
JSC reported it had begun a new procedure for receiving and processing rare and pristine meteorite samples. Such a program had not been necessary previously because available meteorite fragments had been contaminated by reaction with the soil where they fell, by weather, and by often unsterile handling conditions. The new meteorite facility would contain a near-pristine meteorite collection found in the winter of 1977 near McMurdo Station in Antarctica; the first two meteorite samples were 200- to 300-gram (baseball-size) fragments believed by NSF to be rare carbonaceous chondrites that might include primordial matter from the solar system. Dr. William Cassidy, Univ. of Pittsburgh geologist working under an NSF grant, who had found the samples on an Antarctic ice shelf, had hypothesized that large accumulations of meteorites might exist in areas of the Antarctic, where ancient “blue ice” rose to the surface. Meteorites that fell on Antarctica centuries ago might appear on the surface along with the ice. Although the movement of the ice to the surface was not well understood, within 2 mo (last Dec. and Jan.) Cassidy had found 310 fragments believed to represent between 20 and 50 different meteorites, the most concentrated find known so far. Because of the exceptional preservation possible in the extreme cold and dry environment, Cassidy’s find of 310 samples was probably the least contaminated near-pristine meteorite group ever collected. To ensure proper handling, the NSF and NASA’s Lunar Curatorial Facility in Houston had equipped Cassidy with special sterile equipment to safeguard his collection. Researchers at the meteorite-processing facility, using glove boxes first used to handle material from the moon, would document the samples and make initial characterizations before freeze-drying them to remove any trapped water-ice and making a mold, finally storing the samples in dry nitrogen gas. A special committee representing the NSF, the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History, NASA, and Dr. Cassidy’s team would plan systematic examination of the samples. {JSC Roundup, Feb 17/78, 1)
KSC announced that for the third consecutive yr it would host about 80 of the nation’s leading atmospheric physicists and lightning researchers, representing 10 universities, 2 research laboratories, NOAA, and 3 other NASA centers, for a summer of combined study of the electrical properties of thunderstorms. The thunderstorm research international program (TRIP) would use the unique meteorological facilities built at KSC during the Apollo and Skylab programs, to assess thunderstorm hazards during launch operations and to monitor the high incidence of lightning-charged storms in the area during the summer. Participating investigators would bring their own instruments for many of the experiments; others would use KSC’s instruments, like the field-mill system built for the Apollo program to detect buildup of electrical charges in overhead thunderclouds; KSC’s instrumented aircraft, NASA-6, used in previous lightning studies; and the lightning detection and ranging (LDAR) system that detected electrification in distant clouds. NOAA’s geosynchronous operational environmental satellite Goes would provide satellite photographs for the scientists. Experiments would include an evaluation of prototype lightning sensors as part of the scientific package to be flown in 1982 on the Jupiter orbiter probe designated Project Galileo, first planetary spacecraft to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle; a study of evolution of lightning activity; examination of the structure of waveforms radiated from lightning, for characteristics indicating storm type; obtaining from ground-based systems range and azimuth data on lightning strokes; monitoring of electric-field and corona (surface discharge of electricity) current over water; and study of the relationship of precipitation-formation development in thunderclouds to lightning occurrences. (KSC Release 66-78; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1)
The JSC Roundup reported on a 2-day conference, “Meeting Our Energy Needs Today and Tomorrow,” with Dr. Peter Glaser, commonly thought of as the initiator of the solar-power satellite concept, as featured speaker. Glaser, designer of three instruments deployed on the lunar surface by the Apollo astronauts, had proposed a solar-power-satellite concept in 1968 before the days of concern with an energy shortage. He said the scientific community had slowly become aware that solar energy “shines brighter than ever as the major energy source.” Glaser summarized the advantages of collecting the solar energy constantly available in space, as opposed to disadvantages of any terrestrial energy source: absence of gravity and weather; avoidance of thermal pollution and waste; and the ability to direct a beam of collected energy to any location on earth, sunny or not, having usable land or not, close to the user or not. Solar-energy development would depend on development of the Space Shuttle, he noted, and was an idea becoming economically attractive and socially acceptable. Microwave and laser beams could transmit this energy to earth; directing a microwave beam accurately had been demonstrated. As for safety, Glaser pointed out that one cannot concentrate microwaves into a weapon system, whereas lasers could be lethal, so that all nations would have to agree that the laser method would never be used as a weapon. Glaser described the phased-array transmitting antenna already constructed on a 5-story-high project in the Aleutian Islands. He estimated 84% solar-power satellite efficiency in producing 30kw of power, as compared to current power plants with an efficiency range of about 40%. (JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 4)
NASA announced appointment of Robert Aller as director of tracking and data relay satellite system (TDRSS) program office at the NASA Hq Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. Effective Jan. 2,1979, Aller would be responsible for planning, direction, and evaluation of the TDRSS program. Working with NASA program and project managers, he would determine requirements and develop and implement plans for TDRSS support of NASA earth-orbital spaceflight missions. Western Union Space Communications, Inc., would provide NASA with TDRSS tracking, command, and data-relay services under a lOyr telecommunications agreement. Aller had been deputy director of the expendable launch vehicles program in the NASA Office of Space Transportation Systems, and had served in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Skylab, Apollo, and Gemini programs. He had received the NASA medal for outstanding leadership and two NASA exceptional service medals. (NASA Release 78-195)
LaRC reported the White House had issued a statement July 20, 1978, commemorating the ninth anniversary of man’s first walk on the moon. The statement read in part: “Nine years ago today, the world paused to watch two brave men tread the surface of the moon. It was a moment without precedent in human experience, a moment when terrestrial life reached out to touch another world. It is a source of pride for us that those men were Americans. Today, the lunar surface is criss-crossed in a half dozen places with the footprints of American astronauts and implanted with a variety of American scientific instruments. “The Space Shuttle, our next major manned space project, will begin regular, routine economical operation in the early 1980s. ... In the deeper reaches of space, we will continue to seek to expand our knowledge of the solar system and the universe of which we are a part. “As time and technology take us ever more deeply into the space age, it will continue to be our policy to conduct operations in space as required for our national well being and to support the right of all nations to do likewise. In so doing, we remain committed to the underlying principle of the exploration and use of space for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of all mankind.” (Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 4; DFRC X-Press, July 28/78, 4)
For 4yr, the LaRC Space Systems Div. and Flight Dynamics and Control Div. had analyzed the Space Shuttle orbiter’s entry guidance and control system at the request of JSC, the Langley Researcher reported. The system had been designed to control the orbiter from deorbit until landing, regulating both the aerodynamic surfaces and a reaction control system (RCS) composed of small rocket thrusters such as those on Apollo spacecraft, so that orbiter control had turned out to be a hybrid between aircraft and spacecraft control. Onboard computers could direct the entire orbiter entry without pilot input, or a pilot could take over control if necessary. A primary tool in the LaRC analysis had been a reentry flight dynamics simulator (RFDS) that permitted evaluation of the onboard-control system in both the automatic and the manual modes. It had also aided in developing alternate control systems to be used by the pilot if the main control system could not handle a situation. The simulator cockpit, though not an exact representation of the orbiter cockpit, did contain all the instruments and controls necessary to simulate flight: cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) showed displays identical to those on board, changing guidance information automatically as the orbiter entered various flight regimes. Push buttons and toggle switches would permit the pilot to take over any of the control functions. LaRC investigators had found that the system was dangerously sensitive to possible sensed angle-of-attack errors in the automatic mode at hypersonic speed. Shuttle astronaut Col. Henry Hartsfield had been unable to maintain vehicle control in the manual mode. This and other problems had led to major system redesign that had been tested at LaRC and found to solve the sensed angle-of-attack problem. Investigators had then begun work on other system problems. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 1)
JSC announced plans for the week-long ninth annual lunar and planetary science conference focusing on the moon and other worlds, with the Lunar and Planetary Institute of Houston as co-host. Topics of presentations would include the formation of the solar system; new discoveries in moon rocks; the histories of planets; meteorites containing material from ancient stars; and comparative studies of Mars, Venus, and the earth. For the third consecutive year, the USSR would send a delegation. A number of topics would be emphasized: constraints on structures; composition and history of planetary interiors; characteristics and movement of material on lunar, planetary, and asteroid surfaces; characteristics and evolution of volcanic landforms; characterization and evolution of planetary crusts; nature and effect of impact processes; extraterrestrial materials; solar, interplanetary, and interstellar probes; and earliest history of the solar system. JSC had scheduled special sessions on industrial development of near-earth space, on origin of the solar system, on the future of planetary exploration, and on Mars and Mercury. (JSC Release 78-40)
The British Interplanetary Society’s journal Spaceflight reported that NASA had developed a lunar- and planetary-sciences teaching aid, using actual samples of lunar material encased in a clear plastic disk, to educate both the earth-science student through the Aerospace Education Program and the museum visitor through the NASA exhibits program. The hand-held aid would permit looking at, or viewing through a microscope, both sides of a sample. Under an 8yr program for lunar- and planetary-science education, colleges had been able to borrow thin-section microscope slides of lunar material along with a teaching manual, and museums and fairs could display several dozen prepared lunar samples in cases. But until now, NASA had directed no program toward the secondary school earth-science student. The new school-use program which included a film on lunar science, the sample disk, workbook material, slides, and an audio cassette) would require considerable interaction between teacher and class. Student reaction to the museum program, which included a shorter sound-slide presentation and the disk, had been highly favorable. NASA expected to test museum-visitor reaction later in 1978 and to use about 2/31b of lunar materials to make 100 lunar-sample disks available for use in both programs. Apollo astronauts had brought back 843.51b of lunar material during lunar explorations in the late 1960s and early 1970s. (S/, June 6/78, 218)
GSFC announced that the third international sun-earth explorer Isee 3 had been injected into a halo orbit, most unusual ever proposed for a NASA space mission, to increase understanding of solar-terrestrial relationships. Isee 3 was orbiting around the L-l libration point, a point between the earth and the sun about 1.5 million km (1 million mi) from earth at which the centrifugal and gravitational forces acting on a satellite were exactly counterbalanced. In this orbit, Isee 3 would be able to monitor characteristics of the solar wind and other solar-induced phenomena such as solar flares about an hr before they disturbed earth space. GSFC’s Dr. Robert Farquhar, who devised the halo orbit, said it had been designed “to pass slightly above and below the ecliptic plane so that it will avoid excessive solar interference with spacecraft communications back to earth stations. To a person observing Isee 3 from our planet, it will appear to be orbiting the sun, but it actually traces a halo above earth.” On entering the halo orbit, Isee 3 would accomplish three spaceflight firsts: a libration-point satellite; a spacecraft stationed in a halo orbit; and a spacecraft orbiting a point in space rather than a body such as the sun, earth, or moon. Libration-point orbits had aroused interest as possible ideal locations for future space colonies; they would also offer advantages in lunar-farside communications and as staging locations for lunar and interplanetary transportation systems. At least five of the libration points had been mentioned as possible sites for space colonies; one of them (the earth-moon L-5 point) was even the namesake for the leading group of space-colony enthusiasts, the L-5 Society. However, research concerned with space colonization had been mainly theoretical. Isee 3 should provide the first real flight experience for orbital operations of future space colonies. (GSFC Release G-78-85)
MSFC reported that 17 scientists had signed contracts to develop materials-processing experiments, first to be conducted in the weightless environment of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and partially based on results of investigations during the Apollo, Skylab, Apollo-Soyuz, and SPAR (space processing applications rocket) programs. Among the products of interest to the scientists were improved medicines; electrolyte materials for smaller, higher capacity batteries; and larger, more perfect crystals for electronic applications. The $12 million program, covering a 5yr initial period, should produce significant scientific results for developing specific useful materials and products in space. NASA had aimed the programs at science and technology in both research and manufacturing activities leading to privately funded materials-processing in space. Five of the 17 scientists would have a chance to fly their experiments on an early orbital test of the Shuttle in a materials-experiments assembly (MEA) package that would not only produce valuable scientific data but would also define further experiments and hardware needed before the first extended flight on Spacelab or Space Shuttle. A Shuttle satellite-deployment mission would fly four of the MEA experiments again, along with five others; the fifth would fly again on the third Spacelab mission devoted almost exclusively to materials processing. Four more of the scientists would have experiments on this mission. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 1)	'
A Saturn IB rocket, twin of the one that launched Skylab and Apollo/Soyuz test project (ASTP) astronauts into space, would begin a barge journey from KSC to Tokyo Apr. 5, KSC announced. The Saturn IB, part of the largest group of U.S. space hardware ever displayed overseas, would be only one of hundreds of artifacts borrowed from NASA centers across the U.S. for a Japanese space science exposition scheduled to begin July 16, ninth anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11. The U.S. display would include full-scale Mercury-Redstone, Mercury-Atlas, and Gemini-Titan rockets; a lunar rover; Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft that had actually flown in space; a detailed mockup of the Viking lander; and an ATS-6 (applications technology satellite) communications satellite. The Association for the Space Science Exposition, an umbrella organization for the Japan Science Society and the Japanese Maritime Science Promotion Foundation, had organized the exposition at an estimated cost of $21 million and would defray all costs of dismantling, loading, round-trip shipping, reloading, and reinstalling artifacts. The National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution had coordinated the loan of the space artifacts. (KSC Release 38-78; Marshall Star, April 19/78, 2)	•
Alan Shepard, Jr., first American in space aboard a Mercury spacecraft in May 1961, which “demonstrated that his country lacked neither the courage nor the technology to compete in the new arena of space.” He also was cited for showing in Feb. 1971 “the highest qualities of leadership” as commander of Apollo 14, the third lunar landing mission. (NASA Release 78-146)
On the basis of a 4mo interagency review requested in June 1978, President Carter announced a U.S. civilian space policy that would set the direction of U.S. space efforts over the next decade. The policy would reflect a balanced strategy of applications, science, and technology development that would: 1.	emphasize space applications that would increase understanding of earth resources, climate, weather, pollution, and agriculture, with the private sector taking increasing responsibility for remote sensing and other applications; 2.	emphasize space science and exploration in a manner that would retain the vitality of U.S. space technology, yet would provide short-term flexibility to impose fiscal constraints when conditions warranted; 3.	take advantage of Space Shuttle flexibility to reduce the cost of operating in space over the next two decades to meet national needs; 4.	increase benefits for resources expended through better integration and technology transfer among national space programs and through more joint projects when appropriate, thereby increasing the return on the $100 billion investment in space to the benefit of the American people; 5.	assure U.S. scientific and technological leadership in space for the security and welfare of the nation, and continue R&D necessary to provide the basis for later programmatic decisions; 6.	demonstrate advanced technological capabilities in open and imaginative ways that would benefit developing as well as developed countries; 7.	foster space cooperation with nations by conducting joint programs; 8.	confirm U.S. support of the continued development of a legal regime for space that would assure its safe and peaceful use for the benefit of mankind. Since space was becoming a place to work, an extension of the environment, the U.S. would pursue future activities in space when it appeared that national objectives could most efficiently be met through space activities. Finally, the U.S. found it neither feasible nor necessary to commit itself to a high-challenge space-engineering initiative comparable to Apollo. As resources and manpower requirements for Space Shuttle phased down, the U.S. would be able to give greater attention to new space applications and exploration, continue programs at present levels, or contract them. To meet the specified objectives, an adequate federal budget commitment would be made. The U.S. would maintain a position of leadership in space science and planetary exploration, said the President, continuing a vigorous program of planetary exploration and using the space telescope and free-flying satellites to usher in a new era of astronomy, space systems to develop a better understanding of the sun and its interaction with the terrestrial environment through space systems, and the Space Shuttle and Spacelab to conduct basic research. (White House Release Oct 11/78)
LaRC announced it had selected Dr. Larry Pinson, aerospace engineer in its structures and dynamics division, to participate in the President’s executive interchange program, designed to foster improved relations between the government and private industry by yearly having 50 to 75 middle management executives from both sectors spend a yr in the opposite sector gaining in-depth on-the-job experience. The program had trained more than 450 executives since its inception under President Lyndon Johnson. Pinson had begun his term with the Aerospace Corporation, Los Angeles, in August. He had received awards for work on vibration of space vehicles, and had been a consultant during the Apollo program on various studies of light problems. He had received a Ph.D. in engineering mechanics from the Va. Polytechnic Inst, and had begun his NASA career at LaRC in 1963. (LaRC Release 78-51)
The NYT reported a leading Soviet astrophysicist’s forecast that the next 250yr would see construction of a vast “artificial biosphere” in outer space capable of supporting 10 billion people, more than twice the world’s present population. Iosif Shklovsky had visualized a system of space colonies with total surface area hundreds of thousands of times greater than earth’s, that could capture and use huge amounts of solar energy. Looking further into the future, Shklovsky had also predicted that 2540yr from now mankind would have fully colonized the solar system. His article in the journal Social Sciences emphasized U.S. plans to use large satellites to beam solar energy to earth as microwaves. Prof. Gerald O’Neill of Princeton Univ., head of a group of physicists and engineers designing solar satellites, had estimated that a space colony accommodating 100 000 or more people could be built by the year 2025. Skhlovsky had agreed that expansion into space would be inevitable because of mounting pressures of population and environment on earth’s resources. Only the colonizing of space could offer a long-term solution, Shklovsky contended, claiming mathematical proof that adopting a global-balance strategy of limited growth could delay, but not avert, a world crisis. Shklovsky added that construction of large-scale colonies would require raw materials from the moon, asteroids, and other planets. Although other Soviet scientists had stressed the importance of the search for extraterrestrial life, Shklovsky said that chances of finding other intelligent life were extremely remote. The distance to the nearest extraterrestrial civilization (one whose signals could be reaching the earth now) had been calculated at 3300 to 9800 light yr, or 19 800 trillion to 58 800 trillion mi; however, the absence of life, at least intelligent life, in earth’s region of the universe should , not discourage, but rather encourage, the conquest of space, he said. (NYTMay 18/78, B-10)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
Mstislav Keldysh, Soviet scientist and mathematician who had been spokesman for the USSR’s space program as head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died June 24 at the age of 67, the Washington Post reported. Soviet news agency Tass described the death as sudden. Dr. Michael DeBakey had traveled to the Soviet Union 5yr ago to operate on Keldysh’s circulatory system. Recognized in a wide range of scientific and mathematical disciplines bearing on aviation and rocketry, Keldysh had proved his administrative ability by rising to the top of his country’s scientific establishment. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences from 1961 to 1975, Keldysh had been not only USSR science spokesman but also a key figure in organizing and developing scientific research throughout the Soviet Union. He had won the Stalin Prize in 1942 for “The Theory of Calculating and Developing Methods of Reducing Various Types of Vibrations in Aircraft,” and in 1946 for “The Front-Wheel Shimmy of the Tricycle (Aircraft) Landing Gear.” In 1943, Keldysh had become head of a top secret aircraft-development institute with increasing administrative responsibilities. As head of the Academy of Sciences, he announced in Oct. 1969, shortly after the U.S. had put men on the moon, that the USSR had abandoned plans to do likewise and would concentrate on putting manned space stations into orbit around the earth. He acknowledged that the Soviet Union had been debating space expenditures, and said, “My personal view is that, when a man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (WPost, June 27/78, B6; FBIS, Tass Inti Serv in Russian, June 26/78)	•
NASA announced it had selected astronauts Dr. Owen Gar-riott and Dr. Robert Parker to be mission specialists on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the early 1980s. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in crew-activity planning, consumables usage, and Space Transportation Systems/payload interaction. The 7-day flight, a verification test of Spacelab systems and Spacelab/orbiter interfaces, would carry about 40 experiments. Garriott had flown on the second manned Skylab mission of 56da duration; Parker had been a mission scientist and spacecraft communicator during Apollo and Skylab. Ten European nations, under agreements with the European Space Agency, had developed and financed Spacelab to be carried in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter as a fully furnished laboratory adapted to the weightless environment of space and pressurized for working without space suits. Spacelab 1 would also carry two payload specialists (one European and one U.S. citizen) to operate the scientific instruments. (NASA Release 78-121; JSC Release 78-34; JSC Roundup, Aug 4/78, 1; Marshall Star. Aug 16/78, 3; DSFCX-Press, Aug 11/78, 3; Langley Researcher, Aug 11/78, 1)
NASA’s struggle to save 3 astronauts trapped in a foundering spaceship during the flight of Apollo 13 had begun the most harrowing 6 days in NASA’s history, NASA Activities reported in observing the 8th anniversary of the flight. The astronauts had heard a loud bang; when Fred Haise, Jr., scanned the instrument panel, he saw that one of the main electrical systems was deteriorating. The words Jack Swigert spoke to mission control long haunted NASA: “Houston, we’ve got a problem.” At the time of the explosion, Apollo 13 traveling at 2100mph was 205 OOOmi from earth and more than 50 OOOmi from the moon, with a dead mothership (Odyssey) that included the main propulsion engine. After moving the astronauts into the lunar module, NASA focused on getting the Apollo on course for home while conserving limited supplies of power, oxygen, and water. Not only had NASA employees worked round the clock, but also specialists and computers from North American Rockwell, the contractor; Grumman Aerospace Corp., manufacturer of the LM; TRW Systems, builder of the descent propulsion engine; and many others. NASA had decided to drop the service module and put the command module Aquarius into the correct attitude for earth-atmosphere reentry; when the latter entered earth’s gravity 216 277mi from home, it needed another course correction. The tnird descent-engine burn was successful, putting Aquarius into the proper reentry corridor. As the spacecraft drew closer to splashdown, one of the astronauts described to ground control what he was seeing: “There’s one whole side of that spacecraft missing . . . right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the engine . . . it’s really a mess . . . man, that’s just unbelievable—looks like a lot of debris is just hanging out of the side near the S-band antenna.” The astronauts had returned safely to earth 142hr, 54min, 41sec after launch. As Jim Lovell said, “We do not realize what we have on earth until we leave it.” (NASA Actv, Apr 78, 14)
GSFC reported that faint radio signals from 10 million billion miles away had given astronomers the first proof of the long suspected presence of methane (natural gas) outside the solar system. GSFC scientists had detected methane in three locations in deep space: in the Orion A gas cloud, and in gas clouds surrounding variable star RX Boo and carbon star IRC-plus-10216. “The discovery of methane outside our solar system could have an important role in determining the abundance of carbon in the universe,” noted Dr. Kenneth Fox. Methane previously had been detected only on earth, Jupiter, Saturn, and its moon Titan, Neptune, and Uranus. The discovery had confirmed that interstellar space was not devoid of complicated molecules; at least 40 types of molecules had been discovered suspended in space, and the findings were important to scientists attempting to construct models of the origin of the universe. Dr. Fox and Dr. Donald Jennings had searched for the emissions for 3yr using radiotelescopes at the Natl. Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green-bank, W. Va., Kitt Peak near Tucson, Ariz., and the Haystack observatory in Westford, Mass. “Methane now appears to be one of the most abundant molecules in Orion A, perhaps second only to hydrogen [the most abundant gas in the cosmos],” Fox said. Fox and Jennings planned to map the source of methane in Orion A for its precise location and any associations with stars or stellar objects. (Goddard News, Aug 2/78, 2)
After 2 decades as key booster in NASA’s space program, the Atlas Centaur would remain “old reliable” for a variety of planetary, commercial, and military payloads launched in the 1980s, Lewis News reported. The Centaur project had begun in November 1958 when DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) awarded the first contract to General Dynamics after a study recommending a high-energy upper stage for the Atlas launch vehicle. Before the study, Pratt and Whitney had received a contract for a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Since Centaur would be the first space-launch vehicle to use a liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen combination, a whole new technology was needed for handling materials, behavior, fabrication, and testing of liquid hydrogen in a space environment, not only to make Centaur a success but also because this fuel was to be used for the upcoming Apollo program. In 1958 Centaur received its first mission assignment, definition of geosynchronous orbit, and in 1960 its first deep-space mission. The creation of NASA resulted in transfer of the Centaur program from ARPA to NASA in July 1959. LeRC, which had pioneered research in hydrogen technology and had fired an experimental liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine with 50001b thrust as early as 1953, received technical management of Centaur in 1962. The first successful flight of an Atlas Centaur in Nov. 1963 included the world’s, first inflight ignition of a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Centaur had proved its operational capability in 1965 by successfully injecting a dynamic model of the Surveyor spacecraft into a prescribed transfer trajectory, resulting in a simulated lunar-target impact. After successfully launching Surveyor (for the first soft landing on the moon) and Pioneer 11 (for a flyby of Jupiter), NASA in the mid-1960s had directed its efforts to integrating the Centaur with the USAF Titan booster. General Dynamics had built an improved Centaur adaptable to both the Atlas and the Titan boosters; Martin Marietta had conducted studies for NASA on integrating the Titan booster with an improved Centaur, and on modifications needed to the Titan launch facility at ETR. Atlas Centaur missions had included earth-orbiting spacecraft such as the applications technology satellite, orbiting astronomical observatories, Comstar, high-energy astronomical observatories, and FltSat-Com. Atlas Centaur, used for future missions with HEAO and FltSat-Com spacecraft, would remain one of NASA’s prime launch vehicles until the Space Shuttle became fully operational. (Lewis News, July 21/78, 1)
JSC announced that one of the world’s most unusual freight airplanes, the Super Guppy, would deliver a high-fidelity mockup of the Space Shuttle orbiter crew compartment from the contractor in Calif, to neighboring Ellington AFB in Tex. for transfer to NASA, marking first use of the Super Guppy for delivering Space Shuttle equipment. NASA would install the mockup (a detailed model of the cockpit and living quarters on the Space Shuttle orbiter) in a JSC training area for use in crew familiarization. The nonworking mockup was built by Rockwell Inti., prime contractor for the orbiter. The Super Guppy took aboard the mockup at Los Alamitos Naval Air Station near Los Angeles and flew it to Ellington, refueling at Davis-Monthan AFB, Tuscon, and Dyess AFB, Abilene. A modified Boeing YC-97J, the Super Guppy had the world’s largest internal dimensions in an aircraft; it could accommodate the fuselage of a 747, if sectioned. Its present configuration, test-flown by late NASA pilot Joe Walker in late 1965, v/as first used by NASA early in 1966. The Super Guppy, equipped with 4 Pratt & Whitney T34 turboprops, had flown more than 2 million mi carrying NASA cargo and had seen extensive use in the Apollo and Skylab missions. It had last landed at Ellington AFB in June 1976. (JSC Release 78-58)
Cosmonaut Valery Kubasov had spoken of the possibility of joint experimental flights by the USSR’s Salyut-type orbital station and the U.S. Space Shuttle, according to a Tass report. Kubasov noted that such flights could use the joint approach and docking procedures worked out for the Apollo-Soyuz test project and tested during the joint Soviet-U.S. flight of Apollo and Soyuz in July 1975. A new agreement between the USSR and the U.S. on cooperation in space research for peaceful purposes had came into force the previous May, Kubasov pointed out. He added that millions of Americans, like the citizens of the USSR, had viewed the Soyuz-Apollo program as a display of goodwill by the two nations and the beginning of great cooperation between nations in space. However, Av Wk reported that any U.S. Space Shuttle/Soviet Salyut space station joint mission was in deep trouble, if not already dead, because of increased U.S. concern over technology transfer to the Soviets and the current abrasive political climate between the two countries. A NSC interagency committee had reevaluated the entire joint mission idea, while U.S./Soviet discussions on the project were in limbo. The project probably would have been discussed during a planned technology-oriented trip to the USSR by presidential science adviser Frank Press, but the White House had canceled the trip in disapproval of the Soviet treatment of dissidents. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, July 12/78; AvWk, July 17/78, 13)
The Naval Research Laboratory reported that a team of its space scientists had evaluated two new types of far-ultraviolet electrographic cameras. Designed for possible use in the Space Shuttle program to investigate radiation spectra of distant stars and other celestial objects, both cameras would use alkaline halide photocathodes having more sensitivity in the vacuum ultraviolet below 2000A, and higher angular resolution, than cameras previously used. One camera, the internal-Schmidt-optics type, had an opaque photocathode like those NRL had used in previous sounding-rocket flights, in the lunar camera on the Apollo 16 mission, and on Skylab 4. The new camera, flown on two sounding-rocket missions, had on the first flight obtained far-ultraviolet images of the Andromeda galaxy and on the second had recorded the North America nebula in Cygnus and far-ultraviolet spectra of stars in Cygnus. The other camera developed by NRL, a more conventional end-window type, had a semitransparent photocathode intended for possible use at the focus of a large telescope or for making spectrographs on the Spacelab. This large-format electrographic camera, instead of using a phosphor screen, would record directly on film the electrons emitted by the photocathode, allowing better resolution and photometric accuracy. NASA had supported development of the electrographic cameras. (NRL Release July 20/78)
NASA announced it had named Dr. Adrienne Timothy assistant associate administrator for space science, effective June 18. Dr. Timothy would be chief scientist in the Office of Space Science, representing that office to the scientific community as the focal point for obtaining, evaluating, and using its expertise in planning NASA space science programs. She would succeed Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, who had been named chief scientist for NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Timothy had begun her NASA career in 1974 as staff scientist for solar physics, Physics and Astronomy Programs, in the Office of Space Science. In 1975 she had become chief of the Solar Physics Branch, where she planned and directed U.S. space science research in the solar physics discipline; in 1977 she had become program manager for advanced programs and technology in NASA’s Solar Terrestrial Division of the Office of Space Science. Before joining NASA, Timothy had been leader for the Apollo telescope-mount reduction and analysis system at the American Science and Engineering Corp. (NASA Release 78-91)
The Marshall Star reported that a NASA decision to boost the Skylab space station to a higher orbit could lead to reactivation and use of Skylab’s onboard systems and instruments in a number of useful projects. MSFC had awarded parallel study contracts, each in the amount of $125 000, to Martin Marietta Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for independent reports on the possibilities and benefits of Skylab reuse. The 9-mo studies of the most effective ways to , use Skylab in further missions, experiments, and demonstrations would concentrate on the experiments or equipment already aboard Skylab, for firsthand evaluation of how materials and equipment were affected by 10 or more yr in space; on crew quarters and other support, for Spacelab missions and experiments that could benefit from long duration and an additional energy supply; and on opportunities offered by the Skylab in itself, or in conjunction with other hardware elements, for new missions or experiments. For example, the relatively large facility (comparable to a 3-bedroom home) might provide a convenient platform for fabricating and constructing large space structures, or could aid in converting such structures into useful demonstrations or operational systems. The ground station in Bermuda had begun operations Mar. 6 to 13 to reactivate Skylab, turning on command and telemetry systems and receiving data. Transfer of power from the airlock module to the Apollo telescope mount permitted reception of telemetry; the ATM solar arrays also provided power when turned toward the sun. Data received from the ATM computer indicated it was in good working order and had enough power. On Skylab’s last working pass, controllers had used about llmin to check the status of the trickle charge to batteries 2,4, and 5; the charge had been turned off on battery 7, which had remained fully charged and ready for the next mission. Controllers also had performed some systems checkoffs, Bermuda reporting the command receiver as strong throughout the pass. Plans were to reactivate Skylab in mid-April, using the TAC system to reduce atmospheric drag and prolong Skylab's orbital lifetime for several months. (Marshall Star, Mar 22/78, 1)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
