NASA’s Pioneer 11 had encountered Saturn’s bow shock (where the solar wind—a stream of electrified particles from the Sun—bent around Saturn’s magnetic field), project manager Charles Hall reported from ARC, adding that solar storms during the past few days had played havoc with Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was not designed in 1967 to fly to Saturn; that mission arose only after a successful Jupiter flyby in 1974, calling at first for Pioneer to fly through Saturn’s rings on what the Washington Post called a “kamikaze mission.” The most dangerous moment of the 6.5-year 2-million-mile journey would be crossing September 1 through belts of unknown material beyond the ring systems around Saturn that had been visible from Earth, during which Pioneer would risk a potentially fatal collision. Because of intense radiation (solar-particle interference was degrading the quality of Pioneer images), mission controllers at ARC had reduced the data transmission rate by half. Solar storms had occurred late in July and in midAugust, and high-energy particles from the second storm had reached Saturn at the same time as slower particles from the first storm. Reducing the transmission rate would diminish effects of interference and also the quality of the images. Pioneer would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring system at 10:44 a.m. EDT, but scientists would not know for 86 minutes whether it had survived (the time the signals needed to reach Earth). No one knew the composition of the 2 minute-wide third ring; if it consisted of boulders, Pioneer could probably get past it safely, but a ring of dust particles could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr. John Wolfe said chances for survival were half and half; pictures already transmitted by Pioneer were better than any yet taken from Earth telescopes. The Washington Post reported September 1 that solar storms had increased the noise level in space to 10 times normal. In early afternoon, Pioneer had flown into a detectable magnetosphere, showing that Saturn was surrounded by a strong and sizable magnetic field estimated at 700 to 1,000 times the size of Earth’s but roughly equivalent in strength. The New York Times reported September 2 that, as of 12:31 p.m. EDT September 1, Pioneer 11 had survived a hail of fine particles to get within 13,000 miles of Saturn for a 4-hour first encounter. During the approach, scientists were keeping watch on the plane of the visible rings through which Pioneer was descending: Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa was first to note Pioneer’s approach to “dangerous ring debris” in its path. However, the 10:30 a.m. crossing at a speed of 48,000 mph had taken only a second, though ARC had to wait until 2:02 p.m. to learn what had happened; when the radio signals continued past that moment without interruption, “a cheer went up.” LaRC’s Donald H. Humes said that Pioneer 11 might have had a close call, as the micrometeoroid detector had registered two impacts during the crossing: this was the limit of the instrument’s counting ability, and more impacts might actually have occurred. The impacts apparently caused no damage. The sharp rise in radiation encountered by Pioneer before it flew under the rings had fallen as abruptly as it rose, and by the time Pioneer was under the rings (closer to the planet) the radiation reading had disappeared completely. Dr. John Simpson of the University of Chicago said the rings were big enough to “scour out” nearly all the radiation trapped by the planet’s magnetic field. (The New York Times quoted Dr. Van Allen as saying that the radiation count while Pioneer flew under the rings was even lower than while the spacecraft was sitting on its launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 6.5 years ago. Saturn’s radiation, although it would be lethal to an unprotected human, posed no hazard to spacecraft, Van Allen added.) After its close approach, Pioneer swung behind the planet, out of radio contact for 78 minutes, during which its on-board instruments recorded data for later transmission. Upon reemerging, the spacecraft had to cross the ring plane again on its outward journey; the outbound crossing came at 2:32 p.m., and controllers again had to wait for indication that the spacecraft was safe. At 3:55 p.m. the signals affirmed that Pioneer 11 had survived another crossing. This was the last predicted hazard for the spacecraft, which would continue past Saturn to the outer edge of Earth’s solar system and enter interstellar space in 1993, by which time its radio would no longer be audible. The safe passage meant that Pioneer could spend September 2 and 3 photographing Titan and measuring Saturn’s rings from the dark side of the planet; also, that the two Voyager spacecraft following Pioneer could approach without fear of damage. In its two-hour passage, besides recording impacts, Pioneer had photographed a new ring previously undetected by Earth telescopes, called the F ring: scientists already knew of four rings called A through D (in order of discovery, not location), three of them bright enough to be seen from Earth telescopes, and a fifth (or E) ring had been suspected close to the A ring although Pioneer did not report it. Pioneer had also tracked what might be a new Saturn moon orbiting about 70,000 miles out; some thought it might be a known moon, Janus, but it was in a position indicating that it was an entirely new satellite that would bring Saturn’s count to 11, one short of Jupiter’s 12. Pioneer 11 photos of Saturn showed dark blue and green stripes across it just below the north pole; the colors, not so vivid from Earth, probably came from sunlight scattering in upper-atmosphere clouds. Jet streams like those seen on Jupiter appeared to whirl around Saturn at speeds of 300 mph. Pioneer images could give a better idea of the dimensions and composition of the rings when compared with Earth-based photographs. In the six years it had taken to reach Saturn, Pioneer 11 had reported a space-particle strike only once every two months or so, LaRC’s Humes recalled. Once past Saturn, Pioneer was to photograph Titan from about 221,000 miles, record its temperature and atmospheric methane, and try to detect “life chemicals”; as no life was evident on Venus or Mars, this might be the last chance to find extraterrestrial biology in the Earth’s solar system. First images of Titan had shown a fuzzy ball of light indicating a stratospheric layer of orange smog with blue streaks that might denote an atmosphere beneath the smog and clouds. The closest approach at 2:04 p.m. September 2 was 220,000 miles, and Pioneer had taken the first pictures at 260,000 miles. The pictures would be enhanced by computer before scientists could make detailed analysis. On September 3, Pioneer was already more than a million miles from Saturn, relaying no ill effects from the planet’s rings or radiation belts. Early on the morning of September 2, NASA reported loss of about two hours of Titan data from Pioneer transmissions to the Madrid station; ARC controllers did not know whether the loss occurred between spacecraft and station or between Spain and the control center about 40 miles south of San Francisco. A loss between spacecraft and station would be irretrievable: Pioneer had only the one opportunity for Titan observations after its close approach. It was not sending images at the time, but about 15 minutes of a CalTech infrared sensor’s readings on Titan temperature were lost. The cause might have been electrical storms in space or on Earth, or passage of the signals close to the surface of the Sun on their way to the Earth, any of which would make it difficult or impossible for the Madrid station to lock on to the signals. A dramatic difference in day-night Titan temperatures would suggest a thin atmosphere; a thicker, warmer atmosphere might be more hospitable to life forms. Project manager Charles Hall reported September 4 that the Titan data loss previously attributed to radiation disturbances was now thought to result from radiofrequency interference by a Soviet satellite. Both Pioneer 11 and three USSR satellites had been operating on a frequency reserved for scientific use. The Soviet Union had twice agreed to shut down during Saturn encounter, and Hall said NASA had “no doubt the Soviets would have acted” if they had been asked; “we did not request them to turn off their satellite on Monday,” U.S. scientists did not realize at first that signals from a recently launched Soviet satellite might interfere with reception of Pioneer data, being “between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than the signals we were receiving from our spacecraft.” Aerospace Daily said September 6 that the three Soviet satellites that had stopped transmitting September 1-2 for the benefit of Pioneer’s Saturn flyby were early-warning satellites designed to detect U.S. ballistic missile attacks on the Soviet Union. Cosmos 1024, 1109, and 1124 had suspended transmissions September 1 and 2 at NASA’s request; however, no request was made regarding September 3, and Cosmos 1124 had operated as usual. Western analysts questioned, Aerospace Daily noted, “whether the U.S. would suspend communications with any of is early-warning satellites if the Soviets made such a request” during a planetary mission. Pioneer project officials told a September 6 news briefing that the loss of Titan data was not the fault of the Soviet satellite, which was broadcasting before but not during the lost transmission. Poor data had resulted from the combination of solar storm and poor transmission from Madrid. Some data had in fact reached ARC, but was so “noisy” as to be useless. Scientists said the moon discovered by Pioneer was inside the orbit of Janus, previously the innermost known satellite of Saturn; the new ring (labeled G) was between the orbits of Rhea and Titan, beyond the rings visible to Earth telescopes. (NY Times, Sept 2/79, 1; Sept 3/79, A-l; Sept 4/79, C-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; W Post, Sept 1/79, A-3; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 5/79, A-10; W Star Sept 1/79, A-4; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; A/D, Sept 6/79, 17; Today, Sept 1/79, 4A; Sept 2/79, 1A)
ComSatCorp announced the official beginning of the new International Maritime Satellite Organization, INMARSAT, to operate a global maritime communications network. ComSatCorp would represent the United States in the new body. INMARSAT’S board, which would eventually represent 22 member nations, had met for the first time this date at Brighton, England. The new group would begin its operations in the 1980s after taking over from Marisat (developed and managed by ComSatCorp’s wholly owned subsidiary Comsat General), which for three years had provided communications services to the U.S. Navy and commercial shipping and offshore industries. (ComSatCorp Release 79-28) compare the difference of the price tag for the energy effort—$142 billion stretched over a 10-year period versus the $20 billion the Apollo program cost us for 10 years.” The Washington Star said July 19 that all three Apollo 11 astronauts would attend an Air and Space Museum ceremony the evening of July 20; on July 20 it reported that the ceremony had been held at 11 a.m. A Star editorial July 20 asked why the United States had stopped abruptly after taking “our first steps into the universe,” concluding that the United States was reluctant to pay for more space missions; assumed that “Americans had become bored by space voyages”; and now leaned “toward introspection and consumption.” Like the Star editorial, a Tom Wolfe commentary in the July 20 New York Times drew a parallel between the Apollo program and Columbus’s voyages, with support and excitement at the beginning and loss of public interest at the end. The July 21 New York Times said that the Air and Space Museum ceremony drew “some 2,000 people”; the “engineers and managers and astronauts who made possible” the giant leap for mankind had gathered for a “family reunion . . .When they spoke of the future, they wished it somehow could recapture the spirit of the past they remembered.” Later, the three astronauts took copies of the NASA history, Chariots of Apollo to the White House; President Carter said “We will win energy security for our nation in the same way we won the race to the moon.” As part of the observance, the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House Committee on Science and Technology held a symposium July 19: “Next Steps for Mankind—The Future in Space.” Moderated by Jules Bergman of ABC News, speakers were Professor Carl Sagan, Cornell University; Dr. Noel Hinners, Air and Space Museum director; and George Jeffs, president of Rockwell International’s aerospace operations. A NASA release had recalled events of the Apollo 11 launch July 16, 1969, and an MSFC release announced a nine-day observance in Alabama, home of the center and its Saturn V that made the mission possible. (NASA Release 79-74, 79-76; MSFC Release 79-72; W Star, July 17/79, D-1, D-2; July 19/79, B-l; July 20/79, A-10, A-ll, B-2; NYTimes, July 20/79, A-12, A-25; July 21/79, A-l, A-21; symp rept, Sen Cte Comm/H Comm Sci, July 19/79)
Neil Armstrong, “America’s reluctant space hero,” said the United States should develop a permanent manned orbiting space station for long-duration exposure of people and equipment to the space environment. At an interview about the 10th anniversary of the moon landing, the University of Cincinnati engineering professor who in 1969 had been the first man to walk on the moon said that, if the United States had an ongoing manned space program, “we could have solved the problems” with Skylab. {Today, June 12/79, 16A)
NASA announced it would deploy seven laser satellite-tracking systems in the United States and the Pacific Ocean as part of a global network to extend conventional measurements of strain in the Earth’s crust and to seek the causes of earthquakes. The lasers, to be in full operation by October, would work with microwave devices using signals from satellites and radio stars to measure crustal movements and the buildup of strain. Laser systems using corner-cube reflectors put on the Moon by the United States and the Soviet Union were operating in Texas, Australia, and West Germany; satellite-laser systems were operating in France, Spain, Germany, Greece, Egypt, England, and the Netherlands. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had laser systems in Peru, Brazil, and eastern Australia. NASA had joined NOAA, the U.S. Geological Survey, NSF, and the Defense Mapping Agency in a program using space technology to reduce earthquake hazards and possibly to develop a capability of predicting them. (NASA Release
NASA reported that Pioneer 11 was working well on its way out of the solar system after a successful flyby of Saturn, during which it found two new rings and possibly a new moon of the planet. Barring a failure, the Pioneer could continue to return useful data until the late 1980s when it would pass beyond radio contact with Earth. The spacecraft was built by TRW Systems Inc., and the project was managed by ARC in California. After a six-year trip of more than 3.2 billion kilometers (2 billion miles) in space, Pioneer 11 spent 10 days photographing and measuring the ringed planet. The spacecraft experienced at least two hits from meteroids above the rings of Saturn and three more hits below the rings; it recorded no damage from high-velocity ring particles, showing that spacecraft could operate safely near the visible rings. Major findings of the flyby included a magnetic field around Saturn; analysis of the gravity field and composition of the planet’s core; radiation into space of 2.5 times more heat that Saturn received from the Sun; and low temperatures on the moon Titan that might remove the possibility of life there. (NASA Release 79-135; ARC Release 79-42)
Photographs of Jupiter’s moon Io taken by Voyager 1 had revealed a strange “blue snow,” identified as volcanic gases released by continuous eruptions in the equatorial region, the New York Times reported. Dr. Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey told the American Geophysical Union spring meeting in Washington, D.C., that wisps of the gas appeared in Io’s south polar area along faults or fractures in the crust; this was the first finding of erupting volcanoes anywhere except on Earth, and the intense volcanic activity was “endlessly repaving [Io’s] surface with volcanic material.” Dr. Edward C. Stone of the California Institute of Technology (CalTech), chief Voyager mission scientist, said that a change in the Voyager 2 plan would include time-lapse photography of Io to pinpoint the nature of the volcanic activity. Dr. John C. Pearl of GSFC said Voyager 7’s infrared detectors showed that the main constituent of the gases was sulfur dioxide, also found in Earth’s volcanic eruptions. Dr. Norman F. Ness, also of GSFC, said Jupiter’s magnetic field extended far beyond Io’s orbit, creating a “big power station in the sky.” (NY Times, May 31/79, B-16) During May: NASA reported that the X-ray telescope on Heao 2 had photographed for the first time an X-ray “burster,” a “bizarre” phenomenon occurring when compact celestial objects less than 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter increase suddenly and intensely in X-ray brightness. Such a burst, releasing more X-ray energy in 10 seconds than the Sun does in a week, was first discovered by a Netherlands/U.S. cooperative satellite carrying Harvard-Smithsonian detectors in 1976. Scientists had not defined the nature of the bursts, which might result from explosions similar to a helium bomb on the surface of a neutron star or from violent instabilities in gas flow down a black hole. Heao 2’s picture, said Jonathan Grindlay of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, established the presence of a “steady” X-ray source in a “globular cluster” called Terzan 2, bringing the number of such clusters known to harbor X-ray sources to at least eight, six of these being bursters. The cores of globular clusters (oldest objects in the galaxy, consisting of round swarms of about 100,000	stars) were under study as possible precursors of black holes or of compact binary systems containing either neutron stars or black holes being formed to produce bursting X-ray sources. (NASA Release 79-65)
NASA announced that Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart had resigned to take a position with a State of California commission on energy resources that plans and regulates the state energy system. Schweikart flew the first lunar module on Apollo 9 in 1969 and was commander of the backup crew for the first Skylab mission. In May 1974 he became director of user affairs in the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters; in September 1976, he was named assistant for payload operations in Planning and Program Integration and was detailed in September 1977 to the State of California as assistant to the governor for science and technology. (NASA anno July 30/79)
NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, which arrived at KSC April 10-after a piggyback flight from MSFC, would be rolled out to Launch Complex 39 on May 1 as part of an exercise to clear the way for launch of its sister ship, Columbia, which had arrived at KSC March 24 for checkout and final installation of thermal tiles. This would be the first time a complete Space Shuttle configuration had been put together in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) and moved to the launch pad; use of the Enterprise would confirm compatibility of assembly and launch facilities and ground support equipment with elements of the Shuttle and would rehearse KSC staff in Shuttle handling operations. On April 17, a 15-story external tank was mated with two inert solid-fuel rocket boosters on a mobile launcher platform in high bay 3; more than 75,000 visitors to the center viewed the assembly moving down the 2-mile towway to the VAB, into which Enterprise was moved April 18. The delta-wing orbiter would be mated with the external tank in a 19-hour operation before its 3.5-mile ride to Pad A, former site of Apollo lunar launches modified for Shuttle operations, where it would remain until the first week of June. (NASA Release 79-50)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
A United Airlines newsletter reported the first solar-powered flight of an aircraft: Larry Mauro’s Solar Riser, a homemade tailless biplane with about 600 solar cells in upper-wing panels, generating about 60 pounds of thrust to turn a 3-foot fiberglass propeller, enough to carry a 165-pound pilot and 125-pound craft aloft. Mauro flew his plane about a mile at a height of 40 feet during the annual experimental-aircraft convention in Oshkosh, Wise. Astronaut Neil Armstrong had watched assembly of the craft, now in a Wisconsin museum. (UA rept Dec 79)
NASA announced that MSFC had appointed a board to investigate the automatic cutoff of a test firing July 2 at NSTL of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article (three main engines mounted in an orbiter aft section and attached to an external tank). A liquid-hydrogen leak from a main fuel valve caused the cutoff after 18.5 seconds; no explosion occurred, and the gaseous nitrogen and water fire-control systems put out an external fire resulting from hydrogen accumulation around the test article’s aft area. Inspection revealed damage to the aft heat shield and charring of external-tank insulation, but the engines appeared generally in good condition. (NASA Release 79-92) 570 million miles a flood of scientific data and “stunning photographs of the planet and some of its moons,” as the New York Times described them. Scientists at the JPL, control center for the mission, said that the flight was continuing to provide them with “new surprises.” They had modified observing sequences on Voyager 2 to benefit from discoveries by Voyager 1 on its encounter in March. Changes included more darkside images of the planet to measure lightning and aurora; images of Jupiter’s ring, taken away from the equatorial plane; and about nine hours of continuous imaging of Io for volcanic activity. Voyager 2’s inward track past three of the four “Galilean” satellites had let it see regions not viewed by Voyager 1; its path was “more conservative,” as it passed 10 Jupiter radii above the visible clouds compared to Voyager i’s 4.9 radii, for “complementary observations.” Voyager 2 studies began April 25 and would continue for a seven month look compared to Voyager Ts three month look. Voyager 2 had been launched August 20, 1977; Voyager 1, launched September 5, 1977, on a faster and shorter course, had overtaken its sister ship before the end of the year. Scientists found that Jupiter and its moons did not resemble planets or satellites nearer the Sun, nor one another. Surprises in the findings were due, they said, to real differences between the outer and inner solar system and lack of previous knowledge, a result of the distance separating Earth from Jupiter. Before Voyager 1, “we thought we had some idea of what planets were like,” said Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey after seeing Europa images from Voyager 2. Instead of a sphere heavily pocked such as Earth’s moon and Mars from meteor impacts, Voyager 2 images showed Europa “as smooth as a billiard ball,” with hardly any craters on a surface covered by a mantle of slushy snow and ice up to 60 miles deep, with far-reaching shallow marks like cracks in an eggshell. The spacecraft passed Callisto and Ganymede on its way toward Europa and, after its encounter with Jupiter, had begun a 10-hour watch for Io, where it photographed six volcanoes erupting. On its approach to Jupiter, Voyager 2 had encountered radiation so intense that JPL had turned off a sensitive ultraviolet (UV) detector six hours earlier than planned; however, project director Ray Heacock declared “no problems and no failures in any of our instruments.” (JPL Release 901; NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, June 26/79; NY Times, July 10/79, C-l; W Post, July 10/79, A-10; W Star July 11/79, A-4; July 13/79, A-10) The PRC news service told of the difficulties encountered by Skylab and the U.S. government’s offers of assistance and compensation in case of damage or injury, noting that some airlines had suspended flights during the critical period. Tass said that western Australia authorities had “warned the population that some parts of Skylab might be radioactive and urged. .. caution in approaching them.” At a NASA press conference a few days earlier, a reporter asked how NASA could tell if someone brought in a piece of debris claiming falsely that it was part of Skylab. Richard G. Smith, deputy associate administrator, space transportation systems, who had been “actively in charge of Skylab activities for NASA,” replied that “it is very easy to identify an object that’s been in space. The high-energy particles that penetrate it in orbit give an extremely low-level but characteristic radiation background—no radiation for anybody to be worried about.. .But it’s very easy to determine that.” United Press International (UPI) reported July 13 that the Kalgoorlie town hall had squeezed into its lobby the biggest fragment recovered so far, a 6.5-foot by 3.25-foot cylindrical piece of metal bearing a stamped number 102: “very good for the tourist industry,” said Mayor Ray Finlayson. (NASA press conf July 6/79; coord ctr bltns July 9, 10, 11/79; NASA Dly Actv Rept July 12/79; W Star, July 12/79, A-l; UPI, July 14/79, A-7; FBIS, Xinhua in Chinese, July 12/79; Tass in English, July 13/79; AvWk, July 16/79, 22)
Dr. Frank Press, director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space that President Carter’s May directive reaffirmed the policy of five previous administrations: separation of military and “open” civilian space programs; data sharing, hardware sharing, and technology transfer between civilian and military programs; and domestic civilian remote sensing regulated by the government. The United States had spent $100 billion over the past 20 years on federal space activities: about $67 billion for civilian programs ($25 billion for Apollo alone) and $33 billion in military programs. Today, the expenditure was about half and half. The FY79 budget request had been $7.1 billion, and the FY80 request would be $7.9 billion (up by 12%). These sums did not inelude private investment in space, more than $2 billion in communications satellites alone. (Text, Jan 25/79)
Astronauts interviewed in Las Vegas, Nev., on the eve of an Apollo 11 10th anniversary commemoration noted the lack of funding and support for the space program on the part of the U.S. government. James McDivitt, who commanded Apollo 9, said that he foresaw nothing like the Apollo program coming along. Ron Evans, command-module pilot for Apollo 17, said that spectacular space events were not in the cards for the next 20 years. Charles Duke, 10th man to walk on the Moon; Al Worden, Apollo 15 command-module pilot; and Dick Gordon, Apollo 12 command-module pilot, said the Shuttle system was not as safe as craft used in previous manned programs, as “Congress isn’t ready to give NASA the money it needs.” (Today, July 15/79, 20A; W Post, July 15/79, A-4; P Inq, July 17/79, 11)
NASA reported that pictures taken by Voyager 2 in July during its trip through the planet Jupiter’s system had revealed a new moon in the ring plane. CalTech researchers David Jewitt and G. Edward Danielson, the latter a member of the Voyager imaging-science team, had found a starlike object in pictures of the ring plane taken less then 24 hours before the closest approach to Jupiter. When exhaustive search found no star to account for the trace in the photograph, the searchers examined another higher resolution image showing the same portion of the ring, trails of known stars, and the same unidentified object. The presence of a moon was shown by differing angles and lengths of actual star trails compared with the trail left by the object. Jewitt and Danielson would make a further study of pictures taken four months earlier by Voyager 1 in an effort to identify the same object. (NASA Release 79-132)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes. —Eldon D. Taylor, formerly of the NASA Headquarters Office of Space Science and Applications, most recently assistant director of administration for the NSF was approved by the president July 30 as NASA’s first inspector general. He had also been deputy assistant administrator for resource management at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) before going to NSF. (NASA anno Aug 3/79) —Dr. Lee R. Scherer, director of KSC since January 1975, would become associate administrator for external relations at NASA Headquarters September 2, succeeding Arnold W. Frutkin, who retired June 22. Scherer, who retired in 1964 from the Navy as a captain, was program manager for the lunar orbiter manned spacecraft while on assignment from the Navy in 1962 and was director of DFRC 1971-1975. (NASA Release 79-106; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Succeeding Scherer as KSC director would be Richard G. Smith, the deputy director since 1974 of MSFC who had been on detail to Headquarters as deputy associate administrator for STS (the Shuttle program). Smith had been in charge of operations during the Skylab reentry. At MSFC, he had been program manager for the Saturn 5 rocket engine that made Apollo possible. (W Post, Aug 9/79, A-ll; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Dr. Walter B. Olstad, chief of space systems division at LaRC since July 1975, would become deputy associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at NASA Headquarters effective October 1, succeeding Dr. John M.	Klineberg, who became deputy director of LeRC July 1. Olstad had begun as a research engineer at the NACA Langley laboratory in 1954, working first with transonic tunnels, then in reentry physics. (NASA Release 79-110) —JSC announced that Clifford E. Charlesworth had become acting deputy director August 10, succeeding Sigurd A. Sjoberg, who retired May 18. Charlesworth for three years had been deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program office, responsible for coordinating JSC technical management and Shuttle users. He was deputy manager of the Skylab program 1970-1972, then manager of JSC’s Earth-resources program office. He joined JSC as a flight controller in 1962, working on Gemini and Apollo missions and was one of the flight directors during Apollo ITs 1969 Moon landing. (JSC Release 79-51)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel W. Hinners, associate administrator for space science, had accepted appointment as director of the National Air and Space Museum, effective in April. He had joined NASA in 1972 as chief scientist and deputy director of Apollo lunar exploration in the Headquarters Office of Manned Space Flight and had held his present job since June 1974. (NASA Release 79-32) The scheduled takeoff for Florida might be delayed because of bad weather, NASA spokesmen warned, to lessen chances of an accident during the crosscountry flight; adverse conditions had developed along the route. The 15-minute test flight Friday of the orbiter-747 combination resulted in extensive damage to the protective-tile surface of the orbiter, said former astronaut Deke Slayton, NASA’s manager for orbiter flight tests. As the 747 took off down the runway at Edwards, parts of the dummy tiles, some as long as 2.5 feet began to fall off the spaceship. When the flight ended, Columbia had lost not only some of the plastic-foam dummy tiles attached by tape to the areas around the windows, fuselage sides, wings, and midtail, but also some of the 26,000 actual protective tiles bonded to the spaceship at the plant. “When the dummies began to fall off, the tape which was attached to them started to swirl around and damage some of the real tiles,” said Slayton, who flew one of two chase planes to keep an eye on the orbiter-747 test flight. NASA had decided to send Columbia to KSC without about 8,000 tiles that could be installed there; dummies had been used to cover areas where in-flight problems might arise, but after seeing the test results, engineers decided that not all the dummies were needed. Slayton said that the orbiter-747 assembly was now scheduled to depart for Florida on Monday, March 12. The 3,000-mile ferry flight had originally been set for Friday, March 9, but a problem arose in mounting the orbiter on the 747, caused by misalignment of the orbiter to the three struts atop the 747, and the test flight was delayed until Friday afternoon, after which the tile problem occurred. Although NASA engineers said March 10 that the combination could still fly cross-country March 12, a later report said that 34 dummy tiles were lost and 39 damaged; 7 real tiles were destroyed or lost and 100 damaged. Replacement of missing tiles would delay the trip at least to Saturday, March 17; NASA planned to complete the fix without removing the orbiter from its carrier aircraft. (NY Times, Mar 9/79, A-20; W Post, Mar 9/79, A-3; Mar 12/79, A-7; W Star, Mar 10/79, A-5; Mar 11/79, A-6; Mar 12/79, A-4; Today,, Mar 9/79, 1A, 16A; Mar 10/79, 1A, 8A; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Mar 13/79)
The House Committee on Science and Technology announced that it would hold a joint hearing July 19-20 with the House Select Committee on Aging on space technology applications for the elderly and handicapped, to mark the 10th anniversary of the first Moon walk. Committee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said that the hearings would emphasize the importance of space program spinoffs in solving problems here on Earth. NASA would release a report “Technologies for the Handicapped and Aged” on innovations such as a lunar-gravity simulator to speed rehabilitation therapy; a voice-controlled vehicle for paraplegics that could pick up packages, open doors, and handle eating utensils; a human-tissue stimulator to reduce chronic pain; healthmonitoring systems; and fabrics to prevent bedsores. (H Rept Release 96-60)
