Nature reported that the ESA council voted to transfer launch capability to the private firm of Ariane-Espace, which would handle production and launch of all future ESA satellites. (Nature, Jan 31/80, 422) During January: The Washington Post reported the death January 13 of James J.	Donegan, 63, “a pioneer in space technology” at NASA since 1958. An aeronautical engineer specializing in spacecraft tracking, data acquisition, and computing techniques at GSFC, Donegan was an original member of the ground instruments unit attached to the first Space Task Group (STG) formed in 1958 to meet the challenge of Sputnik. He was a designer of the original manned spaceflight network and directed GSFC’s manned spaceflight activity until 1973, when he became head of a new Operations Support Computing Division responsible for computer support to both manned and unmanned scientific spacecraft. He was operations director for Project Mercury and coordinated instantaneous computer services for Gemini and Apollo flights, receiving NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1969 for his work on Apollo. {W Post, Jan 18/80, C-10)
The New York Times reported that Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins would resign effective January 28 as undersecretary of the Smithsonian Institute, an office held since 1976, to become vice president for field operations of Vought, Inc., in Washington, D.C. Collins had joined the Smithsonian in 1971 as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (NY Times, Jan 15/80, C-16)
The Soviet Union launched a redesigned spacecraft, Soyuz 13, carrying three cosmonauts in what the New York Times called a possible bid to break the 185-day endurance record set in October. Launch at 5:18 p.m. Moscow time was from the cosmodrome at Baykonur in Soviet central Asia; Tass reported that all systems were working well. The pilot of the flight was Lt. Col. Leonid Kizim, 39, a first-time flyer in space; flight engineer Oleg Makarov, 47, had flown on Soyuz 12 in September 1973 and Soyuz 27 in January 1978, as well as the “anomaly” of April 1973. Research engineer Gennady Strekalov, 40, also a rookie, had worked for 20 years in spacecraft design. This was the first three-person flight launched by the Soviet Union in nine years, since the crew of Soyuz 11 died during reentry in June 1971 when their capsule sprang a leak and lost pressure. The cosmonauts had not worn their space suits because of crowded conditions on the capsule. Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said that Soyuz T3 had “all the latest accomplishments of science and technology” including a fast onboard computer to free the crew “to the maximum from . . . .routine operations.” The system was said to perform all calculations needed to dock with another craft such as Salyut 6. However, Radio Moscow did not say how long the flight would last, and Moscow media did not say whether Soyuz T3 would link with Salyut 6, which had been in orbit three years—only that the crew would test a new spacecraft. Soyuz T3 was first of that type to carry a three person crew, 39th in the Soyuz series, and sixth manned craft to be launched in 1980. Two tests of the new design had been successful: an unmanned Soyuz 7"had docked with space station Salyut 6 in December 1979, and Soyuz T2 carrying Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V. Aksyonov had joined the Soyuz 36 crew (record-holders Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov) there in June of this year. Salyut 6, designed to last only 18 months, had supported four expeditions over its three years in orbit. When Ryumin and Popov left it six weeks ago, after a thorough overhaul of its equipment, they said that it was fit for further use. (NY Times, Nov 27/80, A-3; W Post, Nov 28/80, A-28) During November: MSFC announced that Dr. William R. Lucas, center director, had appointed Thomas J. (Jack) Lee deputy director, effective December 1. Lee had worked at the center and its predecessor since 1958 and for the past six years had managed the Spacelab program, working with ESA on this Shuttle payload. John W. Thomas, Lee’s deputy, would succeed as manager of the Spacelab office. Lucas named John S. Potate, associate director for management, to a new position as associate director. Potate had come to MSFC in 1973 from the Apollo lunar-landing program at KSC and at Headquarters. (MSFC Release 80-149)
The White House issued a statement on President Carter’s presenting the Goddard Trophy of the National Space Club to NASA’s Voyager team, for the “outstanding achievement in advanced spaceflight programs contributing to American leadership in space.” NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch would accept the trophy on behalf of the Voyager team for its successful planetary mission to Jupiter. The award was established in 1958 to honor Dr. Robert Goddard (1882-1945), considered the father of modern rocketry; receipts in previous years included Wernher von Braun, John Glenn, the Apollo 11 crew, the Skylab astronauts, and the Viking project team. (WH Anno, Mar 24/80)
JSC reported on its new water-immersion facility (WIF) for Shuttle crew training. MSFC would furnish some payload training mock-ups; JSC would build others including a full-sized Shuttle bay. The new pool, measuring 33 x 78 x 25 feet and located in a building formerly housing an Apollo manned centrifuge, would hold half a million gallons—as much water as 25 average backyard swimming pools—heated to a constant 85 °F for diver comfort over long periods of time. It would replace a 25-foot-diameter tank built in the mid-1960s for Gemini and Apollo emergency training. Filter and chemical systems would reduce bacteria and provide a clear medium needed for underwater photography. Six submersible television cameras, two operated by divers and four mounted under water, would follow the training operations, with pan, tilt, and zoom operated from a console at the pool edge. The facility would include a 5-ton air-powered overhead crane to lift trainers and mock-ups out of the water (and eliminate electrical shock), as well as air compressors to fill scuba tanks. (JSC Roundup, Aug 22/80, 1)
The Washington Star said that prospects of mining on the Moon brought senators, scientists, and lawyers together to discuss profits that would not be earned for years, if ever. Witnesses at a Senate commerce subcommittee hearing said that some companies thought private investment would be hindered by any treaty that called for dividing lunar products among Earth’s nations. A proposed Moon treaty approval last year by the United Nations said that lunar resources were “the common heritage of mankind,” a phrase that might threaten profits of the few nations or companies that could mount successful moon-mining expeditions. NASA’s Dr. Robert Frosch said the treaty was not a problem, noting that years of development would have to precede any actual “issues of investment or returns in extraterrestrial resources.” Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) asked if the treaty might have a chilling effect on investment; Frosch replied, “Only if you want to be chilled.” (Washington Star, July 30/80, G-7) July Ji.Following an intensive review of the Space Shuttle program over the past few weeks, NASA confirmed a decision made earlier in 1980 to schedule the first Shuttle launch in March 1981. NASA administrator. Dr. Robert Frosch said the decision was made in spite of a potential setback when fire damaged a Shuttle engine cluster during a test [see July 14]. A study of the engine fire and its possible impact had already begun but would not impede the effort to maintain the launch schedule. The decision to commit to a March launch came after a series of meetings in which NASA and contractor personnel examined the status of hardware and software required for the first flight. On the 15-week work schedule from rollout to launch, Frosch said that experience of previous “first launches of new vehicles” showed that original schedules were seldom carried out in the time planned, but “the best chance of the earliest successful first flight comes in working to a tight but achievable work schedule.” (NASA Release 80-122; MSFC Release 80-102) During July: ESA’s monthly newsletter said that the launch failure of its Ariane L02 launch vehicle [see May 23, June 17] did not call into question the continuation of the program. When the cause: of the engine failure was known, program officials would conduct the other two qualification firings. The six Arianes now being manufactured would launch Marecs B, Sino 2, Intelsat V, Exosat, ECS, and Telecom 1A, the organization said. (ESA newsletter, July 80)
NASA reported that Dr. Cyril Fonnamperuma, director of the University of Maryland laboratory of chemical evolution, and his researchers had recently discovered amino acids (basic building blocks of life) in Antarctic meteorites presented by NASA. The Antarctic program began three years ago as a cooperative venture of NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) to collect meteorites under extremely clean conditions like those under which Apollo astronauts obtained lunar samples, so free of contamination that they could offer evidence of any organic history before they impacted Earth. The agency had given the team Antarctic meteorite and lunar surface samples, as well as data obtained by deep-space probes on atmospheres of other planets. The laboratory examined the lunar and meteor samples for evidence of organic material and tried to create molecules similar to those present in Earth and the planetary atmospheres before life began. Using gas-chromatograph techniques to identify right-and left-handed molecules of amino acids (the direction in which a beam of polarized light sent through a solution of the material would turn), the team had obtained strong evidence of both right- and left-handed amino acids in the Antarctic meteorites. Since all Earth life forms contain only left-handed molecules, the preorganic matter in the meteorites had to be formed somewhere else. The meteorites used by the team were about 4.5 billion years old; the oldest Earth material identified so far was 3.7 billion years old, and some of it contained evidence of organic matter. “The processes we postulated as taking place on the earth before life began seem to have taken place somewhere else also,” Fonnamperuma said. “What this implies is that all those events which led to life may be common in the universe, so what we said happened on the earth may be happening somewhere else.” (NASA Release 80-21)
NASA reported that it and NSF had found a promising new meteorite source in the Antarctic, two fields known as Recking Peak and Elephant moraines, three or four times as large as the Allen Hills area covered by meteorite hunters during the past four years—also “more promising. . .and more dangerous,” said curator John Annexstad, one of the discoverers. The finds had been handled like the lunar samples brought to Earth by Apollo astronauts; the unusual preservation aspects of the ice shelf kept the meteorites as they had been when entering Earth atmosphere hundreds of thousands of years ago, providing evidence of organic history predating their arrival on Earth. The search for meteorites on the ice shelf had begun with the Japanese, who found large amounts in the Yamato mountains of Queen Maud Land. Dr. William Cassady, University of Pittsburgh, theorized a transport system explaining the Antarctic icefield concentrations, and several seasons of hunting tended to confirm the theory. The total of Antarctic meteorites found topped 1,600, many of them rare or unique types. (NASA Release 80-28)
NASA noted the 20th anniversary of the first research of the X-15 rocket plane that opened up the realm of hypersonic flight and contributed significantly to the U.S. space program. The X-15 made 199 flights in a joint NASA-U.S. Air Force-Navy research program between 1960 and 1968, during which it set the standing records for altitude and speed of winged aircraft: altitude of 1,796 kilometers (354,200 feet, more than 67 miles), and on another flight 7,274 kilometers per hour (4,520 miles per hour), or 6.7 times the speed of sound. X-15 pilots included Scott Crossfield, the first; astronaut Joe Engle; and Neil Armstrong, first man on the Moon. In 1954, at the beginning of the X-15 program, hypersonic flight had many unknowns: effects of weightlessness, high heat rates, steep reentry angles, attitude control in space—questions that only actual flight could answer. The program would also explore capabilities and limitations of a human pilot in an aerospace vehicle; analysis of the first 44 flights showed that 13 would have failed without a human pilot. Positive result of the program was the finding that human capabilities of sensing, judging, coping with the unexpected, and using a variety of acquired skills remained undiminished in all key problems of aerospace flight. A significant X-15 contribution to the space program was to demonstrate that simulators could be used for crew training: no X-15s had two seats, so the pilots had to train in simulators. Success of this method led to all-out use of simulators for the space program. Total cost of the program, including construction of three X-15 aircraft, was about $300 million. (NASA Release 80-37; NASA Actv, May 80, 8)
NASA reported on its 17-year-old art program of inviting well-known artists to document major agency activities. Among participants were traditionalists like Peter Hurd and James Wyeth and modernists like Robert Rauschenburg and Lamar Dodd. NASA had stationed artists at the closest possible observation points during Moon launches and on recovery ships when astronauts returned from space and let them pilot simulators; of travel to make-believe moons. In 1977 NASA commissioned Robert T. McCall to document the rollout of Enterprise at DFRC (McCall was muralist for the National Air and Space Museum). In 1978 Franklin McMahon and Tom O’Hara painted the first flight of the orbiter. Arthur Shilstone and Clayton Pond covered vibration tests at MSFC; Shilstone and Nicholas Solovieff recorded Shuttle progress, including rollout in May 1979 at KSC. NASA would send a team to paint the launch and landing of Columbia. The New York Society of Illustrators had given Shilstone a certificate of merit for his painting “The Crawler: Rollout of the Enterprise” which had been in an international exhibition, including Japan and China, and would appear in the society’s 1980 art annual. (NASA Actv, Aug 80, 18)
The Earth 34 million years ago might have had a ring like those that circle Saturn today, said Dr. John A. O’Keefe of GSFC’s Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics. A sudden event 34 million years ago, known to geologists as the terminal Eocene event, caused dramatic climate changes in Earth’s temperate zones, dropping northern-hemisphere winter temperatures about 35 °F (20 °C). Botanical studies revealed that the temperature change, the most profound climatic event between 65 million and 2 million years ago, occurred at the end of the Eocene, but it had no acceptable explanation as yet. O’Keefe noted that the changes coincided with a massive fall from outer space of tektites (glass meteorites) possibly from an eruption on Earth’s Moon; studies of these tektites showed similarities to rocks brought from the Moon. Whatever the source, the tektites that hit Earth made a path around the globe from the eastern United States across the Pacific to the Philippines. Tektites that missed the Earth would have formed a ring like the rings around Saturn; such a ring in the winter would block the Sun’s rays in the northern hemisphere when the Sun was below the equator, and the shadow cast by the ring would lower winter temperatures. The ring disappeared when forces (such as pressure of sunlight or drag of the atmosphere) pulled it either into the atmosphere, where some particles burned and others fell to Earth, or upward into space away from the Earth. (NASA Release 80-86)
NASA reported that the National Archives had formally accepted its records of the 1967 Apollo 204 spacecraft fire, to be retained permanently for use by scholars studying the space program in general and the failure and subsequent redesign of the spacecraft. (NASA Actv Rpt May 12/80)
The British Interplanetary Society’s publication Spaceflight carried an article by one of its fellows (barrister Cyril Horsford, also a director of the International Institute of Space Law), on the agreement covering the activities of states on the Moon and other celestial bodies, opened for signature at the United Nations (U.N.) December 18, 1979. The “moon treaty,” 10 years in the making, was adopted by the U.N. General Assembly as a resolution; some of its principles were already in the first outer space treaty in 1967, but several nations, “notably the USSR,” had expressed the need for a separate agreement specially directed at exploration of the Moon. The treaty now awaiting signature would apply to all bodies in the solar system and their orbits, as well as the Moon; the text (reproduced as appendix to Horsford’s article) was already the subject of controversy among international lawyers and others in two particular areas. First, Article IV said use of the Moon was “the province of all mankind”; Article XI said the Moon and its resources were “the common heritage of mankind .’’ The difference had raised questions whether the meaning was the same. Article I of the 1967 space treaty had used the words “province of all mankind,” whereas the words “common heritage” first appeared during a Law of the Sea conference, when a moratorium on exploration preceded a General Assembly resolution affirming the common-heritage principle. International law had not defined the limits of the principle; the new “moon treaty” would reserve privileges under it to States Parties to it (although “all mankind” would be beneficiaries). Also, the concept of “common heritage of mankind” was apparendy limited to the terms of Article XI. 1. Second, the third paragraph of Article XI would apparently prohibit any appropriation of resources found on the surface or subsurface of the Moon; in its literal meaning, this wording would preclude any mining or exploitation of valuable minerals found there in future. Some felt the language was “merely legal,” reaffirming the existing principle that no legal property in lunar resources in place could accrue to an exploring state. The U.S. delegate to the United Nation’s legal subcommittee was confident that the wording did not place any moratorium on exploration, pending the international “regime of management” required under Article XI.5. Horsford noted that opposition to Article XI had already led the U.S. Senate to postpone ratification of the treaty this year. Although the 1967 space treaty “clearly enshrined” the principle of nonsovereignty over celestial bodies, “some quarters” feared that such a clause would inhibit space powers (particularly the United States) from embarking on “the costly adventure of lunar exploitation” while such a restraint existed or where an international regime of shared resources would result in little or no profit. “This danger is already apparent in. . .deep sea mining, when an international regime is involved,” said Horsford. (SF, July-Aug 80, 273)
MSFC reported that July 21 had marked the end of an era: Gustav A. Kroll, last of the original 118-man “von Braun team” to leave the center, retired just six weeks short of having 35 years of U.S. government service. He had headed the structures division of MSFC’s Structures and Propulsion Laboratory. Kroll arrived in the United States in 1945 in Operation Paperclip and worked at Ft. Bliss, Tex., with the von Braun team, which transferred to Huntsville in 1950. Kroll became a U.S. citizen in 1954. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1976 for “guiding the overall structural design of the solid rocket boosters,” two of which would be used in the first two minutes of flight on each Space Shuttle launch, recovered, and refurbished for reuse. He had worked in structures throughout his career: “all of them—every one of Marshall’s projects—Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn, Shuttle—all of them,” he said. Looking back, “there are no favorites, but the highlight would have to be the Saturn V flight and landing on the moon.” (MSFC Release 80-101)
NASA announced development of a new lightweight flame-resistant material subject only to charring even at 800°F (426°C): polyimide resilient foam, a product of International Harvester’s solar division at San Diego, under contract to JSC. Use of the new foam, available next year, would reduce hazards for buses, trains, and automobiles as well as planes. Between 1965 and 1978, fires occurred in 20% of all passenger air-carrier accidents and caused 2,727 deaths, 469 of them (17%) attributed to effects of fire or smoke. Airlines and builders of commercial planes had sought improved materials since the 1960s; in the late 1960s, materials developed by NASA for Apollo and Skylab were made available to the industry, which chose not to use them because of cost, scarcity, and lack of durability. (NASA Release 80-185)
NASA announced that Dr. William C. Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would retire from federal service February 29. He joined the Gemini program in 1963 after two years at International Telephone and Telegraph’s (ITT) federal Laboratories as director of space systems, having also worked for the U.S. Navy and for NACA. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal for his work as mission director for 7 of 10 Gemini missions. From July 1967 to December 1968 he directed Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 4 and won NASA’s distinguished service medal for the success of Apollo 8, first manned flight around the moon. He directed the Skylab program from December 1968 to July 1974, and with the three Skylab crews received the Collier Trophy in 1973. He would become a vice president of Computer Sciences Corporation. (NASA anno, Feb 22/80; NASA Release 80-27)
Only a day away from its closest encounter with Saturn, Voyager 1 had surprised scientists again with images of a huge hill on the moon Tethys and some distorted “ringlets” inside Saturn’s concentric ring system. The head of the imaging team, Dr. Bradford Smith, said Saturn’s rings were a complex system with dozens of small ringlets forming perfect circles within circles; traditional theories did not explain even the series of concentric ringlets. Of one ringlet offset in a ring gap, Smith said that it was not circular and not of uniform width, varying from 15 to 50 miles wide; this and another found elsewhere might be caused by small moonlets not yet visible on either side, distorting the ring particles with their gravity. (W Star, Nov 12/80, A-5)
NASA announced that a JPL scientist, Dr. Stephen P. Synnott of the Voyager optical navigation team, had discovered a 15th moon of Jupiter from Voyager 1 photos taken in March 1979. Checking March photos to confirm the discovery of another satellite (1979 Jl) in October 1979 photos taken by Voyager 2, Synnott detected an unexplained shadow on the planet that, once recognized, was evident on seven earlier images. The new satellite, labeled 1979 J2, had a 16-hour orbit around Jupiter between moons Amalthea and Io; 1979 Jl had a 7-hour orbit. (NASA Release 80-61; JPL Release 930)
NASA announced that JPL’s Dr. Stephen R Synnott, the Voyager project navigator who discovered a 15th moon of Jupiter [see May 6], had done it again: searching through Voyager photographs token in 1979 to confirm discovery of a 14th satellite, he discovered a 16th. The new find was about 40 kilometers (25 miles) in diameter and circled the planet every 7 hours, 4 minutes, 30 seconds, the same process had located the 15th satellite, found by Synnott in March 1980; at that time, he thought he was confirming an earlier sighting of a 14th moon because they had similar sizes and orbits. But, upon comparing data from Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Synnott found that “the object I was looking at was on the opposite side of the planet—it couldn’t be J14, so it had to be a new one.” Before Voyager 1 reached Saturn the planet was believed to have 13 moons; a 14th (the one Synnott was trying to confirm) had been seen in October 1979. (NASA Release 90-139)
.The longest spaceflight in history ended at 12:50 Moscow time when cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin landed near Dzhezkazgan in the. descent module of Soyuz 37 after 185 days aboard the Salyut 6 space station. A previous record of 175 days was set last year by Ryumin and Vladimir Lyakhov; shown on Soviet television immediately after landing, they seemed to have trouble walking and talking. The Soviet Union did not have television coverage of the Ryumin-Popov landing, but the two appeared on television at 9 p.m.. local time in recliners, being interviewed. A Reuters report from the landing, carried by the New_ York Times, said that the two men appeared well when they climbed from their capsule in the rain, Ryumin noting “it’s always pleasant to have a soft landing.” He joked with journalists and insisted on walking two yards unaided “almost without staggering,” said Trud, a trade-union newspaper. Doctors said that neither man seemed to show the physical deterioration suffered by other long-mission crews; Popov had gained 6.5 pounds, Ryumin almost 11. They had kept up their strength in space with exercises. (The New York Times noted that the new record far outdistanced the longest U.S. space mission, the 84-day mission of Skylab 4 with Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue, that ended in 1974. In the absence of U.S. space exploits since the Moon landings, Western observers said that the new Soviet feat might indicate that the Soviet Union had regained the lead in space; coupled with the delay in the U.S. Shuttle program and public awareness of growing Soviet military might, the Salyut accomplishment might translate into political advantage.) Salyut 6 had been orbiting for three years, being manned for about half that time. Four main and eight visiting expeditions had been working there, backed by automatic cargo craft bringing fuel and supplies. Tass said that the preventive maintenance and resupply procedures carried out by the crews were a big step toward “lasting manned complexes for scientific and national economic purpose.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 11/80; NY Times, Oct 12/80, 23; Oct 13/80, A-13)
