LeRC said that it had developed a device called MIAMI (micro-wave ice-accretion measurement instrument) to warn airplane pilots of dangerous ice buildup. This was the only device able to measure actual ice thickness and rate of accretion, besides giving a warning. Unlike other such instruments, MIAMI was imbedded in, instead of projecting from, the surface under study; projecting probes tended to collect ice and confuse detection of how much was actually forming on the surface. The microprocessor in the device could tell the difference between ice and other substances (oil, dirt, grease, insects) and signal only the formation of ice. (LeRC Release 82-56) LeRC also reported the completion of a five-year $39-million program of engine improvements to conserve fuel in commercial jet aircraft through identifying areas for cost-effective refurbishment and of performance loss. The specific goal was to reduce fuel use by up to 5 % for current jet engines. Much of the cost would be repaid by contractors Pratt & Whitney and General Electric; under the reimbursement feature of the program, repayments over a 10-year period would be based on sales of improved components. So far, NASA had recovered nearly $1 million from the contractors, with a potential of $19 to $20 million. (LeRC Release 82-57) Salyut 7 had been visited twice by the other crews: on June 24 two veteran cosmonauts arrived with French test pilot Jean-Loup Chretien, the first nonAmerican from the West to travel in space; on August 19, a second set of visitors arrived, including Svetlana Savitskaya, the second woman to fly in space. Cargo ship Progress 16 had docked with the combined Salyut 7-Soyuz T-7 November 2 bringing fuel, research materials, supplies for the crew, and mail. On November 18 the cosmonauts launched from Salyut 7s airlock Iskra 3, a small communications satellite created by student designers at the Moscow Aviation Institute to make experiments in amateur radio. Student receiving stations in Moscow and Kaluga would control Iskra 3 and receive and process incoming data. (NY Times, Nov 15/82, B-6; FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 2, 9, 16, 18, 22/82) November. 15-19: Press reports said that problems November 15 with new million-dollar space suits had canceled the first space walk scheduled in nearly nine years and would bring STS-5 to a conclusion November 16. The walk was canceled when the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit quit and the device maintaining oxygen pressure in William Lenoir’s backpack behaved so erratically that flight directors feared a breakdown during any space walk. Program managers said that the walk could be done on a later flight; Glynn Lunney at JSC said that the program was “still right on track.” The next three flights would carry space suits for any unexpected problems, such as cargobay doors that refused to close. The next flight was scheduled for February 1983. Inspectors after the November 16 landing said that Columbia came through the fifth flight better than previously: an inboard tire on the left side was shredded and flattened on landing by a brake jamming against it, but only 4 of the 33,000 protective tiles were damaged or came loose during reentry. A seven-man panel investigating the space-suit failure said that they hoped to have answers within a week. One possibility was that the suits were dropped while in their cases or when removed and stowed in the ship. Engineers were baffled by the failure of both suits at the same time for different reasons. The New York Times said that the suits, “most complex human garments ever made,” differed from those used in Apollo moon landings, or for Skylab in 1973 and 1974, which functioned well but were too stiff for easy handling of tools needed by Shuttle astronauts. Shuttle missions had called for production, by United Technologies’ Hamilton Standard Division, of 43 suits and 13 backpacks at a cost of about $2 million each; the suits had been tested by the company 160 times while unmanned and 70 times while manned, said a company spokesman. (W Post, Nov 16/82, A-l; Nov 18/82, A-7; NY Times, Nov 16/82, C-3)
ARC said that it had developed, with the aid of General Electric, a portable remote-communications system: a terminal and a folding antenna sized to fit inside two suitcases and be carried aboard an airplane and powered by either an ordinary AC outlet or the cigarette lighter in an automobile. Working with experimental communications satellite ATS 3, operated by NASA since 1967, an operator anywhere in North or South America or most of the nearby Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could contact any of several ground stations at any time. The system would fit into two ordinary suitcases that could be carried as luggage in an automobile or on public transportation; one suitcases contained the collapsible antenna, the other an alphanumeric terminal to send or receive messages. The alphanumeric system would not disturb voice communications over the satellite, so that a NASA-authorized user could use it at any time without prior scheduling. ATS 3 had already served in many emergencies. When Mt. St. Helens erupted in May 1980, an Air Force jeep at the disaster site maintained voice communications through ATS 3 and a GE station near Schenectady, showing the need for rapidly deployable long-distance systems not dependant on land lines, often destroyed in emergencies. Organizations, including the state of California and the National Association for Search and Rescue, were working with NASA on further uses of the technology. (NASA Release 82-195; ARC Release 82-48) During December: George B. Kistiakowsky, 82, a developer of the first atomic bomb who later became a leading opponent of nuclear weapons, died of cancer at his home in Cambridge, Mass. In 1944 he headed the explosives division at Los Alamos Laboratory of the Manhattan project, where he designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to detonate the atom bomb, receiving the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work. After he saw the first nuclear bomb explode at Alamogordo July 16, 1945, he said “I am sure that at the end of the world—in the last millisecond of the earth’s existence—the last human will see what we saw” ( W Post, Dec 9/82, C-17) —Jack Swigert, the former astronaut elected to Congress by Colorado’s 6th district voters, who knew he was fighting cancer, died December 27 at the age of 51 a week before he was to be sworn into office. He had flown on the aborted Apollo 13 Moon mission in April 1970, substituting at the last minute for Thomas K. Mattingly who had been exposed to German measles and was not immune. Swigert left NASA in 1973 to become executive director of the House committee on science and technology and had worked for two energy firms in Denver before resigning to run for Congress. (MiHrld, Dec 29/82, 1A)
NASA went before the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to ask for a market test of a “land mobile satellite service” to complement cellular systems and other mobile arrangements now being planned or in use. NASA asked the FCC to reserve frequencies, for commercial companies offering to establish communications by satellite to rural America via portable radiotelephones that could switch calls between vehicles and local telephone networks. Present “cellular radio” systems were land-based, difficult to install in remote areas amid mountains and other barriers. The FCC had denied a similar NASA request last year but would not comment on the new request. NASA said that other nations were developing mobile satellite communications services on frequencies provided by the 1979 World Administrative Radio Conference; if the FCC failed to provide the United States with frequencies, it could jeopardize its leadership “in satellite communications and in mobile communications equipment.” The application said that mobile systems in the United States had been “available only through terrestrial facilities... limited in range” and restricted mostly to urban areas. A satellite system could include up to 288,000 rural subscribers by 1990, NASA said. W Post, Nov 30/82, C-7) November SO: Former Apollo 13 astronaut Jack Swigert, elected November 2 as congressman from Colorado’s 6th congressional district, was hospitalized in Denver after undergoing chemotherapy for bone-marrow cancer. He would remain there “another few days,” an aide said. (NY Times, Nov 30/82, A-17)
NASA’s Solar Max satellite had detected an 18-month decrease in solar-energy output that might have caused an unusually harsh winter in 1981 and 1982, said JPL. In the first direct observation of cause-and-effect between solar output and changes in Earth’s climate, a solar telescope—Solar Max’s active-cavity radiometer irradiance monitor—recorded a steady decrease from February 1980 to August 1981 of a tenth of 1% in total solar energy reaching Earth. Systematic increases or decreases as small as 0.5% over a century had produced vast changes in Earth’s climate: the “Maunder minimum” in the 17th century, when sunspot activity almost vanished, had coincided with a period known as Europe’s little ice age. A 1% decrease could lower mean global temperature by more than 1,000 (2°F), and less than 10% decrease could freeze Earth’s entire surface. Earth lifeforms existed in the bioshell, an area 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) on either side of mean sea level, with temperatures fed by solar-energy input and interaction between atmosphere, ocean, and land masses. The time needed to cool down the atmosphere and ocean would allay short-term changes in solar input. JPL’s Dr. Richard C. Willson noted that “if you turned off the sun tomorrow, you wouldn’t see its full effects on earth for three years.” Solar activity peaked about every 11 years. The current cycle peaked about the time Solar Max was launched early in 1980; the decrease might represent the general decline since then but might also indicate a longer term lowering of solar input. (Telescope at the High-Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colo., had recorded images of what seemed to be a shrinking sun that might have grown as much as a tenth of 1% smaller every 100 years for the last four centuries.) Solar Max had lost pointing capability in December 1980, and only three of its seven instruments were still returning data. It had been designed for retrieval by the Shuttle, and NASA was seeking authorization for a Solar Max repair mission. (NASA Release 82-57; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-6) During April: Dr. Noel W. Hinners, director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, would become director of GSFC June 14, succeeding A. Thomas Young. Dr. Hinners was associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters from June 1974 to April 1979, when he took over at the museum; he had also been director of lunar programs in NASA’s Office of Space Sciences. He had joined NASA in 1972 as deputy director and chief scientist of Apollo lunar exploration. (NASA anno Apr 1/82; NASA Release —Col. Joe H. Engle, commander of STS-2 in November 1981, was temporarily assigned to the STS office at NASA Headquarters in conjunction with recent organization changes. As deputy associate administrator for manned space flight under Gen. James A. Abrahamson, his special experience would help simplify the integration process for Shuttle users and ensure maximum use of its manned capabilities. He would retain astronaut status and return to JSC to train for his next flight. (NASA Release 82-71)
NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS A, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie. STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph P. Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5. STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists. NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release 82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
Charles (Pete) Conrad, who commanded Skylab’s first mission and was now a vice president for marketing at McDonnell Douglas, said that pieces of Skylab that crashed in 1979 over western Australia after five years in orbit would go on sale, with proceeds to NASA, for the support of Viking I, the Mars lander still sending messages from the surface of that planet. The Skylab pieces fitted into colorful posters were expected to raise from $150,000 to $500,000. Conrad had been a member of the Apollo 12 mission that landed on the Moon as well as commander of the Skylab mission in 1973. (W Post, Nov 12/82, A-10)
The Washington Post noted the 25th anniversary of the USSR’s launch of an orbiting satellite, saying that “no single event in history assaulted America’s image of itself as did Sputnik.” Subsequent U.S. space ventures “did nothing but tarnish that image,” the Army and Navy arguing over which would launch the first satellite, while the Soviet Union orbited dogs, rats, and mice and took pictures of the dark side of the Moon. The Navy got the first opportunity December 6, 1957, with Vanguard on the pad at Cape Canaveral and “literally blew it.” The Army was given four days in January 1958 to launch Explorer from the Cape. When the launch finally took place after being delayed two days by unsafe winds, sea air had so corroded Army tracking radios in the Caribbean that, the Cape never received the signal that the satellite was in orbit. In 1961 “the roof fell in” when Yuri Gagarin became the first man to orbit the Earth, and Gherman Titov orbited 17 times. The “best U.S. orbital effort that year was that of Ham the chimpanzee.” Not until 1962 did John Glenn orbit the Earth, and then for only three orbits. By the end of that year the Soviet Union had sent four cosmonauts into, space.	. President John F. Kennedy had told Congress May 25, 1961, that the U.S. goal would be to put a man on the Moon and return him safely “before the end of the decade.” By the time a three-man crew in Apollo 8 orbited the Moon in 1968 at Christmastime, “the space race was over. What happened to the Soviets?” Former JSC Director Chris Kraft said in an interview that the Soviet Union PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED INTFNU0NAUt RUN* “abandoned their moon program. We took the wind right out of their sails.” Critics said that not all of the effects of the space race were good: it “spurred U.S. determination to improve the quality of schools and students, but whether that succeeded is debatable.” Kennedy “never saw the flight of anything to which he gave the initial impetus”; President Johnson, “who did more for the Apollo manned program than any president, suffered through the fatal Apollo fire”; President Nixon “basked in all of the Apollo triumphs only to answer for Watergate.” One educator said “Sputnik is one reason Johnny can’t read today. He’s more interested in Pac-Man, which you might call an outgrowth of Sputnik.” If Sputnik led to Pac-Man, the Washington Post said, it also “helped to produce the high technology of the computer revolution. . .Today’s state-of-the-art computer processes 5 million operations a second.” W Post, Oct 4/82, A-l)
NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hartsfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights. The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command. Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release 82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1) During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86) —NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful ApolloSoyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
The U.S. Air Force launched two military communications satellites from Cape Canaveral on its Space Division’s first Titan 34D and inertial upper stage (IUS). The first Defense Satellite Communications System III (DSCS) satellites went into orbit with parameters of 35,779/35,901-kilometer apogee, 35,641/35,839-kilometer perigee, 1440-minute period, and 2.5° inclination. The Air Force Systems Command said that the launch was the culmination of five years of development effort on an experience base of 47 previous Titan III launches from the Cape. The DSCS system had handled national security communications since the late 1960s, maturing from simple short-lived satellites to flexible systems with six times the capacity and more than three times the on-orbit life. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 19/82, 1) During October: Leroy R. Grumman, 87, founder of the Grumman aerospace firm and designer of carrier-based airplanes with stubby teardrop-shaped fuselages used by the U.S. Navy in World War II, died October 4 in Manhasset, N.Y., after a long illness. He had started his business with a few other persons in 1929 as a repair shop for amphibious aircraft built by the Loening brothers’ company; by the end of the war, Grumman employed 20,000,	and it was still Long Island’s largest employer. The company built more planes in a single month than any other U.S. firm (664, in March 1945) and made 98% of the Navy’s bombers. In 1966, when Grumman resigned as chairman of the board, the firm was building the lunar module that carried Apollo crews to the Moon. His awards included the Guggenheim Medal for Aeronautics and the Presidential Medal of Merit. (W Post, Oct 5/82, C-7; NY Times, Oct 5/82, D-25)
Three astronomers at the University of Hawaii, using NASA’s infrared telescope facility on Mauna Kea and data from Voyager 2, announced the first measurement of the sizes of four of the five known moons of Uranus. Voyager 2 was heading for Uranus after a successful flyby of Saturn 10 months ago, and the new calculations would be useful in planning the scientific studies to be done after arrival. Uranus was so far from Earth, about 3 billion kilometers (2 billion miles), that it was visible only through telescopes. Sizes of the moons were figured from their infrared (heat) radiation. NASA had built the Mauna Kea telescope, most sensitive in the world for measuring faint infrared sources, to provide support for spacecraft exploring the planets; Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii team, also a member of the Voyager project, said that the Moon data were exactly the sort of support NASA had in mind. The moons of Uranus, smaller than Earth’s, were all as large as any of Saturn’s except Titan, the giant moon that was the only planetary satellite found to have an atmosphere. Oberon, largest of the Uranus moons, had a diameter of about 1,690 kilometers (1,100 miles). Besides measuring the Uranus moons, the astronomers reported that Triton, largest moon of Neptune, and the planet Pluto were both too small and too cold for any heat radiation to be detected; the weakness of the sources led them to decide that Triton must be smaller than Earth’s Moon. Triton and Pluto, “based on our current knowledge,” might be very similar; past speculation suggested that Pluto might have been a escaped moon of Neptune. (NASA Release 82-104)
