NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
President Reagan issued a proclamation calling on the nation to observe the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s 25th anniversary with “appropriate ceremonies and activities.” Reviewing the agency’s history and accomplishments, including preeminence of U.S. civil and military aviation, the Apollo program, planetary exploration, and the Space Shuttle, the message stated “The future looks bright, and NASA will be an important part of it.” (Text, pres, doc., Oct 1/83)
The International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE), a spacecraft intended to be the first man-made machine to encounter a comet, came within 72 miles of the Moon’s surface in a maneuver designed to carry it through the tail of the comet Giacobini-Zinner in September 1984. Engineers at GSFC stored the five-year-old spacecraft on a horseshoe-shaped path behind the Moon, then down over the Sea of Smyth on the visible side of the Moon, where it picked up speed and sped out oward deep space. Goddard’s worldwide tracking network lost contact with the spacecraft when it flew behind the Moon, then regained contact when it flew across the Moon in a flyby as close as any unmanned spacecraft had ever made to another heavenly body without going into orbit around it. The close approach to the Moon was intended to provide a slingshot effect from the brush with lunar gravity that accelerated the spacecraft from 2,900 to 5,145 miles per hour. The flight through the comet’s tail was to take place on September 11, 1985, when Giacobini-Zinner was 44 million miles from Earth. It was planned that the spacecraft would fly through the comet’s tail for about 30 minutes at a distance of about 12,000 miles from its head. On passing the Moon, the ISEE-3 spacecraft was renamed the International Cometary Explorer to emphasize its new mission. (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Dec 28/83; W Post, Dec 23/83, A-4)
A Solar System Exploratory Committee, representing the science community and NASA, concluded a two-year study by recommending that the agency undertake “moderately priced missions” to Mars, Venus, Titan, and a comet before the end of the century. NASA had sent 32 unmanned spacecraft to other worlds in the 1960s and 11 in the 1970s; only 2 in this decade. Proposals were a Venus radar-mapper in 1988, a Mars orbiter in 1990, flyby of an asteroid and rendezvous with a comet in the mid-1990s, and a probe of Saturn’s moon Titan between 1988 and 1992. Other missions of interest to the group would be sampling Mars and comets; robot rovers on Mars; and probes to Neptune, Uranus, and Saturn. (W Post, Apr 17/83; A-9; NY Times, Apr 17/83, 22)
NASA launched Telestar 3A for the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (AT&T) from the Eastern Space and Missile Range at 6:49 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37,516-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, 23° inclination, and 664-minute period, preparatory to moving it to geosynchronous station at 96 °W over the Pacific just west of the Galapagos. Telestar 3A was the first of a new series of three domestic communications satellites offering AT&T long-lines customers television, phone, and data service over the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico; it had 24 transponders and 6 spares, each able to relay a color-television signal at 60 million bits per second or up to 3,900 two-way phone calls. (Telestar 1 launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay could offer only 600 one-way voice channels or one television channel.) Launch of Telestar 3A was declared successful December 16. (NASA Release 83-110; NASA MOR M-492-216-83-01 [postlaunch] Dec 16/83; Spacewam SPX-358, Aug 30/83, 2) During July: NASA appointed Dr. Milton A. Silveira, assistant to the deputy administrator, to succeed Dr. Stanley I. Weiss as chief engineer. Weiss, who came to NASA in 1980 as associate administrator for space transportation operations at Headquarters, was leaving to become vice president for engineering at Lockheed Corporation, where he had worked from 1957 to 1978. Silveira began at Langley with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1951 and worked in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. He was deputy project manager at JSC for the shuttle orbiter program before coming to Headquarters in 1981. (Anno, July 1/83) NASA also appointed John W. Boyd associate administrator for management at Headquarters effective September 4. He had begun at ARC in 1947 and served there until appointed deputy director of DFRC in 1979, returning to ARC in 1980 as associate director. (Anno, July 1/83)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
NASA signed with the California Institute of Technology (CalTech) an extension of its contract for performance of research and development at JPL. The contractual relationship had been in effect since 1962; JPL studies for NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA) had been principally in space science and unmanned exploration of the Moon and planets. Extension from October 1, 1983, through September 30, 1988, would cover space exploration and Eiarth observation. (NASA Release 83-122)
NASA announced the selection of crews for STS-13 and Spacelab 3, as well as mission specialists for Spacelab 2. Robert L. Crippen, who piloted STS-1 and was scheduled to command STS-7, would command STS-13 in April 1984 with Francis R. Scobee as pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. George D. Nelson, Terry J. Hart, and Dr. James D. van Hoften. Robert F. Overmyer, who has pilot of STS-5, would command STS-18 (the Spacelab 3 mission, now scheduled for launch ahead of Spacelab 2) with Frederick D. Gregory as pilot. Mission specialists v/ould be Dr. Don L. Lind and physicians Dr. Norman E. Thagard and Dr. William E. Thornton. Both of the latter would be on Shuttle flights before Spacelab 3: Thagard on STS-7, Thornton on STS-8. Payload specialists would be selected later. Mission specialists for STS-24 (Spacelab 2) would be Dr. Anthony W. England and Dr. Karl G. Henize. Spacelab 3 was originally to be the first operational mission; Spacelab 2, which should have preceded Spacelab 3, was delayed for completion of an instrument-pointing system. (NASA Release During February: The Florida Historic Preservation Society charged that NASA had breached a 1974 agreement by arranging for demolition of the last Apollo launch tower at KSC and sale of the metal as scrap. NASA said that it had to award a contract for demolition by February 18 or risk further delay in Shuttle schedules: the tower had to be removed by October so that NASA could begin modifying the mobile launch pad for use by the Shuttle beginning in 1986. NASA had postponed demolition for a week to let the society find a way to preserve the tower but said none of the suggestions was practical. The matter arose when two U.S. Air Force engineers at KSC said that the tower could be a major tourist attraction and started a move to save it. NASA said that it would cost up to $4 million to remove the tower and reassemble it for display. The agency had accepted a bid of $557,000 to remove the tower, and the demolition company would keep the steel, worth about $400,000, as scrap. A coalition of historic preservation groups said that the tower could be removed and rebuilt for $1 million (admittedly only an estimate). NASA had offered free storage and a site for reconstructing it if the coalition would pay a contractor to dismantle and move it. (NASA Release 83-25; W Post, Feb 17/83, A-17)
