Scientists at the University of Chicago announced that a U.S. experiment to analyze the dust of Halley’s comet was riding aboard the Soviet Union’s Vega-1 spacecraft. It was the first known Soviet-U.S. cooperative space venture since the docking of the manned Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. The cosmic dust analyzer—and a twin that would be launched aboard Vega-2—were built by university scientists under the leadership of John Simpson, one of the preeminent astrophysicists in the United States, who had designed, experiments for more than 30 space missions over the past 25 years. The joint project was bom at an international symposium in Holland in . September 1983, where Simpson outlined vastly improved comet dust measuring methods. About'a month later, he said, the Soviets surprised him by inviting him to put the analyzer aboard their Vega. Simpson received Reagan administration approval and about $300,000 in NASA funds, which touched off a frantic search for components. “We scoured the U.S. and within two weeks got all the pieces,” Simpson said. Plugging U.S. electronics into a Soviet spacecraft required unusual cooperation. Moscow shared telemetry coding data, and Simpson was able to conduct high-speed computer analysis of Soviet rocket launch characteristics to aid in designing the dust analyzer so it could survive blastoff and flight. “On May 7, we walked into the Soviet space lab with working instruments,” which were then bolted aboard the Soviet spacecraft by U.S. scientists, he said. Simpson said that he had received computer tapes from the instrument during Soviet tests of the device while it awaited launch from the Baykonur cosmodrome and added that the Soviets had invited him to br on hand in Moscow when the comet encounter would begin in March 1986. (W Post, Dec 21/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 21/84, A-l)
A working meeting, in Paris, of astronauts from the Soviet Union, the United States, and France concluded after participants expressed concern for mankind’s future and the need for cooperation, and they emphasized their desire to use their unique experience to promote space exploration and the use of space technology for the good of all people. Participating in the meeting were Soviet cosmonauts A. A. Leonov (Voskhod-2 and Soyuz Apollo), O.G. Makarov (Soyuz 12, Soyuz 27, Soyu T-3), and Yu.V. Romanenko (Soyuz 26, Soyuz 38); U.S. astronauts R. Schweickart (Apollo 9), E. Mitchell (Apollo 14), and D. Eisele (Apollo 7); and French astronaut J.L. Chretien. The participants agreed to set up an organization of those who had traveled in space, with the aim of studying the potential and promoting the constructive use of space to improve living conditions on Earth, formulating positive prospects for future generations, and promoting the establishment of broad contacts among people who had been in space to identify opportunities for cooperation and issues of common concern. (FBIS, Moscow TRUD in Russian, Sept 12/84; FBIS Moscow Tass in English, Sept 11/84)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
