NASA announced that NASA, the Department of Energy (DOE), and the Department of Defense (DOD) selected the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for further design, development, and ground demonstration testing in Phase II of the SP-100 space reactor power program. The SP-100 program required developing and demonstrating a compact nuclear power system that would provide a safe and highly reliable source of hundreds of kilowatts of electric power for a broad range of civilian and military space applications including the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) in the early to mid-1990s and beyond. In the past, lower power nuclear sources provided the electric power for several NASA and DOD missions including Transit, Pioneer, Apollo, Viking, Voyager, and Lincoln Experimental satellites. The Galileo and Ulysses missions would also use nuclear electric power sources. The selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept followed three years of Phase I data collection and technical investigation. The three agencies considered four reference reactor system concepts employing different power conversion techniques: in-core thermionics and out-of-core thermoelectrics, which were both static energy conversion processes, and Stirling and Brayton cycle engines, which were both dynamic energy conversion machines. Selection criteria included safety; reliability; the capability of the system to meet mission power requirements; the potential for the technology to cover a range of power requirements up to 1000 kw; cost, schedule, and programmatic risks; survivability; and launch operations. The three agencies determined all of the power system technologies were adequate under those criteria; however, they ranked the reactor thermoelectric power system as having the greatest potential to fulfill reliably the overall requirements for future space power needs with minimum performance and schedule risk. The next steps in the SP-100 program required DOE to prepare the request for proposals and, pending the availability of funds, to select competitively a contractor to design, develop, fabricate, and test during the period FY 19861991 the major systems of the selected concept. DOE would select shortly a site for the reactor system program test. (NASA Release 85-116)
NASA announced that it had named effective immediately John Hodge acting associate administrator for space station. Hodge became director of the Space Station Task Force on its establishment in May 1982 and was appointed deputy director of the Interim Space Station Program Office in April 1984 when the task force completed its work. He directed activities that resulted in the initial concepts definition for the space station, established program management policies, initiated advanced development programs, defined user needs, and organized potential international cooperation. In 1984 NASA appointed Hodge deputy associate administrator for Space Station, coinciding with establishment of the Office of Space Station. Hodge joined NASA in 1959, after working with Vickers-Armstrong, Ltd. and AVRO Aircraft Ltd., as chief of Flight Control, supervising a team of over 200 technical and administrative personnel and 100 aerospace contractors and serving as flight director for Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo flights. In 1970 Hodge worked for the Department of Transportation as director of transportation systems concepts at the Transportation Systems Center and later became associate administrator for Policy, Plans and Program Management before rejoining NASA. Hodge received a B.S. degree in engineering from Northampton Engineering College in London and in 1966 the honorary degree of Doctor of Science from the City University, London. (NASA anno., Dec 26/85) NASA Installations Ames Research Center
National Space Transportation System manager Dr. Glynn Lunney, who was a member of the Space Task Group that inaugurated U.S. manned space flight, announced he would leave NASA in the near future, the Johnson Space Center Space News Roundup reported. Lunney, whose career almost exactly spanned the period of U.S. efforts in space, began his government service in 1958 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, NASA's predecessor, at Lewis Research Center. He then moved to the Space Task Group and with it to Houston when it became the Manned Spacecraft Center. Later he became head of the mission logic and computer hardware section, chief of the flight dynamics branch, flight director for the Gemini program, and, in July 1968, one year before the first manned landing on the moon, chief of the flight director's office. He then served as special assistant to the manager and then manager of the Apollo spacecraft program. With the advent of the Space Shuttle program, he became manager of the Space Shuttle payload integration and development program responsible for directing the planning and implementation for all payloads and payload carriers in that program. Since 1981 he served as manager of the National Space Transportation Systems Program with responsibility for overall systems management and integration of all elements of the program. Among the awards received by Lunney were the Lawrence Sperry Award, the Arthur S. Fleming Award, the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, the Allan D. Emil Memorial Award, the W. Randolph Lovelance II Award, three NASA Group Achievement Awards, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, an Outstanding Leadership Medal, Senior Executive Service designations, and an honorary doctorate of laws from the University of Scranton. Lunney was a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (JSC Space News Roundup, Apr 12/85, 1)
USA Today reported that its debate for that day would explore the pros and cons of U.S. manned space missions. In its editorial, USA Today said, "Human brains can adapt to change. Machines cannot. Without men and women in space, there would be no one to even try to fix the Navy's stranded satellite" [Navy communications satellite carried on the Discovery 51-D mission], ". . . Space is our last frontier. Without humans aboard to ride rockets to the stars and beyond, man will never embrace what he has envisioned," the editorial concluded. USA Today guest columnist Geoffrey Keller, a professor of astronomy at Ohio State University, wrote that one of the values of the manned space program was that it would help to lengthen the useful life of expensive space telescopes (for example, the Hubble Space Telescope), by permitting astronauts to replace worn-out telescope parts and to make telescopes more powerful as new and more efficient cameras were invented and installed. In an opposing view, James Van Allen, a professor of physics at the University of Iowa, wrote that nearly all of what he considered the really important and durable products of space technology were "achieved by much-less-expensive unmanned spacecraft, operating automatically and under cornmand control from ground stations, often for many years in earth orbit or in the far reaches of the solar system. ". . . The public acclaim for the Apollo program has left a permanent imprint on NASA and has, in effect, committed it to an overriding emphasis on further development of manned space flight," Van Allen continued. "This emphasis is simultaneously NASA's greatest strength and its greatest weakness. Manned space flight, with all its mythological foundations, has assumed the aura of a religion. The space shuttle and the proposed permanently manned space station are primarily embodiments of this religion," he wrote. But, he added, "the relevant results to date are far too meager to justify such hyperbolic expectations and such enormous expenditures. Meanwhile, the proven applications of space technology are languishing for lack of resources." (USA Today, Apr 16/85, 8A)
Dr. George Wetherill, director of the department of terrestrial magnetism at the Carnegie Institution of Washington, said in an interview with the New York Times that his report to appear in the May 17 issue of Science discussed his hypothesis that the inner planets of the solar system appeared to have been formed when a number of planets, some of them three times larger than Mars, repeatedly collided with one another until only one survived in each of the present planetary orbits. Wetherill believed the present planets had "lots of brothers and sisters" not much smaller than themselves, which collided to form "trial" planets, the NY Times reported. "The four we see today [Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars]," he said, "are the survivors. One of the final collisions," he added, "probably increased the spin of earth sufficiently to throw off materials that consolidated to form the moon." Wetherill derived his hypothesis from a computer simulation of what probably happened after the solar system began to take shape from a rotating cloud of dust and gas about 4.5 billion years ago. The analysis took into consideration various factors affecting the formation process once some 500 bodies, each one-third the size of the moon, had formed in the region around the sun now occupied by the four planets mentioned above. These factors included the gravitational fields around each object, the frequency of near misses that would throw the objects into eccentric orbits, and the collisions that may have canceled the eccentricity. Collisions would have generated enough heat within the earth to melt most, if not all, of its interior, allowing heavy material to sink and form earth's metallic core. Wetherill's calculations assumed that not enough gas was present to affect motions of the objects as they sped past one another; many scientists concurred that a violent "wind" blowing out from the sun swept the inner solar system clear of gas. Each collision would have driven off most of any planetary atmosphere that had begun to accumulate, and since impact histories of Earth and Venus were different, this could account for the differences in their atmospheric abundances of such inert gasses as argon. Initially, material destined to form the planets was so uniformly spread around the sun that their motions were determined by multiple collisions much like those of molecules in a hot gas. By the time this material had formed into larger bodies, Wetherill said, their mutual gravitational attractions would have become a significant factor. During the ensuing collisions, Wetherill believed, the existing planets had acquired 50% of their present material; after 100 million years the process was 99% completed. Age determinations of moon rocks indicated that the last great crashes, enough to produce the lunar seas, did not end until 3.8 billion years ago, or several hundred million years after the formative process began. By then, however, the impacting bodies were "quite small," Wetherill said, "about 30 miles in diameter." What remained in the form of asteroids and meteorites was far less than that needed to produce even a small planet. Jupiter and the large planets beyond it were not in a region swept clear of gas, making their formation histories very different, Wetherill concluded. (NY Times, May 11/85, 12)
NASA launched at 7:29 p.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B to practice methods for building a space station and to launch three satellites, the Washington Post reported. People more than 400 miles away in South Carolina and Key West, Florida, saw the launch. There had been only two other previous U.S. night launches: in 1972 when the Apollo 17 crew left for the moon in the middle of the night and in 1983 when the Space Shuttle Challenger departed in early morning. Nine minutes after launch, mission control reported Atlantis was in a secure orbit about 200 miles high, and launch director Gene Thomas said the countdown was the smoothest yet in the Space Shuttle program. Crew onboard Atlantis were Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, commander; Lt. Col. Bryan O'Connor, pilot; mission specialists Dr. Mary Cleave, Maj. Jerry Ross, and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring; and payload specialists Rudolfo Neri Vela (Mexico's first astronaut) and McDonnell Douglas engineer Charles Walker. During the mission the crew would launch Mexico's Morelos B satellite, Australia's AUSSAT 2, and RCA's Satcom KU-2. Jerry Ross and Sherwood Spring would also take two long spacewalks to assemble 93 aluminum struts into a 45-foot beam and six 12-foot beams into a 64-lb. inverted pyramid to test techniques that might be used to build the proposed permanently manned space station. Following each spacewalk, the mission specialists would disassemble and stow the beams. Cameras would record every move so that later a computer could reduce the photos to a motion study that engineers would use to determine how construction work could best be performed in the zero gravity of outer space. (NASA Release 85-153; W Post, Nov 27/85, A3)
NASA announced it was donating a 26-m antenna located at the Orroral Valley Tracking Station, Australia, which had ceased operations in December 1984, to the Australian University of Tasmania. NASA, which had used the antenna in programs such as Skylab, the Apollo Soyuz test project, and the Space Shuttle, had offered to assist in antenna dismantling and transfer to Hobart, Tasmania. The University of Tasmania's physics department, one of Australia's major centers for astronomy and astrophysics, would use the antenna as part of its teaching and research activities, including operation with the Australian telescope under construction in New South Wales to improve telescope performance. Researchers would also use the antenna in conjunction with other instruments for very-long baseline interferometry, a system employing a number of separate antennas to construct a radio telescope with a high-resolution capability, to obtain more accurate measurements of earth's surface. Researchers would also make the antenna available to NASA for its future geodesy, geodynamics, and astronomy projects. (NASA Release 85-28)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
NASA announced that Sultan Salman Abdelazize Al-Saud, an Arabsat payload specialist scheduled to fly on the 51-G 7-day Space Shuttle mission in June, would conduct 70mm photography over Saudi Arabia, 35mm photography of a fluids experiment, and would participate in the French posture experiment. Al-Saud's flight was part of a reimbursable agreement with the Arab Satellite Communications Organization covering the launch of the Arabsat 1B communications satellite. Al-Saud would use the 70mm camera to take pictures on daylight orbital passes over Saudi Arabia and the 35mm camera to document such phenomena as surface tension effects on mixed fluids in the absence of gravity. His other activities would include photography of the new moon in a lunar crescent observation and assisting the French payload specialist as a test subject in the French experiment. At a May 28 news conference at Johnson Space Center, Al-Saud said his flight was bound to improve diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Islamic world, the Washington Post reported. "You will have 800 million Moslems and 155 million Arabs glued to their TV sets watching an American spaceship carrying an Arab into space," he commented. NASA selected Al-Saud, nephew of Saudi's King Fahd, from hundreds of Saudi applicants. He had logged more than 1,000 hours in jet aircraft. Other crew for the mission were Daniel Brandenstein, commander; John Creighton, pilot; Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel, mission specialists; and Patrick Baudry, French payload specialist. Backup payload specialist for Arabsat was Abdulmohsen Hamad Al-Bassam. (NASA Release 85-69; WPbst, May 29/85, A12)
Space Shuttle mission 51-F was aborted today at three seconds before liftoff when the orbiter Challenger's onboard computer automatically shut down the main engines, Spaceport News reported. Seconds after main engine start, main engine No. 2 lost redundancy to operate the chamber coolant valve. NASA's ground rule restricted launching without an operating backup system in that area of the main propulsion system. Although the valve did assume its proper position after a command from a backup system, the loss of redundancy resulted in a major component failure flag being sent to the orbiter's computers. Challenger Commander Gordon Fullerton later thanked the Kennedy Space Center team on behalf of the crew, saying the team acted quickly and professionally and that at no time did the crew feel apprehensive. In answering a Washington Post reporter's question later, Fullerton said, "We all have mixed emotions here, but we're thankful the system worked the way it should. It was the longest three seconds I've ever experienced." Launch operations manager Thomas Utsman said that crews would strip parts of the malfunctioning engine and that engineers had identified four different parts that could have failed when they should have been pumping fuel from the hydrogen tank into the engine chamber. When the liquid-fuel engines ignited, valves that fed fuel into the chambers were fully open so engines could attain speed instantly. Just before liftoff, the valves were partially closed to cool engines slightly and prevent too much fuel from entering the chamber. The valve on main engine No. 2 failed to close partially, signaling the computer to shut down the system. The first Space Shuttle abort occurred June 26, 1984, when an onboard computer shut down two of Discovery's three engines four seconds before liftoff. That abort triggered an investigation that led to a complete overhaul of Discovery's main engines. NASA had to move Discovery back to the Vehicle Assembly Building where its cargo was removed and placed aboard another orbiter that flew into space two months later. "We don't think the engine valve itself failed the way a valve failed the [other] time we had a launch abort," Space Shuttle program manager Robert Lindstrom said. "I really believe there's a fair likelihood we'll get off again in another week." The delay did have an impact on the mission's objectives. The infrared telescope in Challenger's cargo bay could be operated successfully only in a completely dark sky. Had the flight left on schedule, the sky would have been dark for most of the following seven days until a new moon. NASA had scheduled the next Space Shuttle launch using the orbiter Discovery for August 24. It was not immediately clear how the Challenger's abort would affect that mission. (Spaceport News, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 13/85, A3)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
New observations supported the prediction that Saturn's satellite Hyperion was tumbling wildly rather than rotating with a regular predictable period, Science reported. In 1983 Jack Wisdom, who was currently at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues predicted that the combination of Hyperion's odd potato shape and the stretching of its orbit by the gravitational tugs of the larger satellite Titan would prevent Hyperion from rotating regularly. Instead of keeping one face toward Saturn, as the moon faced earth, Hyperion would rotate chaotically, tumbling one way then another, slowing down and speeding up, in a fashion impossible to predict in any detail from its preceding behavior. Since then, Peter Thomas of Cornell University and his colleagues reported analyses of the brightness of Hyperion in Voyager images that indicated a regular 13-day period of rotation during the 61 days of Voyager-2's encounter with Saturn. Jack Wisdom and Stanton Peale of the University of California, Santa Barbara, countered that determining a period from 14 brightness observations scattered over several supposed rotations could not determine whether the rotation was chaotic or not. They found many periods by similarly sampling a numerically generated chaotic light curve. The University of Texas's Richard Binzel, Jacklyn Green, and Chet Opal reported at a recent meeting of astronomers that the light curve of Hyperion they observed in April was "highly inconsistent with a 13.1-day rotation period." On April 16 and 17, Hyperion's magnitude was at a maximum for the 14-day observing period; it faded by 1 magnitude by April 21 and was no brighter 13 days after the first observations. It should have become 1 magnitude or 2.5 times brighter if it had a 13-day period. Although the observations did not prove chaotic rotation, the group said, "they provide strong evidence in favor of the hypothesis." To say much more about Hyperion's rotation, astronomers would have to observe Hyperion nightly for many weeks, something that those assigning telescope time had been reluctant to permit. (Science, Nov 29/85, 1027)
The European Space Agency announced that it had signed with the Commission of the European Communities an agreement to cooperate on the APOLLO project, which would provide, through the EUTELSAT 1 series of communications satellites developed by ESA and European industry, a highspeed digital information transfer system suitable for long data messages, particularly document facsimiles, transmitted from a small number of information providers (up to 10) to many widely dispersed users. The agreement provided for development as specified by ESA of prototype equipment by European industry and for the Commission with the assistance of ESA to provide overall coordination of APOLLO, including archives planned for the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities in Luxembourg and for several other large document archives in Europe. The commission estimated that APOLLO would help to provide a longterm infrastructure for a market expected to expand greatly over the next five years and to contribute to experience in the design, costing, and operation of small dish earth terminals and other equipment developed for APOLLO. APOLLO could also stimulate the creation of a market for European earth stations and associated equipment. Trial users transferring digital records, documents, and computer files would assess the system for high-speed and high-quality information. (ESA release Aug 2/85)
Although a mission to put a human colony on Mars seemed unlikely anytime soon, members of the National Commission on Space [see U.S. Space Policy/National Commission on Space, Mar. 29] said it appeared to be only a matter of time until such an undertaking took place, the Washington Post reported. The commission was due in May 1986 to present a report outlining what it thought the U.S. space program should look like over the next 20 years. The U.S. last visited Mars in 1976, when unmanned Viking 1 and 2 missions landed and began collecting data. The Mars Observer was scheduled for a 1991 launch to study the planet from orbit. NASA officials said that beyond that there was nothing concrete on the drawing boards, although they were considering sending an unmanned craft to land on Mars, collect samples, and return in a manner similar to early moon explorations. (W Post, June 5/85, A5)
The Circumnavigators Club in New York City would present Sally Ride, the first American woman astronaut, with its Order of Magellan, the Washington Post reported, which was presented to individuals who were dedicated to advancing peace and understanding in all parts of the world and who had circumnavigated the globe. Ride was only the 17th person to receive the award. Other recipients were Gen. Douglas MacArthur, former President Hoover, Neil Armstrong, Sen. Barry Goldwater, Lowell Thomas, and Thor Heyerdahl. (W Post, Nov 11/85, C3)
NASA's Inventions and Contributions Board awarded the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Dr. Robert Nathan a plaque and a check for $20,000 for his work in planetary image processing, the JPL Universe reported. Nathan received the award for his "combined technical contributions to planetary and biomedical image processing and scientific data analysis techniques." Nathan invented digital image processing, a technique in which computers remove noise, correct distortions, and enhance different images such as planetary objects or biomedical images. Nathan joined JPL in 1959 to manage scientific data analysis for the upcoming Ranger moon missions. The Ranger spacecraft used the best available cameras, but they were subject to distortion and noise contamination. Nathan devised techniques to eliminate extraneous patterns from the images. His processes and the creation of the image processing laboratory (lPL) established JPL as an important center for planetary image processing. In 1969 Nathan launched JPL into biomedical imaging with a $2 million grant from the National Institutes of Health, which later led to formation of the JPL biomedical image analysis facility. In 1976 Nathan developed a system at the IPL to handle large amounts of data by means of a large array filter using very-large scale integration (VLSI) system silicon chip technology. The microchip reduced computer time by a factor of 100. He was currently working on another microchip design that would perform high-quality geometric image manipulations and filter chips that would perform pattern recognition functions. (JPL Universe, Nov 15/85, 1) During November: NASA announced that its Lewis Research Center (LeRC) received four of Research & Development magazine's IR—100 awards to honor the 100 most significant new products developed during the past year. A panel of technical judges selected the winners from more than 1,000 entries. The award-winning products were servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, transmit module, communications traffic processor, and rotary power-transfer device, all of which LeRC and private firms under contracts to the center developed jointly. LeRC researchers Stuart Loewenthal and Bruce Steinetz with General Electric engineers developed the servomechanism for propeller-pitch change, which could accurately control the propeller blade angle of large (10,000 kw) turboprop aircraft propellers over the complete spectrum of flight operating conditions. With certain modifications, the product should be adaptable for applications as aircraft wing pivot mechanisms, tank turret aiming actuators, and other heavy mechanisms, requiring very accurate pointing and tracking control. The transmit module, developed by LeRC researchers Thomas Kascak, Godfrey Anzic, and Denis Connolly along with Rockwell Internatl. engineers, provided rf signal amplification and phase shifting at a frequency of 20 gigahertz. The device was of monolithic design in which all module functions were contained on a single 6.4 by 4.8 millimeter semiconductor chip with the smallest circuit feature about 40-millionth of an inch. This development made possible the production of weight- and cost-effective phased array antenna systems for future communications satellite systems. LeRC engineer Russel Jirberg along with electronics engineers from Motorola Corp. developed a communications traffic processor for the next generation of communications satellites. The system provided the capacity and routing flexibility needed to handle the nation's growing demands for telephone and computer message traffic. When used aboard satellites having multiple narrow beam antennas, the device enabled more than 60,000 individual voice messages, video pictures, and computer data to be routed directly to users throughout the U.S. equipped with low-cost ground terminals. LeRC engineer David Renz in cooperation with Sperry Flight Systems engineers developed a rotary power-transfer device that transferred electrical power through a rotating joint. It had a low loss space-type design capable of transferring high power (hundreds of kilowatts), AC or DC, to frequencies such as 20 kilohertz. One of its outstanding features was loss of only 22 watts per circuit while transferring 100 kilowatts. Renz and his colleagues said the roll-ring assembly device had the potential to be one of the major components of the proposed space station and other spacecraft where large amounts of power are required. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 10)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
Researchers in the Workload and Ergonomics Branch of the Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory were working to adapt machines to pilots rather than the traditional other way around, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "The success or failure of a modern Air Force aircraft and mission depends on whether the pilot has the ability to handle the unpredictable situations typical in a wartime environment," said Maris Vikmanis, supervisory industrial engineer for the lab. He explained that laboratory researchers studied how pilots performed in different environments, including combat, to provide information to aircraft designers so that future aircraft would be better adapted to pilots. But he pointed out there was more to it than simply assessing new aircrafts' cockpit designs. "Not only do we have to observe how the pilot performs in the aircraft cockpit, we also have to tap into the pilot himself," Vikmanis explained. "We must know how much effort the pilot is expending, his mental capability, and his workload limitation." In analyzing cockpit design, researchers checked into how well a pilot could see and reach cockpit controls and displays. Only in existence as an aerospace research field since 1979, workload research measured both the pilot's performance and his internal state of wellbeing. By combining experiments in the laboratory and in flight, lab researchers measured human performance/workload using three different methods. First, researchers used a computer-based performance test to measure a pilot's physical and mental action. By having the pilot perform up to 11 different tasks, researchers could characterize various aspects of human behavior. Second, pilots answered, after flying a simulator or an actual aircraft, subjective questions about their experience. A third method measured human performance/workload from a physiological viewpoint by collecting and analyzing variable responses of the human brain, heart, muscles, and visual system. Lab scientists and engineers used the test data to prepare a workload scale, which focused on problems the pilot, aircrew, and the aircraft itself might encounter in the future. NASA was applying similar methodology to the Space Shuttle and its crew, particularly to examine the effects on astronauts of microgravity as an element of stress. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 7)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) director Dick Smith and Lockheed Space Operations Co. president Doug Sargent today hosted a dedication ceremony for KSC's launch pad B after six years of modification at a cost of $150 million, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would use pad B, the second of the two complex 39 launch pads to undergo modification from the Apollo configuration, to support Space Shuttle and Shuttle Centaur upper stage launches. First launch from the modified pad would be Space Shuttle mission 51-L, scheduled for January 22, 1986. NASA first used pad B in May 1969 for the Apollo 10, third manned Saturn V/Apollo launch. Its last use was for the launch of the Apollo/Soyuz mission in July 1975. Pad modifications included a new Centaur rolling beam, permanent orbiter weather protection system, TV camera floodlights and a TV camera system, boxcars, upgrading of the payload changeout room, a cost-saving lighting system, variable speed motors for loading liquid oxygen, and hydrogen flare stacks. Although there were currently minor differences between pads A and B, the work underway at pad A would eventually make the two functionally identical. (Spaceport News, Dec 20/85, 1; Kennedy Space Center Release 242-85) Launch Schedules
In its recently published "1986 Long-Range Program Plan," NASA outlined plans for an evolutionary, permanently manned space station in low-earth orbit; operation by the year 2000 of man-tended platforms in equatorial, polar, and geosynchronous orbit; and routine manned missions on the moon and later Mars by the early 21st century, Defense Daily reported. The annually updated plan, summarizing the status of NASA planning as of the end of February 1985, also detailed some 120 ongoing and planned NASA space projects and missions for approximately the next ten years, with some out to the year 2000. The plan did not discuss budget figures, but for the near-term assumed budgets with the 1% growth promised annually by President Reagan (which had since disappeared in the deficit battle in Congress). The report did not project a need for more than four Space Shuttle orbiters but did not rule out such a need, while calling for development by 1990 of an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). Beyond 1990, objectives of the NASA spaceflight program included developing an orbital transfer vehicle complementary to the Space Shuttle for transportation of payloads, to, between, and beyond earth orbits; defining, designing, and providing a second-generation space transportation system including unmanned cargo vehicles and second-generation orbiters; developing and operating on a routine basis, beginning in the mid-1990s, geosynchronous orbit space platforms that were unmanned, permanent, and multifunctional; developing and putting into routine operation by the year 2000 geosynchronous orbit facilities that were permanent, multifunction, and able to be periodically manned; developing technology and techniques to construct, deploy, or assemble such facilities in space and to test and service them in orbit; and encouraging and supporting NASA and industry development of technology to improve concepts for space boosters that significantly reduced launch costs. The NASA report noted that "achievements in the early 21st century in science, exploration, earth applications, and commercial uses would depend on two trends: first, the increasing capabilities of space systems with regard to accessibility, payloads, stay times, and variety and sophistication of operations; and second, the increasing capability of instruments with regard to detection, resolution, pointing accuracy, and data collection and management made possible by improvement of their power supplies and cooling mechanisms." In the 21st century, the NASA report said, "automated or human-tended instruments located on the lunar surface will begin complementary observations" with instruments in low-earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit. For manned transportation from the space station, "a cyrogenic version of the orbital transfer vehicle evolutionary family, currently in early stages of preliminary design, is expected to provide by the year 2000 reusability for manned and sortie flights to at least geosynchronous orbit ... It also should be able to provide the basis for transportation for longer flights to establish a lunar base and for planetary missions such as a Mars sample return . . . Routine access to the lunar surface will make possible the first intensive, systematic study of another major celestial body," the report noted. "Extensive sample collection and scientific traverses conducted by humans and long-term instrument networks installed and managed by humans will help determine the details of the moon's structure, composition, and history. They also will make accessible the record of solar and cosmic ray particle fluxes preserved in the lunar soil . . . Similar scientific activities can be carried out on Mars, either by large automated spacecraft or by a manned mission . . ." (D/D, Oct 22/85, 268)
When launched August 12, 1978 from Cape Canaveral, ICE was known as the International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE-3). The 1054-lb. 16-sided spacecraft became the first spacecraft to orbit at the sun-earth libration point (that point in space where a satellite is suspended in a gravitational equilibrium between the sun and the earth-moon system) and the first to traverse the earth's distant geomagnetic tail. ISEE-3 also was the first spacecraft to make multiple swings by the moon and the first to use a lunar gravity-assist maneuver for targeting-escape trajectory. It made more gravity-assist maneuvers (five) than any other spacecraft. After the spacecraft completed most of the objectives of its original mission, it remained in good operational condition and had approximately 75% (150 lb.) of its total propellant reserves (200 lb.). Engineers at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), under the leadership of Dr. Robert Farquhar, developed a plan that would divert ISEE-3 from its libration point orbit, take it past the moon five times, and propel it out toward Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although the spacecraft was not designed for cometary investigation (it had no cameras or dust detectors), GSFC scientists believed it was well-suited for measurements of a comet's plasma properties, a chief objective of cometary exploration. In addition, the trajectory developed by Farquhar and his colleagues brought the spacecraft within range of a March 1986 upstream intercept of Comet Halley. That 1986 upstream pass, following an October 31, 1985 distant pass, was important because ICE would provide data on the solar-wind state upstream from Halley and earth-based telescopes would then observe the effect of the solar wind on Halley's tail. The spacecraft would return in July 2012 to the vicinity of earth, where a lunar gravity-assist maneuver could place the spacecraft into an earth orbit from which it might be retrievable. (NASA Release 85-121)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
