Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Myers had served as an atlarge member to the NASA Advisory Council and before that as president and chief operating officer for Jacobs Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Energy, vicepresident of Rockwell International, president of North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, and vice president/program manager for both the Apollo Command/Service Module Program and the Space Shuttle Program at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86149)'?0*October 21: Several senior staff changes were made at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to include: Robert C. Goetz, from Deputy Center Director to Technical Assistant to the Center Director; Clifford E. Charlesworth, from Director of Space Operations to Special Assistant to the Director; Henry O. Pohl, from Division Chief to Director of Engineering; William R. Kelly, from Director of Center Support to Director, Administration; Dr. Wayne R. Young was named Deputy Director for Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office to Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86151)
Communications Satellite Corporation announced that it had found a way to double the life of an orbiting satellite by reducing fuel consumption. Satellites in a geosynchronous orbit appear stationary over the Earth, allowing ground stations to communicate. Because of gravitational forces, most coming from the moon, satellites tend to drift north or south to a degree where communication can be lost. To compensate for the drift, rockets are fired to bring a satellite back to its original orbit. Most of a satellite's fuel is spent firing its rockets. The new approach, elements of which are used by the military, allows the satellite to drift and be tilted by its rockets so that the antenna's "footprint" can be located. Ground stations receiving messages needed to undergo some modifications as well, however. (W Post, Oct 17/86; WSJ, Oct 17/86; NY Times, Oct 17/86)
A Presidential panel report was to be released April 11, but details that aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by 1994, called for establishing a lunar base after the year 2000 for mining and production of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially0*useful asteroids, and a "network of spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian colony by the year 2027." (W Post, Mar 24/86; NY Times, Mar 25/86; CSM May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86)
The UNISTICK control system, used in NASA's lunar rover vehicle during the Apollo moon landings, was utilized as a handoperated device for steering, acceleration, and brake control in vehicles for handicapped drivers. The joystick type system was developed by the Johnson Engineering Corporation, which had made plans for commercial production. (NASA Release 86123)
NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
Researchers at the Construction Technology Laboratory found that concrete made from lunar soil, which contains no organic substances, was 5 percent stronger than highstrength Earth concrete. Because NASA planners anticipated a return to the Moon in the 21st century to establish a permanent lunar base, the concept of lunar building materials was a valuable asset when the cost of otherwise transporting them was considered. (NASA Release 8668) '$0** Satellite remote sensing technology, NASAdeveloped software for processing satellite imagery, was used by scientists and medical researchers at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories in conjunction with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) for enhancement of disease diagnosis. NMR, sensitive to soft tissue and superior to Xrays and CAT Scans, is a technology that has been around since the 1940s, but previously had not been used as a diagnostic tool. (NASA Release 8669)
