NASA announced that it was studying four major initiatives to help determine the next major goal in space. The initiatives emerged from proposals by NASA's Strategic Planning Group and by a group headed by astronaut Dr. Sally Ride. The four initiatives were a considerably expanded study of Earth systems, an enhanced program of solar system exploration, establishment of a permanent scientific base on the moon, and human exploration of Mars preceded by untended missions. At the same time, the independent NASA Advisory Council recommended that exploration of Mars be the Nation's primary goal in space. (NASA Release 8736)
NASA scientists successfully ordered the Voyager 2 space probe, which was some 2 billion miles away from earth, to fire its thrusters changing the spacecraft's course for its 1989 encounter with the planet Neptune. The course was altered so that Voyager 2, launched on August 20, 1977, would avoid the debris that might be orbiting the planet. The spacecraft was expected to arrive on August 24, 1989, within 3,100 miles of cloud tops above Neptune's north pole and was expected to pass within 25,000 miles of Neptune's moon Triton. (B Sun, Mar 14/87; P Inq, Mar 15/87)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
NASA released a long awaited report of a task force, headed by Dr. Sally K. Ride, set up to assess NASA's future space policy in the wake of the Challenger disaster. The 63page report, delivered to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher the preceding week, urged that the United States build a permanent outpost on the Moon as the first step toward the ultimate goal of "exploring, prospecting, and settling Mars." Ride emphasized, however, that while settling Mars should be "our eventual goal," it should not be "our next goal." She recommended a strategy of "natural progression which leads step by step, in orderly, unhurried way, inexorably toward Mars." (LA Times, Aug 18/87; NY Times, Aug 18/87; W Post, Aug 18/87; W Times, Aug 18/87)
