The same publication discussed the way in which Michael Griffin, described as "NASA's new moon/Mars czar," was shaking up NASA's space exploration initiative. Reportedly, Griffin wanted to move fast on launching a "relatively inexpensive, high-visibility space mission," such as sending an unmanned spacecraft to scout for a permanent base on the moon. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
The New York Times cited a report by Jean O. Dickey, a geodesist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and Raymond Hide, a geophysicist at Oxford, published in the journal Science. They analyzed the rotation of the earth, which is fitfully and almost imperceptibly slowing. More accurate measurements than in the past were possible by bouncing laser signals off quartz reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts. (NY Times, Aug 9/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the six moons of Neptune discovered by Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 were given names by the International Astronomical Union's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. In addition, Saturn's newest moon, Pan, was discovered by Mark Showalter, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (P Inq, Sep 28/91)
The Washington Post cited the Synthesis Group unpublished report stating that although a Space Station in Earth orbit was preferable, if such could not be built in timely fashion and with the desired capabilities, one could consider using the moon as a preparatory environment for a Mars mission. (W Post, May 25/91)
The Los Angeles Times indicated that various scientific teams from the United States, Japan, and Europe, were trying to develop solar-sail spacecraft to race to the moon. At the time of writing, the Russian Federation was ahead of the other teams and planned to launch a test craft in October 1992. None of the research teams was government-sponsored and financing was a problem. Theoretically, the sail craft were to be propelled through space by tiny solar particles called photons. (LA Times, Dec 27/91)
The report of the committee appointed by the Bush Administration, headed by Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, produced favorable comments from industry, according to the New York Times. Industrialists believe that the report showed greater realism about the space program, with its emphasis on unmanned flights and request for larger funding for NASA. In contrast to this complimentary review, Alcestis Oberg in Space News maintained that the Augustine panel's recommendations were irrelevant and a new agency was needed to pursue moon and Mars initiatives. (NY Times, Feb 7/91; SP News, Feb 4-10/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Paris Observatory, using data from the Voyager 1 spacecraft, for the first time had described an anti-greenhouse effect on a solar system body. In an article in Science magazine, they also described the temperature structure and energy balance on Titan, Saturn's largest moon. (NASA Release 91-143)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
An article by Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic  discussed arguments by foes of the Space Station and concluded that a bold new initiative in the form of a moon base was a preferable next step in space. (P Inq, Jun 18/91)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
An article by S. Fred Singer, guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, where he is completing a book on space policy, discussed the Space Station and the Stafford committee report. He advocated Martian moon exploration as NASA's best solution. (H Post, Jun 20/91; W Times, Jun 25/91)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
University of Colorado astronomer Jack Brandt talked of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its fuzzy focusing. Discoveries included proof that Pluto has a moon and dramatic photographs of a star spewing hot gases during its birth in the Orion constellation. (W Times, Feb 14/91)
Exploring the Moon and Mars, a report by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment, was quoted. The report advocated the need for the United States to take the development and use of robotic technology more seriously if robots are to be used in a mission to Mars. Furthermore, the report projected that robots would be considerably cheaper than human exploration that NASA appeared to favor. (W Times, Aug 30/91)
In a commentary on the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, released in December 1990, Alston Chase pointed out that the report stressed that among NASA's major problems were that it "has grown too large and is trying to accomplish very complex tasks in which there is little margin for error." As an example of NASA's growth, the report cited that Viking involved some 13,000 people, whereas Apollo involved 180,000. (W Times, Jan 8/91)
A mysterious object was scheduled to fly near Earth in December. Scientists do not know whether it is a new type of asteroid or a 20-year-old Apollo rocket that shot past the moon and was returning home. Subsequently, it was reported to be a tiny asteroid in circular Earth orbit. However, further reporting by another team of observers indicated it was more probably a cartwheeling rocket carcass. (W Times, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 21/91; P Inq, Dec 1/91; W Post, Dec 9/91)
Ivan Bekey, a NASA space power expert, was quoted by the New York Times in connection with an article on solar power from space. Bekey said that power beaming was not a problem. Rather, the difficulty was getting a large enough satellite into orbit. Currently large satellites ran between 20,000 to 30,000 pounds whereas a satellite to enable developing solar power would need to be some 100 times larger than that. Another possibility would be to mine the silicon for the solar cells and the aluminum for the structure from the moon. Those materials might make up 90 percent of the mass, meaning less weight would need to be launched from Earth. Bekey foresaw that developing power from space would be 20 or 30 years away. (NY Times, Dec 25/91)
NASA announced that it had signed an agreement with the National Science Foundation (NSF) by which the two organizations would use Antarctica as a testing site to prepare for future missions to the Moon and Mars. The agreement would enable NASA to benefit from NSF's 33 years of experience in scientific research in the harsh Antarctic environment. Scientists believe that Antarctica's climate, terrain, temperature, and isolation provide an environment on Earth that most closely parallels the conditions of isolation and stress to be faced on long-duration human missions in space. (NASA Release 91-13)
NASA Associate Administrator Spence Armstrong met with Marshall Space Flight Center officials on December 4. He said NASA's programs put it in a good position to continue to attract top engineering talents. NASA would need to attract engineers from several previously underrepresented groups, including blacks, women, the disabled, and other minorities. (Htsvl Tms, Dec 5/91)
The Christian Science Monitor carried a descriptive article about programs of the Howard B. Owens Science Center in Prince Georges County, Maryland. Schoolchildren spend two hours there simulating either landing on the moon or rendezvousing with Halley's comet. The program is part of the Challenger Center for Space Science Education, founded by the families of astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster and to which NASA contributed.
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of General Spence M. Armstrong, USAF (Retired) for the newly established position of Associate Administrator for Human Resources and Education. (NASA Release 91-138)
A policy paper by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington think tank, said defense and national security should be top priority for the US space program. Exploration of the moon and Mars should occur as a result of "market incentives" or interest of research organizations. Environmental research should be the province of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the Department of Energy. If NASA's functions could be performed by other agencies, it should be closed. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
As the thirtieth anniversary of his trip as America's first space pioneer approached, Alan Shepard reminisced about his vivid recollections of that flight on May 5, 1961 as well as the 33 hours he spent on the Moon 10 years later. Since that day in 1961, NASA has launched 70 manned flights with 161 individuals. (LA Times, Apr 28/91)
The Washington Times reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center near Houston had 842 pounds of moon rocks brought back by 12 moonwalkers on six Apollo flights between 1969 and 1972. The rocks are loaned to scientific groups for study. Each nation in the world also has a small piece of moon rock, sent at President Nixon's instruction in the early 1970s. (W Times, May 24/91)
NASA scientist Thomas J. Miller said NASA would establish a Nuclear Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center in early 1991 to develop nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. The Defense and Energy departments would join in this project; the NASA FY 1991 budget included about $1 million for nuclear propulsion development. Such propulsion could significantly reduce the time required from Earth to the moon or Mars. (AvWk, Jan 7/91)
NASA issued a release indicating that as a result of Apollo data findings NASA scientists and other researchers had a revised theory of the origin of life on earth. Life may have begun more than once and been wiped out several times by rare, planet-melting superimpacts on the Earth. Evidence of such early solar system impacts is well-preserved on the moon. (NASA Release 91-87; UPI, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 6/91)
A lengthy account in the New York Times dealing with asteroids and the threat they posed to early life as well as the continuing possibility they might destroy Earth, referred to NASA's findings about early life forms based on a survey of impact craters on the moon. Several scientists' findings, discussed in the journal Cell, were also reported. The newspaper also published an article citing NASA's expenditure of somewhat less than $1 million a year to search for Earth-crossing asteroids. NASA reportedly was also studying the feasibility of nudging asteroids aside and in this connection is to help sponsor the first International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids. (NYT, Jun 18/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced a nationwide search for a senior official to direct NASA's activities to send people to the Moon and to explore Mars. This announcement represented an implementation of a recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program to create a new Office of Exploration under an Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 91-24)
Nippon Television Network asked to borrow from the Smithsonian the Space Shuttle Enterprise, an Apollo capsule, a moon conveyor vehicle, a rocket, and a spacesuit. The Enterprise is stored at Dulles Airport and transporting it--the back of a 747 or by ship would be difficult. The space gear was to be used to celebrate the company's fortieth anniversary in Tokyo in 1993. (W Post, Feb 23/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
An article on interactive computer graphics and the virtual reality system they involve stated that NASA's Visualization for Planetary Exploration project might use such technology. It would enable the creation of environments of the moon and planets that would use data gathered by space probes and satellites to allow users to feel they were visiting those bodies. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
