NASA's funding remained flat as Congressional appropriations committees completed work on NASA's 1993 budget. Although some high-profile programs such as the Space Station and a  constellation of environmental monitoring satellites emerged virtually unscathed, newer or less visible efforts suffered setbacks. An advanced series of tracking satellites, robotic missions to the moon, and a new generation of launchers were among the efforts put on hold for at least the next year. Spending on space research and technology was reduced by 13 percent. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
The eight-legged rappeling robot Dante was placed in position on the rim of the Antarctic volcano Mt. Erebus in preparation for its exploration of the interior of the crater and its lava lake. NASA and the National Science Foundation hoped that the Dante project would help develop technology and telecommunications capabilities that NASA could use in future explorations of the Moon or Mars or in ongoing research activities in the Antarctic. (NASA Dante Advisor #3; UPI, Dec 28/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 31/92)
Scientists reported that enhanced versions of the pictures taken from the Voyager 2 spacecraft reveal what look like three gigantic ice-gushing volcanoes on Neptune's frozen moon Triton. (NY Times, Feb 18/92; AP, Feb 14/92)
Cornell University astrophysicist Thomas Gold said in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences" that there is probably more life inside the Earth than there is on its surface. This life would be in the form of bacteria and other microorganisms, and its overall volume probably surpasses that of all the plants and animals living on the planet's surface. NASA scientist Stephen Maran said that if Gold's ideas prove correct, "they will revolutionize scientific theories of geology and the evolution of life on Earth." Gold speculated that similar life forms may exist inside the moon and other planets in our solar system. "The surface life on Earth, based on photosynthesis for its overall energy supply, may be just one strange branch of life. The deep, chemically supplied life, however, may be very common in the universe," Gold commented. (P Inq, Jul 1/92)
NASA's Galileo spacecraft flew by the Earth at 10:09 a. m. EST, completing a three-year gravity-assist program and setting course to reach Jupiter in December 1995. The spacecraft was programmed to measure the near-Earth environment and to observe Earth and the moon during this flyby. (NASA Release 92-217; UPI, Dec 2/92, Dec 7/92, Dec 8/92; Dec 9/92; AP, Dec 1/92, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92; W Post, Dec 9/92; WP, Dec 9/92)
James V. Correale, 69, a native of Philadelphia who figured out how to clean the air that Apollo 13 astronauts rapidly were running out of during their mission to the moon in 1970, died Saturday at a hospital in Nassau Bay, Texas. (P Inq, Mar 17/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
NASA scientists released pictures and results from spacecraft Galileo's December 8 flight over the moon's north pole and 189 miles above the southern Atlantic Ocean. The flyby allowed Galileo to practice for Jupiter by studying Earth as if it were an alien planet. The craft detected radio signals that changed frequencies in a repeating, artificial way, indicating intelligent life on Earth. It also detected ice clouds in the stratosphere that help create a hole in the protective ozone layer above Antarctica and found evidence that the moon once was more volcanically active than thought. (AP, Dec 22/92, 23/92; C Trib, Dec 23/92; W Times, Dec 23/92; NY Times, Dec 23/92; UPI, Dec 23/92)
In an interview in Huntsville, Alabama, Vice-Presidential candidate Al Gore said that a Clinton administration would support a return to the moon and Mars but would not commit major resources to such efforts. Given other current NASA priorities, Gore said the longer-range mission to Mars "must be pursued according to a sensible timetable." (Htsvl Tms, Sept 11/92)
According to Michael Griffin, NASA's associate administrator for exploration, NASA needs $3 billion annually to conduct a program of human exploration of the moon and Mars. Those funds would have to come from sacrificing other space projects if NASA's overall budget could not be increased, Griffin said. (Space News, Apr 13/92)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
NASA announced that extended observations by the Hubble Space Telescope indicated that Jupiter's moon Io has a smaller atmosphere than previously thought, with very dense regions possibly over volcanoes and surface frost. The observations also showed that despite continual volcanic activity, Io's surface has remained largely unchanged since first photographed by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. (NASA Release 92-163)
Michael Griffin, associate administrator of NASA, told an opening session of a NASA was conference, that NASA in trouble with the tax-paying public because its hadn't been running efficient programs. Griffin said NASA risks losing support for its projects--like proposed returns to the moon and manned missions to Mars--because the public perceives it is employing more people than it needs and not giving a good return for the money it spends. (Birmingham News, Mar 25/92)
James Edwin Webb, 85, whose work as the chief of America's space agency was instrumental in putting a man on the moon, died March 27 at Georgetown University Hospital. During Mr. Webb's tenure, America's first manned space flight took place as well as the first orbital flight by John Glenn and the first walk in space by Edward White. (W Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 29/92; W Post, Mar 29/92)
It was reported that the spacecraft Ulysses had revealed unexpected changes in the violent vicinity of Jupiter since the last Earth probe flew past in 1979, including a swelling of the giant planet's magnetic field and an apparent abatement in volcanic eruptions on the Jovian moon Io. (W Post, Feb 12/92; NY Times, Feb 12/92; USA Today, Feb 12/92; W Times, Feb 12/92; AP, Feb 11/92; B Sun, Feb 9/92; P Inq, Feb 9/92)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
It was reported that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was studying aurorae on the giant planet Jupiter. The HST made observations of Jupiter over a four-day period when ESA/NASA Ulysses spacecraft swung by the giant planet. While passing Jupiter, Ulysses made measurements of Jupiter's powerful magnetic field and the flow of subatomic particles along magnetic field lines. Simultaneously, HST was looking at aurorae, one visual manifestation of these electrical fireworks. These joint observations provided a unique opportunity to combine ultraviolet images and spectra with information on particles and fields. By studying the activity of Jupiter's aurorae, astronomers hoped to learn more about the dynamics of Jupiter's immense magnetic field, the structure of the giant planet's upper atmosphere, the effects of aurora on the chemistry of the polar regions on Jupiter, and Jupiter's interaction with the moon Io via a magnetic "flux tube." (NASA Release 92-22)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
NASA launched a rocket carrying a Japanese scientific satellite called "Geotail" that will swing by the moon and be flung by lunar gravity nearly a million miles into space. The satellite was intended to explore the effect of the solar wind on the tail of the magnetosphere, a comet- shaped region surrounding Earth and containing radiation belts. The $160 million, four-year mission was a joint project between NASA and the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science. (W Post, Jul 25/92; APn, Jul 24/92)
After hearing complaints from employees across the nation, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin unexpectedly announced he was changing the agency's logo. Goldin killed the despised "worm," which displayed "NASA" in high-tech red lettering, and restored the insignia affectionately known as the "meatball." The meatball, which served the agency from 1959 to 1975, consists of the agency's name surrounding a starry blue background, a red wing shape and the flight path of a spaceship. It was worn by astronauts on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions. (W Post, May 26/92)
Scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation detailed experimental projects scheduled to be undertaken in the winter in Antarctica. The Antarctic Space Analog Program was to use the harsh, frigid conditions of the Antarctic continent to test technology and techniques for future missions to the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-200)
Harrison A. Storms, Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, at age 76. Storms's designs and leadership played a key role in developing B-25 and P-51 Mustang fighters in World War II and in Project Apollo's billion-dollar race for the moon in the 1960s. He served as an advisor to NASA, the Air Force, and the Pentagon. (NY Times, Jul 16/92)
