The New York Times reported that astronomers were worried about growing light pollution, which makes it very difficult for even the strong 200-inch telescope on Mount Palomar in California to pick up faint galaxies. Some cities, hoping that brighter lighting would deter crime, were installing white street lights as opposed to low-pressure sodium lamps, which are easily filtered from telescopes. In addition, a Georgia company announced plans to put a one-mile-reflective panel into space some time in 1996; the satellite, which would appear nearly as large as the moon, would add to the light pollution. (NY Times, May 9/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
Arthur L. H. Rudolph, a German-born scientist who played a crucial role in developing the Saturn 5 rocket used in the American moon landings, lost his attempt to regain his American citizenship. He gave up his citizenship in 1984 when he faced deportation for Nazi war crimes.
NASA announced that the Clementine mission to orbit the moon and to visit an asteroid would be headed by Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geologic Survey, Flagstaff, Arizona. Clementine, sponsored by the Strategic Defense Initiative Office (SDIO), was scheduled to launch a small spacecraft in January 1994 to orbit the moon for several months. The mission would test new, lightweight sensors in a space radiation environment and demonstrate autonomous navigation and spacecraft operation. (NASA Release 93-66)
The countdown began for the Hubble Telescope repair mission, considered by many to be NASA's biggest challenge in space since the Apollo moon landings. The Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to lift off on the 11-day flight on December 1. (B Sun, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; USA Today, Nov 29/93; P Inq, Nov 29/93; NY Times Magazine, Nov 28/93; USA Weekend, Nov 26-28; W Post, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; RTw, Nov 27/93, 28/93; APn, Nov 27/93, Nov 28/93; UPn, Nov 26/93, Nov 28/93; W Times, Dec 1/93)
General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego proposed returning to the moon for a 21-day, two-person mission in 1999. The mission would use a capsule and return vehicle transported by the U.S. Space Shuttle and a Titan 4 rocket with a Centaur upper stage; the proposal did not call for the construction of a new launcher. However, NASA's head of exploration called many of the calculations in the proposal overly optimistic. NASA's own rough draft for a lunar base program entailed construction of a new launcher and higher costs than those projected in the General Dynamics proposal. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation reported that its Martin Marietta Astronautics Group had received a $35 million contract from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build the propulsion module subsystem for NASA's Cassini spacecraft mission that was to study Saturn, its moon Titan, and the rest of the Saturnian system. The Cassini was scheduled for launch in October 1997. (W Times, Apr 13/93)
French scientists, led by Dr. Jacques Laskar of the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris, writing in the journal Nature, and Dr. Jack Wisdom, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writing in the journal Science, described the implications of chaos in the solar system. New computer simulations have revealed that over great spans of time, small gravitational disturbances from neighboring planets, combined with their own wobbly rotations, can cause significant fluctuations in the orbits and orientations of the planets, leading to, for example, great temperature fluctuations. Mars, for example, is still undergoing great variations. According to scientists, Earth may be spared such variations because of the stabilizing influence of the moon, the only large satellite in the inner solar system. (NY Times, Mar 2/93; Time, Mar 8/93)
NASA said that its mission to send a robot into an Antarctic volcano had opened the way for exploration of the moon and Mars. Despite the fact that the mission had to be aborted, David Lavery, director of the Dante project, noted that the objectives of controlling the robot from afar and testing sophisticated hardware in a harsh environment had been met.
NASA announced that scientists had found water molecules frozen in the surface ices of Jupiter's moon Io. According to Dr. Farid Salama, University of California, Berkeley, who led the project at NASA, "This is the first strong evidence of solid water on the surface of this satellite." (NASA Release 93-107; NY Times, June 15/93)
Sotheby's auction house announced that it had agreed to sell more than 200 items from the Soviet space program, including the first moon rock fragments ever to go up for sale.  The items were being sold by family members of the top participants as well as the state factories that produced the space suits and capsules being offered for sale. The Russian government  was not involved in the sale.  ((Rtw, August 9/93; AP, Aug 11/93)
Lowell Nesbitt, an artist who documented the Apollo 9 and 13 space launches for NASA, was found dead in his Manhattan studio on July 8. Death was attributed to natural causes. He was 59. (UPI, Jul 8/93)
NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
NASA announced that 14 astronauts who orbited the Earth during Project Gemini were installed in the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame. The new inductees were John E. Young, James A. McDivit, the late Edward H. White II, Charles Conrad Jr., Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Thomas P. Stafford, Neil A. Armstrong, David R. Scott, Eugene A. Cernan, Michael Collins, Richard F. Gordon Jr, and Buzz Aldrin. (UPI, Mar 18/93, March 22/93; Reuters, March 22/93; AP, Mar 22/93; P Inq, Mar 21/93)
At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)
The journal Science reported that the brightness of a full moon, thought to be caused by a process called shadow hiding, in which the sun shining directly on the moon minimizes shadows, is really caused by a phenomenon known as coherent backscatter.
Astronauts assigned to the Space Shuttle Columbia mission in the fall of 1993 were scheduled to conduct experiments on rats while in orbit. After beheading the rats, they were to dissect them. This would be the first dissection of an animal in space, to NASA's knowledge. The remaining rats aboard the Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned to Earth.  NASA's Willy Hinds, a biologist and immunologist who is in charge of the project, said that "these tissues...are the biological equivalent of the moon rocks."  (AP, Aug 30/93; LA Times, Sept 5/93)
