Former General Electric Aerospace employee Vincent S. Maleche was sentenced to a two-month prison term and a fine for providing confidential NASA documents to an undercover agent. The charge of fraud occurred in connection with Operation Lightning Strike. On June 15, former Armstrong Laboratory employee at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, William C Alexander, pleaded guilty to providing documents to an FBI undercover agent. (Reuters, Jun 14/94; UPI, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 16/94)
The Earthwinds balloon flew 200 miles in seven hours from Reno, Nevada, over the Sierra Nevada and landed 200 miles north of Los Angeles in its fourth failed attempt since its initial try in February, 1992, to make the first nonstop round-the-world flight. The hourglass-shaped craft about the length of a football field consists of an upper teardrop-shaped, helium-filled bag separated by a three-man crew capsule from its lower round, air-filled anchor balloon. The project, sponsored mainly by hotel magnate Barron Hilton, has cost $7 million to date, with $700,000 for non-reusable balloons and helium for each flight. Project manager Don Engen expected no new flight this season, but project advisor, Apollo XVII commander Gene Cernan, predicted another attempt. (Reuters, Jan 12/94)
The Defense Department said that robot spacecraft Clementine suffered a malfunction on May 7 that would prevent it from flying by and photographing the asteroid Geographos. However, Clementine was to continue to perform a military mission that would test 23 "advanced technologies." On May 19 the managers of Clementine were to fire its main thruster to ease the craft into a circular path between the moon and Earth, where they can continue to test its prototype military components in the upper reaches of the Van Allen radiation belts around the planet. Since its January 25 launch, Clementine has provided 1.5 million images of the moon at a bargain price. (W Post, May 10/94; NY Times, May 10/94; USA Today, May 10/94; W Post, May 11/94; W Times, May 13/94; W Post, May 19/94)
NASA announced the death of Stuart Allen Roosa, one of six Apollo astronauts to fly solo around the moon. (NASA Release 94-210; UPI, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94)
On the 25th anniversary of the moon landing, President Clinton and Vice President Gore welcomed the three Apollo 11 astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, and Michael Collins, at a White House ceremony. The U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the 1969 event. (UP, Jul 20/94; Reuters, Jul 20/94; W Post, Jul 21/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong made a rare public appearance at an airshow in New Knoxville, spoke briefly to reporters and signed autographs. He said he had accepted an invitation to the White House on the 25th anniversary of his moon walk. (Western Star, Jul 20/94)
Various special television programs were scheduled to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. In addition, the press planned to feature accounts recalling events of the first moonwalk. (B Sun, Jul 10/94; C Trib, Jul 10/94; LA Times, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Post, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94)
The publication of former astronaut Jim Lovell's new book, Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13, led to an article recounting the Apollo 13 flight 24 years previously. He stated his belief that NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin should do more to use NASA's past successes to show how NASA had progressed since. (W Times, Oct 21/94)
Roger Bonnet, science director of the European Space Agency (ESA), stated in an interview that the ESA, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, sought some $350 million from member states to fund the first in a series of lunar programs that could end in a manned moon station within 25 years. The first European emissary to the moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (Lunar European Demonstration Approach), could land on the moon by 2001. LEDA would carry instruments to measure the darkness of the lunar sky, the frequency of meteorite impacts, and the stability of the ground, factors that would affect the functioning of a future astronomical observatory. LEDA would also need to analyze lunar soil for components to be used in the construction and operation of a permanent station. Such a European approach would bypass NASA's plans for an orbiting Space Station, a plan with which many European countries had become disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
NASA announced that of the various devices left by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the moon 25 years ago, a laser ranging retroreflector continued to provide fundamental scientific data. From the data obtained and new observations scientists now believed that the moon might have a liquid core. Among other findings from the laser ranging experiments were a verification of Einstein's theory of relativity and the direct influence on the moon's orbit of ocean tides on Earth. (NASA Release 94-122)
On April 9-10, radio astronomy experts from Stanford University and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena sent a signal from the Clementine spacecraft, which was engaged in a moon-mapping mission for the Pentagon, into a huge crater on the lunar South Pole. NASA's Deep Space Network picked up the reflection of the signal, and the Pentagon was scheduled to undertake a preliminary review of the data to determine whether the moon contained ice. (AP, Apr 16/94)
Spence Armstrong, NASA Associate Administrator for Human Resources, stated that in order to cut more than 1,000 jobs as Congress ordered, NASA needed to offer buyouts to staff. To restructure the Space Station Freedom project, NASA had to cut 1,300 positions, but employees were not leaving in normal attrition numbers--an attrition of only 600 to 700 persons was predicted for fiscal 1994, without buyouts. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said further cuts would endanger NASA's entire mission. The vice president's "reinventing government" group said NASA needed to accelerate its job cuts but stick with attrition and buyouts rather than reductions in force. The group offered no specifics as to positions NASA should cut. (Federal Times, Feb 24/94)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
In preparation for commemorating the 25th anniversary of Neil A. Armstrong's walk on the moon on July 20, 1969, the media featured various articles, books, films, television specials, and high-level conferences on the meaning of the moon landing. One article commented on the significance of these publications and events, with particular reference to Moonshot, a memoir cowritten by Alan B. Shepard Jr. and the late astronaut Deke Slayton. (LA Times, Jun 28/94)
NASA announced that the International Astronomical Union had approved the name Dactyl for the tiny moon discovered on August 28, 1993 in orbit around the asteroid Ida by NASA's Galileo mission. Dactyl was the first natural satellite of an asteroid ever discovered and photographed. The name derived from the Dactyli, a group of mythological beings who lived on Mount Ida, where the infant Zeus was hidden. (NASA Release, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; H Post, Sep 21/94)
NASA astrophysicist Fred Espenak stated that an annular eclipse would be visible to observers within a 145-mile wide path from El Paso, Texas, through Toledo, Ohio, and much of New England on May 10. The moon will appear completely silhouetted against the sun, which will form a dazzling unbroken outer ring for up to six minutes. People outside the ground path will see only a partial eclipse. (Reuters, May 2/94; W Post, May 4/94; B Sun, May 8/94; W Times, May 8/94; W Post, May 9/94)
NASA announced that the Clementine mission, sponsored by the Department of Defense Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, had completed systematic mapping of the lunar surface to produce the first global digital map of the moon. NASA's Clementine science team mapped the topography and composition of major regions of the moon in detail and produced other important science results released at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore, Maryland. The digital data cover 38 million square kilometers of the moon mapped in 11 colors in the visible and near infrared parts of the spectrum during the mission's 71 days in lunar orbit. (NASA Release 94-84; B Sun, May 27/94)
Robot spacecraft Clementine successfully completed a two-month mission to map the moon's surface in unprecedented detail. Radar data indicate what scientists term an "astonishing" depth of 7.5 miles in one of the moon's ancient basins. Other data may reveal ice in a permanently shadowed spot at the lunar south pole. At 6:20 p.m. EDT, controllers were to command the spacecraft to fire its rockets for four minutes to remove it from lunar orbit, loop around Earth, and head for the small asteroid 1620 Geographos for a late August rendezvous. NASA provided funding to refocus the mission effort, substituting the moon and asteroids for man-made "Star Wars" objects. (W Post, May 3/94; NY Times, May 4/94)
Clementine spacecraft, launched January 25 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, took just released high-resolution color photographs of the moon. The purposes of the spacecraft were to test anti-missile military technology and explore space. Reportedly, the pictures, which were available to the public, were of high quality and the cost of the program was relatively low. (Reuters, Mar 2/94; W Times, Mar 20/94)
NASA researchers hoped that, among other things, Endeavour's comparison radar images from its second environmental voyage would enable them to peer through the mists of Rwanda to track the imperiled mountain gorilla. In the category of experiments, shortly after liftoff, the crew of Endeavour were scheduled to engage in mixing up a batch of special order concrete, which was to be allowed to harden during the 10-day voyage. After the flight, Master Builders Inc. of Cleveland, who had prepared the ingredients, were to test the concrete to determine the critical particle dispersion that ensured hardness for possible future construction on the moon or elsewhere. An experiment in earthquake forecasting also was planned. Another planned experiment was the dumping of oil and algae byproducts into the North Sea off Denmark to see if Endeavour's radar could detect them. The countdown for the flight began August 15. (AP, Aug 13/94; AP, Aug 15/94; UP, Aug 15/94; Reuters, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 16/94; USA Today, Aug 16/94; AP, Aug 17/94; Reuters, Aug 17/94; NY Times, Aug 18/94; W Times, Aug 18/94; W Post, Aug 18/94; USA Today, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
Reporting on Spacecraft Clementine, an $80 million joint military-civilian venture, which sent the first close-up pictures of the moon in more than 20 years, the mission was considered a possible model for NASA. On May 3, Clementine's rocket was to be fired to leave lunar orbit and head for a rendezvous at the end of August with a small asteroid, 1620 Geographos. Soon thereafter Clementine might disappear from view; hence the name. Meanwhile Eugene M. Shoemaker, Clementine's chief scientist and a planetary geologist assigned by NASA, was studying pictures sent by the spacecraft, including the possible existence of ice at the lunar poles. The mission was considered an example of a "cheaper, faster, better" approach that could pay off. (NY Times, Apr 26/94)
Joseph P. Martino, senior research scientist at the University of Dayton Research Institute, examined space launch costs in a study released by the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation. Because of high costs, he noted that the United States was now farther away from having people on the moon than when President Kennedy launched the Apollo program. In 1994 it cost $3,500 per pound to put items into orbit. The cost increase started in the 1950s, when high performance of ballistic missiles was needed at any price and has been continued by NASA's policy of developing new technology for each new mission. Launch costs must be lowered and can be by three new approaches: use of commercial practices for vehicle construction, long production runs of single designs, and designing launchers to be reusable like aircraft instead of producing single-use like missiles. (W Times, Jan 25/94)
The publication of Moon Shot by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton was set for release one month before the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 lunar landing. The book gives a history of space flight and includes many little-known anecdotes. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
The Italian Foreign Ministry announced that Italy and the United States would launch a spacecraft in October 1997 on a seven-year voyage to Saturn. The Cassini would leave a special probe, called Huygens, on the surface of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, to gather data on the atmosphere, magnetosphere, and chemical make-up of the rings of Saturn and the movements of its satellites. An agreement to conduct the mission, which was being developed by NASA and the Italian Space Agency, was signed by Italian Foreign Minister Antonio Martini and U.S. Ambassador to Italy, Reginald Bartholomew. (Reuters, Jul 21/94)
The 25th anniversary of the first moonwalk was the occasion of several articles looking back at the excitement of that event and developments since as well as an assessment of the current status of the space program. Noting that one-third of the U.S. population was not alive in 1969, the articles especially remarked upon lack of enthusiasm about space, together with expressing concern about earthly matters. Neil Armstrong's role in the moon landing and the fact that he never became a public hero also was touched upon. (W Post, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; WSJ, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; H Post, Jul 22/94; P Inq, Jul 22/94)
NASA announced that transmission of data from Galileo spacecraft indicated its observation of what was probably a satellite of the asteroid Ida, which would be the first moon of an asteroid ever sighted. The flyby of Ida occurred August 28, 1993. (NASA Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off on schedule, and the seven astronauts, including the first Japanese woman in space, began their experiments. The embryonic newts were thriving, and the adult female newts had produced additional eggs. The astronauts also began performing tests to determine how their bodies were adapting to weightlessness. One effect of the absence of gravity was that astronauts tended to grow two or more inches in space because of an elongated spine; they would revert to normal height on Earth. Findings could help in treating back pain on Earth. Among the animals carried for experimental purposes were four pregnant newts. By July 17 the second newt had died for an undetermined reason. The scientists also levitated a pea-sized drop of gold inside an electromagnetic field to investigate ways to exploit the absence of gravity in manufacturing. The astronauts worked in two shifts around the clock in order to complete all but one of the planned 82 experiments. A blown fuse in the French-built electrophoresis unit kept the astronauts from conducting their final experiment before preparing to return to Earth. On July 20 the astronauts marked the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. Because of heavy rainstorms, the projected landing on July 22 was postponed; because of the delay, the mission set a new Space Shuttle flight duration record. In the course of the flight, a number of the eggs hatched, and scores of eggs were laid by the various animals aboard. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; C Trib, Jul 9/94; NY Times, Jul 9/94; W Post, Jul 9/94; W Times, Jul 9/94; Reuters, Jul 9/94;B Sun, Jul 10/94; W Post, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; UP, Jul 10/94; Reuters, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Times, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94; Reuters, Jul 11/94; B Sun, Jul 12/94; W Post, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; AP, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; UP, Jul 18/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; NY Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; AP, Jul 19/94; UP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 22/94; UP, Jul 22/94; Reuters, Jul 22/94)
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the University of Arizona's Open Sciences Forum at which professors presented overviews of their space-related work. He assured the faculty and students that NASA would continue to fund University of Arizona research projects such as the $3.6 billion Cassini Saturn probe. He urged scientists to simplify the way in which they discuss their experiments so that lay people would understand them and thus increase scientific awareness. Stressing the concept that "small is better," he mentioned the development of robots that may one day extract fuel from the moon or Mars, thus reducing the amount of propellant that would need to be stored on moon- or Mars-bound spacecraft. (Tucson Citizen, Apr 9/94)
NASA determined it was cheaper to tear down the giant hammerhead crane originally built for the Apollo moon landing program rather than to refurbish it. Therefore, the crane was in the process of being dismantled at the Kennedy Space Center launch pad. (Fla Today, Dec 11/94)
NASA showed photographs taken by Galileo spacecraft revealing for the first time an asteroid orbited by its own moon. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory released the photos of asteroid Ida. (NASA Release 94-50; Reuters, Mar 23/94; P Inq, Mar 24/94; LA Times, Mar 24/94; W Post, Mar 24/94; USA Today, Mar 24/94; NY Times, Mar 24/94)
A lengthy review of the four-hour TBS documentary film "Moon Shot," described the extraordinary footage obtained from NASA, primarily from the Johnson Space Center, and the story behind the U.S. 10-year race to beat the Soviet Union to the moon. (TV Times, Jul 10-16/94)
Findings about the moon resulting from the 71-day rendezvous of the military probe Clementine were reported at the recent American Geophysical Union meeting. It developed, according to geophysicist Maria Zuber of Johns Hopkins University and NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center, that "Now we know that we don't understand the moon as well as we thought we did." Instead of no activity on the moon in the preceding 3 million years, there was volcanic activity as recent as 1 billion years ago. The crust was very variable and the moon had a crater large enough to span the continental United States as well as another fresh-looking crater created by an impact recorded by 12th century monks. (LA Times, Dec 15/94)
Spence Armstrong, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Human Resources and Education, announced its Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This was a three-year, $500,000 annual award to six states as a new initiative to improve their research and competitive capability while expanding education and training opportunities for women and minorities. The funding would enable states to develop an academic research enterprise for long-term, self-sustaining, nationally competitive capability, contributing to the states' economic viability. The involved states were Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Montana, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
The approaching 25th anniversary of the first moon landing by Neil Armstrong occasioned a feature article on Gene Kranz, NASA Flight Director, who enabled the operation to occur. (LA Times, Jul 5/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
NASA released new pictures of asteroid 243 Ida and its recently discovered moon taken by the Galileo spacecraft. Although similar in color and brightness, Ida and its moon appear to be composed of different types of material. (NASA Release 94-83)
