NASA released images taken from Galileo as it soared just 430 miles (690 kilometers) above the surface of Jupiter’s moon Europa. The images revealed the apparent traces of massive ice volcanoes. According to early analysis of the pictures, ice volcanoes and the movement of tectonic plates had reshaped the surface of Europa, one of the bodies in the universe that scientists believed might once have hosted life. The presence of water, organic compounds, and adequate heat, all of which would be present if ice volcanoes existed on the moon, had led scientists to focus on Europa as a location for possible development of life. According to Galileo team member Robert J. Sullivan, the apparent traces of ice volcanoes supported the even more significant possibility that an ocean might exist below the surface of Europa. Because NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) managed the Galileo Mission, the scientific community credited JPL with providing the vital new images of the surfaces of Europa and Jupiter that had led to further discussion about the possibility of life beyond Earth.(NASA, “Ice Volcanoes Reshape Europa’s Chaotic Surface,” news release 97-12, 17 January 1997.)
Educators, scientists, and politicians gathered to celebrate a new nationwide observance⎯Space Day⎯meant to carry on President John F. Kennedy’s call to the nation for space exploration. On 25 May 1961, Kennedy had urged the United States to “commit itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth,” sparking NASA’s successful development of human space travel. Advocates of Space Day argued that a day of celebrating previous achievements and calling for further advances would inspire future space explorers, particularly children. More than 1,900 schools across the nation participated in Space Day activities.(Martha Woodall for Knight-Ridder News Service, “Space Day Today To Renew Interest in Outer Space,” 22 May 1997.)
In a once-in-a-century occurrence, eight planets lined up in the sky “like pearls on a string” from west to east. Astronomers could view, in one line of sight, Pluto, followed by Mercury, Mars, Venus, Neptune, Uranus, Jupiter, and Saturn⎯with a crescent Moon visible as well. Jack Horkheimer, host of public television’s Star Hustler described the event as “naked-eye astronomy at its best,” a boon for amateurs. According to computer calculations, the orbits of the planets would not line up in such a pleasing manner for observers on the Earth for at least another century.(Associated Press, “Planets in Once-in-Century Lineup,” 2 December 1997.)
NASA announced the completed construction of the Lunar Prospector spacecraft, scheduled for launch in September 1997. Engineers had designed the craft to obtain the first compositional and gravity maps of the Moon. G. Scott Hubbard, NASA’s Lunar Prospector Mission Manager at Ames Research Center, praised contractor Lockheed Martin for its efficient construction and for keeping project costs at forecasted levels. NASA projected that the total cost to build Lunar Prospector and send it to the Moon would be about US$63 million. Scientists explained the need to return to the Moon, even though it was “conquered” decades ago, reminding the public that many important questions about the Moon’s history and its fundamental composition remained unexplored. Researchers hoped that Lunar Prospector’s planned one-year mission orbiting the Moon would create a detailed map of the Moon’s surface composition and gravitational and magnetic fields. Lunar Prospector itself was compact⎯only 4.5 feet (1.37 meters) high, 4 feet (1.22 meters) in diameter, and weighing 660 pounds (300 kilograms). Even before its launch, scientists hailed Lunar Prospector as a new type of pathfinder, which had “made history in terms of management style, technical approach, cost management, and focused science.” Prospector used a gamma-ray spectrometer to provide maps of the composition of the Moon, thereby allowing scientists to understand better the elements present in the surface layer of the Moon.
The U.S. Capitol’s Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, “Houston, we’ve had a problem.” Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigert’s statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for women’s admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, “New Statue,” USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, “Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert,” 22 May 1997.)
Abe Silverstein received the Guggenheim Medal, honoring his significant contributions to the advancement of flight. Silverstein’s 40-year career at NASA had included a period as the Director of Lewis Research Center. The citation praised him for his leadership in the Mercury and Gemini programs and for “advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance,” as well as crediting him with proposing the name “Apollo” for the lunar landing mission. Previous winners of the Guggenheim Medal included Orville Wright, William E. Boeing, and Charles A. Lindbergh.(NASA, “Former NASA Official Receives Guggenheim Medal,” news release 97-177, 14 August 1997.)
President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the men’s families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, “though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissom’s footprints are on the moon.” Besides Apollo 1’s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, “Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad,” 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal,” 17 December 1997.)
Geochemists from the University of Michigan and the University of Tennessee announced that they had arrived at the most accurate and precise estimation of the age and origin of the Moon yet calculated. They suggested that a collision between the Earth and another planet, 4.5 to 4.52 billion years ago, resulted in the creation of the Moon. To reach their conclusion, the researchers used a special spectrometry technique to examine 21 lunar samples. The scientists also concluded that the collision had set Moon’s orbit.(United Press International, “Researchers Narrow Moon’s Origins, Age,” 10 November 1997.)
Mars Pathfinder scientists announced that Mars appeared to have a crust, a mantle, and an iron core⎯attributes similar to those of Earth. The researchers suggested that Mars may once have been warm and wet, although they remained unable to determine whether Mars had a molten core, such as that of Earth or Mercury, or a “dead” core, such as that of the Earth’s Moon. The findings contributed to growing evidence that Mars might be more than a solid ball of rock and that the planet might once have had water and life. Signs of possible erosion and weathering encouraged such hypotheses, as well, although scientists clarified that proof of such theories was still probably years away.(K. C. Cole, “Internal Structure of Mars, Earth Similar, Scientists Say,” Houston Chronicle, 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Once Warm and Wet, Data Suggests,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Three Mars Layers Suggests Life on Planet Was Possible,” 9 October 1997.)
Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey announced that the Galileo spacecraft had captured images revealing iceberg-like structures, suggesting the presence of frozen water on Jupiter’s moon Europa. The discovery provided strong support for the theory that an ocean once existed on the moon’s surface. Astronomers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the discovery “mind-blowing” and “the clearest evidence to date that there is liquid water and melting close to the surface of Europa.” Ronald Greeley, the Arizona State University geologist who managed the Galileo imaging team, described the structures in the Europa images as “blocks of ice, similar to those seen on the Earth’s polar seas during springtime thaws.” Greeley concluded that a “thin icy layer covering water or slushy ice” might possibly exist on Europa’s surface. The images revealed one possible ice formation that spread across Europa’s surface in patches as wide as 4 miles (6.4 kilometers). Scientists disagreed on exactly how to interpret the images and on whether future exploration would be able to prove the presence of an ocean. Nevertheless, excitement over the findings spread throughout the research community. In its use of the Galileo probe to explore Europa, NASA continued its mission to search the universe for other environments suitable for life. The Galileo probe almost lost the images when an antenna on the craft jammed, slowing data transmission to Earth. Galileo came within 363 miles (584 kilometers) of Europa to capture the highly celebrated pictures.(Kathy Sawyer, “Signs of Ocean Found on a Jupiter Moon,” Washington Post, 10 April 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Spot Water on Moon of Jupiter,” 10 April 1997; NASA, “New Images Hint at Wet and Wild History for Europa,” news release 97-66, 9 April 1997.)
The Galileo spacecraft made the closest ever flyby of Jupiter’s moon Europa and earned a place in space history by becoming the first spacecraft to orbit an outer planet. Galileo came within 124 miles (200 kilometers) of Europa, gathering images of what looked liked an icy ocean beneath the moon’s frozen crust. The prospect of water on the moon’s surface excited scientists, who had identified Europa’s climate as unique among the moons and planets of the galaxy. The images of the possible ocean seemed to show signs of “slushy material” pushing up against the surface ice, a sign of a heated core. The flyby was the first encounter to occur during Galileo’s two-year extension to its original mission. According to press accounts, Galileo, launched in 1989, had already gathered enough data to force scientists to “rewrite textbooks.”(NASA, “Closest Europa Flyby Marks Start of Galileo Mission ‘Part II’,” news release 97-286, 16 December 1997; K. C. Cole, “Galileo Takes Close-Ups of Icy Europa,” Los Angeles Times, 17 December 1997; Associated Press, “Galileo Flies By Europe, Sees Indication of Ocean Under Ice,” 17 December 1997.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASA’s more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlight⎯not enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecraft’s instruments from freezing. NASA’s policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the mission⎯the first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planet⎯as NASA’s boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: “I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.”(NASA, “Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet,” news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, “NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission,” news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, “Protestors Set Stage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
The Cassini spacecraft lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a seven-year, 2.2 billion-mile (3.5 billion-kilometer) journey to and around Saturn. After several delays, including a two-day delay immediately before the launch because of high winds, the takeoff was flawless. Before the launch, activists had protested Cassini’s fuel source, 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of radioactive plutonium; to calm public anxiety, NASA planned to sample air quality at 25 stations surrounding the launchpad, including several samples taken as far as 10 miles (16 kilometers) away. Additionally, a U.S. Department of Energy aircraft flew through the trailing gases of the rocket booster to make sure that no radioactive material had leaked. The US$3.4 billion mission set out to survey the planet Saturn, its rings, and its moon Titan. Engineers had programmed the Cassini spacecraft to conduct a number of “gravity-assist swingbys,” flying twice past Venus and once past Earth and Jupiter, to build up the speed necessary to make the long journey to Saturn. About seven years into the mission, NASA planned for Cassini to release a disc-shaped Huygens probe toward Titan. Throughout the mission, Cassini was to make more than 40 close flybys of Titan, gathering far more vivid images of the moon than ever before. NASA intended Cassini’s camera to take more than 300,000 colored pictures of Saturn and its moons. Scientists hoped that the mission would expand considerably the knowledge of the planet gained through the earlier Voyager missions.(NASA, “Cassini Launch,” news release, October 1997; Earl Lane, “Plutonium-Bearing Craft Set for Saturn Trip,” Birmingham News (AL), 5 October 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Nuclear Powered Craft Fuels Fury Before Launch,” USA Today, 13 October 1997; Karl Grossman, “The Risk of Cassini Probe Plutonium,” Christian Science Monitor, 10 October 1997; Associated Press, “Cassini Spacecraft Lifts Off for Saturn,” 16 October 1997.)
