Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being “one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon.” A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepard’s spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, “Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard,” news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, “Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74,” news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard,” government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shepard’s Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age,” USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, “Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: ‘Pioneer’s Pioneer’ also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon,” Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
Scientists published a study in the journal Science, using images from the Galileo probe as evidence that an ocean beneath the surface of Europa, one of Jupiter’s moons, was once warm and salty. James K. Crowley of the U.S. Geological Survey stated that Galileo data showed that “salt absorption patterns on Europa were similar to those on Earth.” Gary B. Hansen, a University of Hawaii geophysicist, added the observation that “the size of the salt bands on Europa’s surface are continuous and stretch across much of the moon,” evidence of a salty ocean beneath the moon’s icy surface. Jeffrey S. Kargel, also of the U.S. Geological Survey, commented on his colleague’s study in Science, saying that salt is an important “piece in the puzzle,” but in the absence of other evidence, does not prove that a salty ocean lies beneath Europa’s surface. Scientists seek other evidence, such as shifting ice plates, cracks in the frozen surface, and a magnetic field.(Michael Kahn for Reuters, “Jupiter Moon Might Have Salt Ocean—U.S. Study,” 22 May 1998; T. B. McCord et al., “Salts on Europa’s Surface Detected by Galileo near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer,” Science 280, no. 5367 (22 May 1998): 1242.)
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena II’s first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, “Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, “Late Flagstaff Astronomer’s Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute,” Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, “NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers,” 7 January 1998.)
James L. Elliot, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues, together with Lowell Observatory and Williams College, published findings in the journal Nature based on data obtained from NASA’s HST. The data indicated that Neptune’s largest moon, Triton, had warmed up significantly since the Voyager spacecraft’s visit in 1989. Triton’s temperature had risen from 37 K (-393°F or -236°C) to 39 K (-389°F or -234°C), a 5 percent increase. The astronomers traced the warming trend to seasonal changes in Triton’s polar ice caps attributed to “an extreme southern summer,” a cyclical phenomenon occurring every few hundred years. Other possible explanations included a changing frost pattern on Triton’s surface, which could have caused the surface to absorb more of the Sun’s warmth; or changes in the reflectivity of Triton’s ice, which could have caused it to absorb more heat. Because of the warming, Triton’s frozen nitrogen surface was turning into gas, making its thin atmosphere denser. The scientists hoped their study of the changes on Triton would provide insight into global warming on Earth, which has a more complicated environment than Triton. HST’s “detection of an increase in the moon’s atmospheric pressure,” measured with one of the space telescope’s three fine guidance sensors, had provided the clue to the increased surface temperature.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope Helps Find Evidence that Neptune’s Largest Moon Is Warming Up,” news release 98-110, 24 June 1998; J. L. Eliot et al., “Global Warming on Triton,” Nature 393, no. 6687 (25 June 1998): 765–767.)
NASA announced it had renamed the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility the Chandra X-ray Observatory, in honor of the late Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. NASA chose the name Chandra because it was the late scientist’s preferred name among friends and colleagues, and because it means moon or luminous in Sanskrit. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented that Chandrasekhar had made “fundamental contributions to the theory of black holes and other phenomena,” which the Chandra X-ray Observatory would study. NASA also announced that it had set a new launch date for the observatory⎯no earlier than 8 April 1999.(NASA, “NASA Renames Telescope and Sets New Launch Date,” news release 98-225, 21 December 1998. 644 Bill Scanlon, “CSU Will Lead NASA Cloud Study $145 Million Project Is Designed To Improve Weather Forecasts, Study Global Warming,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver), 30 December 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that Europe’s Infrared Space Observatory, which had been orbiting Earth for two and one-half years, had located water in unexpected places. The most intriguing of these was the water vapor detected in the atmosphere of Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. ESA Director of Science Roger M. Bonnet remarked, “the moon may duplicate the conditions that led to the creation of life on Earth . . . and the only thing you need is a little heat to heat up Titan, maybe [the] birth of life may be seen.” Chairperson of ESA’s Astronomy Working Group Reinhard Genzel said that the Observatory had “enabled scientists to see water throughout the universe,” and that the water was likely brought “to the icy outer planets by comets.” He explained further that comets might have deposited the water on Earth during the early formation of the solar system, when many comets constantly collided with the Earth.
The journal Science published data gathered from NASA’s Lunar Prospector, indicating the presence of hydrogen, often bundled as water molecules, on the north and south poles of the Moon. Alan B. Binder, Chief Scientist for the Lunar Prospector mission, explained that the spacecraft had detected an abundance of hydrogen, and that the science team had interpreted the data to mean that the Moon has 1–10 billion tons (910–9,100 kilograms or 0.9–9.1 billion tonnes) of water. In a previous mission to the Moon to collect data, the spacecraft Clementine had found radar indications of water on the Moon’s south pole. Paul D. Spudis, a member of the Clementine science team, remarked that Prospector’s discovery was significant because “the presence of lunar water has been confirmed by two different research methods.”(D. J. Lawrence et al., “Global Elemental Maps and the Moon: The Lunar Prospector Gamma-Ray Spectrometer,” Science 281, no. 5382 (4 September 1998): 1484–1489; Reuters, “Prospector Finds Water on Moon: NASA Spacecraft Locates Ice at the North and South Poles,” Washington Times, 4 September 1998; Associated Press, “Man in the Moon May Have Plenty To Drink: Abundance of Water Likely; Scientists Foresee Colonization,” Chicago Tribune, 4 September 1998.)
The data transmission system of Galileo malfunctioned during its fifth flyby of Jupiter’s moon Europa when it went into safe mode. Although NASA engineers activated a backup system, the transmission system had lost all data collected when the craft passed within 1,141 miles (1,835 kilometers) of the moon. NASA was investigating the malfunction. NASA had launched Galileo in 1989, and the probe had entered Jupiter’s orbit in 1995, collecting data from moons Io, Europa, and Callisto during its initial two-year mission, completed in December 1997. NASA had extended the mission for two additional years.(Agence France-Presse, “Galileo Probe Suffers Malfunction in Jupiter Moon Flyby,” 22 July 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft Galileo Working Again,” 24 July 1998.)
Rocket engineer Max E. Nowak died of natural causes at the age of 89. An original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, which developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets during World War II, Nowak had been among the first of the team members to move to the United States after the war. He had been the assistant to the director of the manufacturing engineering lab during the Apollo program and had directed the assembly of systems for the Saturn I nose cones and Saturn V launch systems.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die,” 12 July 1998.)
Scientists studying Galileo data published findings in the journal Nature describing the likely presence of a subsurface, liquid, salty ocean on Callisto, Jupiter’s second largest moon. Margaret G. Kivelson, space physics professor at the University of California at Los Angeles and NASA’s Principal Investigator for Galileo’s magnetometer instrument, explained that data showed variability in Callisto’s magnetic field similar to that of another Jupiter moon, Europa. However, neither Callisto’s atmosphere, which lacks charged particles, nor Callisto’s icy crust, is a good conductor for generating a magnetic field. Kivelson explained that a layer of salty melted ice could carry “sufficient electrical currents to produce the magnetic field.” In addition, she noted that Galileo data indicated electrical currents flowing in opposite directions at different times, a “key signature consistent with the idea of a salty ocean.” However, scientists had concluded that, unlike Europa, Callisto was unlikely ever to support life, even if it had an ocean, because of its insufficient energy sources. Callisto’s only apparent source of heat is radioactive elements, whereas Europa’s closer position to Jupiter means it possesses tidal energy.(NASA, “Jupiter’s Moon Callisto May Hide Salty Ocean,” news release 98-192, 21 October 1998; K. K. Khurana et al., “Induced Magnetic Fields as Evidence for Subsurface Oceans in Europa and Callisto,” Nature 395, no. 6704 (22 October 1998): 777–780.)
NASA successfully tested a fuel tank made of a new metal mixture, aluminum lithium, never before used in major U.S. manufacturing. The tank made of the new alloy was 30 percent stronger and 5 percent lighter than the aluminum magnesium tanks in use since the days of the Apollo program. The tank showed no leaks, pressure bulges, or other problems, when loaded with 537,000 gallons (2,033,000 liters) of liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel. Lockheed Martin had developed the new fuel tank to help ensure that NASA would be able to haul large sections of the ISS into orbit.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle’s New Fuel Tank Test a Success,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 May 1998.)
NASA announced that it had restructured and renamed its Office of Aeronautics and Space Transportation Technology, known as Code R, appointing retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Spence M. Armstrong to head the newly reorganized Office of Aero-Space Technology. NASA’s spokesperson said that NASA’s management had created three new divisions within the Office⎯Goals, Programs, and Institutions⎯to help NASA achieve its goals. Major goals included accessing space more cheaply, with reusable launch vehicle programs; creating greater synergy between aeronautics and space transportation technology; decreasing aircraft accident rates, while tripling the nation’s aviation-system capacity; diminishing aircraft noise and emissions; and reducing the cost of air travel and the cost of placing payloads in orbit. The role of the Goals Division would be to implement the challenging development of new technologies; that of the Programs Division would be to manage the various programs within the Office, and the Institutions Division would oversee “institutional problems at the field centers.”(NASA, “Aeronautics Enterprise Reorganizes and Changes Name,” news release 98-187, 14 October; Aerospace Daily, “NASA Renames, Reorganizes Code R under Armstrong,” 15 October 1998.)
NASA released “unusually detailed” images of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede taken by the Galileo probe in June 1996 and June 1997. Although the images did not indicate the existence of any form of life, they showed that life had been possible in Ganymede’s oceans billions of years ago. At that time, the moon had water, heat, and organic material, brought by comets from outer space. The images also revealed geological formations, including mountain-like ridges and a valley system of volcanoes. Early in the moon’s history, the volcanoes had supplied water for Ganymede’s oceans, which are now frozen.(Paul Hoversten, “Photos Suggest Life Could Have Existed on Jupiter’s Moon,” USA Today, 16 July 1998; New York Times, “Hints of an Ocean on Jupiter’s Moon Yield Questions About Life,” 16 July 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
NASA researchers released images and temperature readings collected by Mars Global Surveyor. The images revealed that the Martian moon Phobos is covered in a layer of dust at least 3 feet (0.9 meters) deep, the result of the impact of meteoroids, occurring over millions of years. Surveyor’s thermal emission spectrometer revealed that, on Phobos, the temperature changes from -170oF to -25oF (-112oC to -32oC) between night and day. Scientists explained that dust accounts for some of the moon’s drastic temperature change, because Phobos does not have an atmosphere enabling it to trap heat. Therefore, the surface’s small particles have only 7 hours to absorb heat from the Sun, losing heat rapidly after sunset. Images of landslides on steep crater slopes indicated that Phobos’s gravity, even at just 1/1,000th of that of Earth, is sufficient to pull objects downward.(NASA, “Martian Moon Phobos Hip-Deep in Powder,” news release 98-164, 11 September 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Martian Moon,” 12 September 1998.)
At 7:15 a.m. (EST), Lunar Prospector executed the first of three engine bursts needed to settle into orbit. In a flawlessly executed maneuver, Prospector fired its engines for 30 minutes to slow down, permitting the Moon’s gravity to capture it. The small robotic spacecraft was NASA’s first visitor to the Moon since the astronauts from Apollo 17 had walked on its surface in 1972. The Lunar Prospector project had cost about US$63 million.(Washington Times, “After 25 Years, NASA Shoots for the Moon,” 12 January 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Prospector Slides into Lunar Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 12 January 1998.)
Lunar Prospector settled into its orbit after three flawless engine burns. The five scientific instruments (magnetometer, electron reflectometer, gamma-ray spectrometer, neutron spectrometer, alpha particle spectrometer, and Doppler gravity experiment using an S-band antenna) began transmitting streams of data. The neutron spectrometer scanned the lunar surface for evidence of hydrogen; the gamma-ray spectrometer determined concentrations of elements such as uranium and iron; and the alpha-particle spectrometer searched for indications of volcanic and tectonic activity.(Reuters, “Corrected—U.S. Space Probe Begins Hunt for Water on the Moon,” 14 January 1998; NASA, “Solar System Exploration: Lunar Prospector,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/missions/profile.cfm?MCode=LunarPr&Dis play=ReadMore (accessed 30 July 2007).)
NASA announced that Lunar Prospector’s gamma-ray spectrometer had returned data about the Moon’s elemental composition. Scientists had used the data to develop the first global maps delineating compositional variations of thorium, potassium, and iron ore over the lunar surface. The maps provided insights into how the Moon’s crust had developed. Prospector’s magnetometer and electron-reflectometer data indicated that the Moon contained magnetized rocks on its upper surface, which had created the two smallest known magnetospheres in the solar system. The craft’s Doppler gravity experiment had enabled scientists to develop the “first precise gravity map of the entire lunar surface,” showing seven previously unknown lava-filled craters, which cause gravitational anomalies. NASA also announced that Lunar Prospector had supplied additional evidence of water-ice deposits on both poles of the Moon.(NASA, “Latest Lunar Prospector Findings Indicate Larger Amounts of Polar Water Ice,” news release 98-158, 3 September 1998.)
