NASA announced that new findings from the Galileo spacecraft indicated the presence of sulfuric acid on the frozen surface of Jupiter’s moon Europa. Sulfuric acid is a corrosive chemical found in car batteries. Robert W. Carlson of NASA’s JPL, the lead author of a paper published in the journal Science, was Principal Investigator for Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer, which located the chemical. The new findings corroborated Galileo’s earlier spectrometer data analyses, suggesting the presence of sulfate salts on Europa. Despite indications that a liquid ocean may exist under Europa’s crust, Carlson had initially thought the presence of sulfuric acid would end debate over whether it was possible for Europa to contain biological life. However, his colleague Kenneth H. Nealson suggested the opposite, remarking that sulfur and sulfuric acid are oxidants⎯energy sources known to us on Earth. Therefore, Nealson proposed that the findings should encourage scientists to search for “any possible links between the sulfur oxidants on Europa’s surface and natural fuels produced from Europa’s hot interior.”(NASA, “Battery Acid Chemical Found on Jupiter’s Moon Europa,” news release 99-112, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-112.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); R. W. Carlson et al., “Sulfuric Acid on Europa and the Radiolytic Sulfur Cycle,” Science 286, no. 5437 (1 October 1999): 97–99.)
At the American Geophysical Union’s fall meeting in San Francisco, NASA presented images from the Galileo spacecraft’s close flyby of Jupiter’s moon Io on 25 November, showing “a curtain of lava erupting within a giant volcanic crater.” Because of the intense heat and height of the lava fountains, NASA’s Infrared Telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was also able to observe them. NASA scientists hoped to determine the temperature of the extremely hot lava on Io, by combining data from the telescope and from Galileo observations. Galileo scientist Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson remarked that capturing images of the fountains was a 1-in-500-chance observation. NASA announced that engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s (JPL’s) Measurement Technology Center had been able to repair images damaged by radiation during Galileo’s 10 October flyby using LabVIEW software from National Instruments. JPL’s Torrence V. Johnson compared the work to unscrambling a television cable signal: “JPL engineers had to break the code that was inadvertently introduced by the radiation near Io.”(NASA, “Galileo Sees Dazzling Lava Fountain on Io,” news release 99-148, 17 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-148.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
NASA’s Lunar Prospector crashed into a frozen crater on the Moon, but detected no water upon impact. Scientists, believing that the crater held frozen water, had hoped that the “fire and violence of the collision would vaporize ice,” sending a “wet plume, detectable by special instruments, spiraling into the lunar sky.” Telescopes equipped with ultraviolet detectors recorded hours of data after the impact, searching for the “chemical signature” of water. The Prospector mission, which had lasted 18 months following its 6 January 1998 launch, had used five instruments to “map the magnetic, chemical and gravitational character of the [M]oon.”(Associated Press, “Spacecraft Smashes into Moon: Scientists Hoping for Evidence of Ice Vapor in Lunar Sky,” Washington Post, 1 August 1999.)
Researchers reported in the journal Science that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had detected hydrogen peroxide on Jupiter’s moon Europa. Hydrogen peroxide does not occur naturally on Earth. A scientific instrument aboard the craft⎯the Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (NIMS)⎯had aided scientists in their study of Europa’s surface. Working like a prism, the instrument had broken up infrared light, detecting dark areas of hydrogen peroxide. The scientists reported that the chemical was forming constantly on Europa, through the process of radiolysis; in this case, the process involved “intense particle radiation” emanating from Jupiter. Principal Investigator for NIMS Robert W. Carlson explained that hydrogen peroxide begins breaking down almost as soon as it forms and, therefore, its life on Europa spans no more than a few months. The short lifespan of the chemical limited the scientists’ ability to study the long- term chemical history of Europa. However, scientists would be able to apply their observations of short-term chemical changes on Jupiter to the study of how the moons of Jupiter interact with the planet, as well as to the study of similar processes elsewhere in the solar system.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Galileo Finds ‘Bottle Blonde’ Chemical on Europa,” news release 99-022, 25 March 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/europaperoxide.html (accessed 21 December 2007); R. W. Carlson et al., “Hydrogen Peroxide on the Surface of Europa,” Science 283, no. 5410 (26 March 1999): 2062– 2064.)
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASA’s Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiter’s moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, “recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data.” James K. Erickson of NASA’s JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileo’s instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, “If we didn’t have the automatic restart software, we wouldn’t be getting any data at the encounters.”(Michael A. Dornheim, “Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
Astronaut Charles P. “Pete” Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who “combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet.” As an example of Conrad’s wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” Conrad had been a member of NASA’s second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident,” news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
NASA’s Galileo probe survived intense radiation emanating from Jupiter during a “do-or-die effort,” when the spacecraft came within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io. The craft experienced computer problems when passing through the densest part of Jupiter’s radiation belt, but 1 hour after Galileo’s closest encounter with Io, all of its systems had resumed normal functioning. Duane Bindschadler, Manager of Science Operations for the Galileo Program, explained that close-up study of Io could help scientists learn about the behavior of volcanoes, thereby helping them predict the behavior of volcanoes on Earth. However, because Jupiter’s radiation field could damage or destroy the spacecraft, NASA had planned the close flyby for the end of the two-year extended mission, following Galileo’s original two-year mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Succeeds in Historic Flyby of Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon,” news release, 11 October 1999; Reuters, “Galileo Probe Risks Ruin for a Closer Look at Io,” Washington Post, 12 October 1999.)
After a search of nearly two weeks, a team of salvagers funded by the Discovery Channel located the Liberty Bell 7, the Mercury space capsule flown by astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, which had been lost at sea on 21 July 1961. Grissom had survived the splashdown and had been rescued from the Atlantic Ocean. He had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo I launchpad fire that he had done nothing that could have caused the hatch to blow out following the splashdown. The cause of the accident remained a mystery and “forever marred” Grissom’s otherwise successful 15-minute suborbital flight, the nation’s second piloted spaceflight. The salvagers’ remotely operated submersible had located and recorded video of the capsule about 300 miles (480 kilometers) southeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the surface of the ocean. Expedition leader Curt Newport said the video showed that the capsule was in “amazingly good condition.” It was “still shiny in spots,” the window and parachute liner were intact, its periscope was extended, and the words “United States” and “Liberty Bell” were “plainly visible.” Newport explained the difficulty of locating the capsule, comparing the attempt to find it to searching for the Titanic⎯the Liberty Bell’s capsule, smaller than one of the Titanic’s boilers, was hidden in water 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) deeper than the doomed ocean liner. Although the submersible located two cameras and a tape recorder with the capsule, which might possibly help to explain why the hatch blew open prematurely, it was doubtful that the film from those items would be salvageable after 38 years underwater. Although the discovery of the hatch itself would more likely provide an answer, Newport estimated that the hatch could be a mile from the capsule. The capsule remained in the ocean, for recovery at a later unspecified date.(Washington Times, “Salvagers Able To Locate Grissom’s Space Capsule,” 3 May 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Sunken Spacecraft,” 3 May 1999.)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences, research group leaders from the University of Texas at Austin announced that scientists had sifted through the data from Earth-based observatories and from spacecraft such as the HST, obtained from the controlled crash of NASA’s Lunar Prospector into a crater near the south pole of the Moon on 31 July. The researchers reported that they had identified “no observable signature of water” in the Moon’s crater. The announcement confirmed the conclusion reached at the time of the crash. The Lunar Prospector spacecraft had launched on 6 January 1998. In March 1998, mission scientists had announced the first tentative findings of the presence of water ice on both of the Moon’s poles. The controlled crash, proposed by engineers and astronomers at the University of Texas, was “a low-budget attempt to wring one last bit of productivity from the low-cost” mission. NASA had accepted the proposal because of the successful peer review of the idea, and because the craft’s useful life was nearing its end.(NASA, “No Water Ice Detected from Lunar Prospector Impact,” news release 99-119, 13 October 1999; Associated Press, “Craft’s Crash into Moon Finds No Water,” Los Angeles Times, 13 October 1999.)
NASA’s Galileo spacecraft was unable to record its closest encounter with Jupiter’s moon Io, as it passed within 186 miles (299 kilometers) of the volcanic moon’s surface. Although radiation shut down the craft’s instruments, NASA was able to restart the instruments 4 minutes later, permitting Galileo to complete more than half of its planned observations. The craft had encountered a similar problem when it had flown within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Io in October. NASA had added the close flybys of Io, located deep within the Jovian system’s radiation belts, to the end of Galileo’s two-year extended mission. The spacecraft had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis on 18 October 1989, had begun orbiting Jupiter in December 1995, and had completed its primary mission in December 1997, thereafter, continuing an extended mission focused on Jupiter’s moon Europa, with flybys of the planet’s moons Callisto and Io, as well.(John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo’s Moon Shots Impeded by Radiation,” Washington Times, 27 November 1999; John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo Spacecraft Faces Huge Doses of Radiation,” USA Today, 26 November 1999.)
NASA released an image of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io, captured at the closest range ever accomplished. The image, which NASA’s spacecraft Galileo took during a flyby of the moon on 10 October, showed a lava field near the center of an erupting volcano named Pillan, with visible new lava flows from its volcanic center. To capture most of the new images of Io, Galileo had used a fast camera mode, in which the camera preprocesses the image, averaging the brightness in its adjacent parts. However, Io’s radiation had disrupted the process, degrading the quality of the images. Radiation had not affected images, including the newly released image of Pillan, taken in other camera modes. Galileo Project Manager James K. Erickson remarked that Galileo would not use the fast camera mode during the next Io flyby.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Closest-Ever Picture of Volcanic Moon Io Released,” news release, 22 October 1999.)
NASA officials announced that the Galileo spacecraft was operating normally again after entering safe mode on 31 January. Galileo’s computer had become confused while flying past Jupiter’s moon Europa. David A. Senske, a member of the Galileo imaging team at NASA’s JPL, explained that the unusual angle Galileo required for studying Europa had caused the computer to malfunction.(Associated Press, “Galileo Craft Resumes Its Jupiter Mission,” 13 February 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, established by Congress after the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire on 27 January 1967, submitted its annual report to NASA. The panel found Shuttle safety satisfactory, but cautioned that cutbacks, such as hiring freezes and budgetary restrictions, had created a “looming crisis” of future shortfalls in the workforce. The panel warned that NASA was at risk of “losing the core competencies needed to conduct the nation’s spaceflight and aerospace programs in a safe and effective manner.” Budgetary constraints had also caused NASA to postpone planned improvements to the Shuttle fleet and the International Space Station (ISS). The panel’s chairperson remarked that both programs were operating at an “acceptable level of risk,” but that updating Shuttle computers and refurbishing the supply of spare parts would make the programs safer.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel To Present Report to NASA,” news release N99-8, 4 February 1999; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Space Safety,” 5 February 1999.)
