NASA released the first images taken by the recently launched Mars Odyssey spacecraft. Headed for the Red Planet, Odyssey pointed its camera Earthward to take calibrating shots as it traveled around the South Pole. Among the first images the vessel captured were the first thermal-infrared views ever taken of Earth and its Moon. The photographs demonstrated the technological sophistication of the instruments for the mission to Mars, which allowed close observation, producing images even with very little available light. The clarity of the images of Earth, particularly those of Antarctica, boded well for the success of the Mars mission. Mars Odyssey measured surface temperatures in Antarctica as low as minus 58°F (14°C), similar in range to temperatures the craft would experience during its survey of Mars.(NASA, “Earth Day Portrait Is First One Snapped by NASA’s 2001 Mars Odyssey,” news release 01-81, 23 April 2001.)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the world’s leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the company’s missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Society’s Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, “Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, “International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
Continuing to gather data long after it had completed its original mission, the Galileo spacecraft made the closest ever pass of Jupiter’s largest moon, Callisto. Although regarded as the ugly duckling of Jupiter’s moons because it does not appear to have ever had liquid water present, Callisto still interested scientists who hoped to gather enough data to determine the size and number of craters on the moon’s surface. In the days leading up to the close pass of Callisto, problems with Galileo’s cameras had worried NASA controllers. Galileo scientists had anticipated the complications, however, predicting that the flyby, within 100 miles (161 kilometers) of the moon, would expose the probe to strong gravitational pulls and radiation belts. Galileo had originally begun orbiting Jupiter in 1995 and had already made 30 flybys of Jupiter’s largest moons.
NASA made available the first large-scale images revealing a tail of electrified gas streaming from Earth toward the Sun. One of the images, which NASA’s Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had produced, appeared on the cover of Science. The IMAGE technology had captured new views of previously unverifiable gas trapped within Earth’s magnetic field, known as the magnetosphere. The images placed in the context of the solar system the vast reach of the region affected by Earth’s magnetosphere, which extends past the Moon on the night side of Earth. Astronomers compared the perspective the new images provided them, to the perspective satellite images of Earth provide to scientists researching hurricanes.(NASA, “NASA’s Image Reveals Earth’s Invisible Magnetic Tail,” news release 01-08, 25 January 2001; cover of Science 291, no. 5504 (26 January 2001).)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASA’s JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Center’s goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSC’s Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director,” news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASA’s Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silverstein’s work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States’ first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for “technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASA’s “true founding members,” who had made possible NASA’s robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, “Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies,” news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program,” New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA,” 4 June 2001.)
