NASA’s Galileo spacecraft took its last pictures, images of Io, a planet-sized moon orbiting Jupiter. Galileo had launched in 1989 from Space Shuttle Atlantis and had entered Jupiter’s orbit six years later. The spacecraft had eventually made 33 orbits around Jupiter, capturing nearly 14,000 images of the planet and the objects around it.(NASA, “Farewell, Io; Galileo Paying Last Visit to a Restless Moon,” news release 02-10, 15 January 2002; NASA, “Solar System ExplorationGalileo: Overview,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/ /index.cfm (accessed 31 July 2008); Andrew Bridges, “NASA Awaits Last Photographs from Jupiter Probe’s Long Trip,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2002.)
Thomas J. Kelly, designated by NASA as father of the lunar module, died at the age of 72 in Cutchogue, New York. Kelly had led a team of engineers at Grumman Aircraft Corporation in designing and building the Lunar Excursion Module known as the Eagle. Apollo 11 astronauts had used the Eagle to land on the Moon and to return to the orbiting command module for the trip back to Earth. In 1972 NASA had awarded Kelly with its Distinguished Public Service Medal for his work on the Apollo program. Kelly’s wife, six children, and 10 grandchildren survived him.(Warren E. Leary, “T. J. Kelly, 72, Dies; Father of Lunar Module,” New York Times, 27 March 2002.)
In an article in the journal Nature, scientist Paul M. Schenk provided evidence that Jupiter’s moon Europa might not be able to support life, challenging many scientists’ previous assessments about the potential for life on the moon. Astrobiologists had theorized that Europa might be able to support life, based on the possibility that it might possess a heat source, liquid water, and organic material, all necessary for life to exist. However, researchers had also known that Europa is covered with a shell of ice, which might be sufficiently thick to prevent sunlight and oxygen from reaching water below the icy surface, thereby impeding Europa’s ability to support life. Using data obtained from NASA’s Galileo and Voyager spacecraft, Schenk had calculated the thickness of Europa’s ice shell by comparing the depths of impact craters on Europa with those on Callisto and Ganymede, two other moons of Jupiter. Schenk’s analysis indicated that Europa’s ice shell is at least 19-kilometers (12-miles) thick―nearly twice that suggested by previous studies and thick enough to prevent the existence of life.(Usha Lee McFarling, “Life on Jupiter Moon Likely on Thin (or Thick) Ice,” Los Angeles Times, 23 May 2002; Paul M. Schenk, “Thickness Constraints on the Icy Shells of the Galilean Satellites from a Comparison of Crater Shapers,” Nature 417, no. 6887 (23 May 2002): 419–421.)
A group of astronomers, including NASA’s Christophe Dumas, announced the discovery of a new moon orbiting the planet Uranus. S/2001 U 1 was Uranus’s 21st confirmed moon, one of six Uranian moons with an irregular orbit on a different orbital plane from that of the planet’s other moons. Moons with irregular orbits are hard to find, because they tend to be very distant from the planet they orbit and are so faint that they are difficult to distinguish from stars. The six Uranian moons with irregular orbits were the planet’s smallest moons, ranging in size from 10 to 20 kilometers (6 to 12 miles) in diameter. Scientists theorized that these smaller moons were the result of collisions that had occurred during the early stages of planetary formation.(NASA JPL, “Scientists Boost Tally at Uranus,” news release, 25 October 2002.)
The FBI and NASA’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) announced the arrest of three students employed at NASA’s JSC. The FBI had charged the students with the theft of lunar and meteorite samples. According to the FBI, the three student employees and another man had stolen a safe containing the samples and had attempted to sell the specimens. JSC had notified the FBI and NASA’s OIG of the possible theft on 15 July.(NASA, “NASA Cooperating in Investigation of Theft,” news release 02-133, 22 July 2002; Los Angeles Times, “4 Charged in Theft of NASA Moon Rocks,” 23 July 2002.)
