The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
John E. Riley, a 33-year member of NASA’s Public Affairs Department, broadcast voice of NASA’s Mission Control for the Apollo program, and NASA spokesperson, died of cancer at the age of 78. He had begun working for NASA in 1959 and, as a member of the Apollo program team, had provided commentary during the first moonwalk. Riley had also initiated the practice of encouraging astronauts’ interviews with media and had traveled with astronauts internationally.(Matt Schwartz, “Obituary: Riley, 78, Longtime Spokesman for NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 21 April 2003.)
NASA announced the new charter and new members of its Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP). All members of the previous ASAP, which the U.S. Congress had initially chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire, had resigned in late September 2003 in the wake of the Columbia accident investigation. The original charter had intended the panel to act as an independent body to advise NASA’s Administrator on safety issues, but over the years, additional administrative procedures had governed the panel’s work. In the new charter, NASA revoked those procedures to enable the panel to develop its agenda in accordance with CAIB findings. The ASAP’s original 1967 charter formed the foundation of the new charter, with the following revisions: 1) the ASAP would make quarterly reports, instead of annual; 2) new members would have two-year terms, extendable to a maximum of six years; 3) members would have staggered terms to ensure fresh perspectives at regular intervals; and 4) the ASAP would focus on industrial and systems safety, risk management, trend analysis, and management of NASA’s safety and quality systems. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named, as new members of the ASAP, Rear Admiral Walter H. Cantrell, Vice Admiral Joseph W. Dyer, Augustine O. Esogbue, Major General Francis C. Gideon Jr., Deborah L. Grubbe, Rosemary O’Leary, John C. Marshall, Steven B. Wallace, Rick E. Williams, and ex officio member, Brigadier General Joseph A. Smith. The new members represented academic, military, and industrial sectors; no member was a current or former NASA employee or contractor.(NASA, “NASA Names New Safety Advisory Panel,” news release 03-370, 18 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03370_asap.html (accessed 5 February 2009); Patty Reinert, “NASA Safety Panel Takes Flight Again with New Members,” Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2003.)
A panel of five retired NASA and contractor managers, whose expertise dated to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs, testified in a public hearing before the CAIB that engineers had never designed orbiters’ wings to sustain strikes from any form of debris. The panel members agreed that engineers had known in the 1970s that the RCC panels along the leading edge of the orbiters’ wings presented a technical challenge, and that NASA should have taken appropriate precautions against debris striking the RCC panels. Milton A. Silveira, who had helped design the orbiter, remarked that wings of airplanes were also incapable of sustaining such strikes. Robert F. Thompson, another designer of the orbiter, who had headed the Space Shuttle Program in the 1970s, added that providing an impenetrable wing edge was impossible. According to Thompson, if NASA had insisted on that standard, it would have had to abandon the Shuttle project. Diane Vaughn, a sociologist affiliated with Boston College, who in 1996 had published the book The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and Deviance at NASA, spoke to the panel about NASA’s approach to risk-management and decision-making systems. Vaughn observed that NASA had failed to address institutional problems present at the time of the Challenger disaster, and that as a result, NASA decision-makers had remained unable to access the type of data they needed to assess risk accurately and to act on that knowledge.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Pioneers Testify on Shuttle Columbia Tragedy,” 24 April 2003; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Mistakes Will Repeat Without Changes, Board Told,” Washington Post, 24 April 2003.)
In its first mission to the Moon, ESA launched its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) spacecraft aboard an Ariane 5 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. SMART-1 was the first spacecraft since NASA’s 1998 Lunar Prospector to attempt the journey to the Moon. ESA planned for the 770-pound (349.2-kilogram) craft, powered by an ion- propulsion engine, to reach the Moon in early 2005. SMART-1 carried 33 pounds (15 kilograms) of miniature instruments, which researchers from Finland, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom had provided, including a color camera the size of a human eye, a 4.4- pound (2-kilogram) infrared spectrometer, and an 11-pound (5-kilogram) x-ray spectrometer. The purpose of the SMART-1 mission was to solve certain mysteries about the Moon’s formation, its mineralogical composition, and the amount of water it has, if any. The Ariane 5 also carried into orbit two telecommunications satellites―the INSAT 3-E for India and the European e-BIRD. ESA had delayed the launch of e-BIRD since 28 August to allow the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to make further checks on its satellite.(Frank D. Roylance, “Europe Finally Ready for Mission to Moon,” Baltimore Sun, 29 September 2003; Agence France-Presse, “European Rocket Places Lunar Explorer, Two Satellites into Orbit,” 29 September 2003.)
NASA appointed two veteran astronauts―Apollo Commander Thomas P. Stafford and Space Shuttle Commander Richard O. Covey―to lead the task force assisting NASA’s return-to-flight team. The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), composed of distinguished experts and industry professionals representing a wide range of disciplines, would help the NASA team implement the CAIB’s findings following the release of its final report. Stafford, a retired Lieutenant General in the U.S. Air Force who had flown four missions during the Gemini and Apollo programs, had also chaired the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on ISS Operational Readiness. Covey, a retired U.S. Air Force Colonel, had piloted the 1988 Shuttle Mission STS-26, the first flight following the Challenger accident. He had also piloted Mission STS-51I in 1985 and had commanded STS-38 in 1990 and STS-61 in 1993.(NASA, “Former Apollo and Shuttle Commanders Lead Columbia Accident Report Task Force,” news release 03-196, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03196_covey_lead.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe accepted the resignation of all members and staff of the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), which the U.S. Congress had first chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire. ASAP’s function was to provide an independent body to advise NASA’s Administrator about the safety of NASA’s operations, facilities, and personnel. In her resignation letter, ASAP Chairperson Shirley C. McCarty stated that the panel had decided to resign so that the NASA’s Administrator and Congress would have an opportunity to revitalize ASAP and to reshape its charter and mission. The panel also noted its frustration that, over the years, legislation had weakened its authority and that the CAIB final report had described the ASAP as “often not very influential.” Experts had noted that NASA had often ignored warnings that the safety panel issued and that ASAP had possessed no authority to enforce its recommendations. In accepting the ASAP members’ resignations, O’Keefe pledged to strengthen the panel by studying its original concept and determining how to help its successor panel best meet the needs of NASA.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Accepts Aerospace Safety Panel Resignation,” news release 03-301, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03301_asap_resign.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Nine NASA Safety Panel Members Resign,” 24 September 2003.)
The Japanese probe Muses-C―renamed Hayabusa (Falcon) after its deployment―launched from Kogoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu, aboard an M-5 solid- fuel rocket. The probe’s mission was to rendezvous with the asteroid 1998 SF36, gather surface samples, and return to Earth. Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science expected the 510-kilogram (1,124-pound) spacecraft to arrive at the asteroid in June 2005. The craft would then skim the surface several times over three months, collecting 1 gram (0.04 ounces) of surface material from various sites. The Institute had designed the mission to return the samples to Earth in a capsule in June 2007. If the probe succeeded, the samples would be the first space rocks collected since the end of the U.S. Apollo Lunar Exploration Program 30 years before.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, “Japan Launches Rocket To Probe Asteroid,” 9 May 2003.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
