President George W. Bush formally established the President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, to provide recommendations on implementing elements of his recently announced Vision for Space Exploration. The Commission would make recommendations regarding the type of scientific research U.S. scientists would conduct on the Moon, the development of technologies to enable human and robotic exploration of the Moon and the planets, and the criteria for selecting future destinations for human space explorers. The appointed members of the Commission were Edward C. Aldridge Jr., Carleton S. Fiorina, Michael P. Jackson, Laurie A. Leshin, Lester L. Lyles, Paul D. Spudis, Neil deGrasse Tyson, Robert S. Walker, and Maria T. Zuber.(The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Executive Order Creating the Presidential Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy,” news release, 30 January 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/aldridge_executive_order.html (accessed 30 January 2009); The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Members of the Presidential Space Exploration Commission,” news release, 30 January, 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/ aldridge_members.html (accessed 30 January 2009). 591 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 603, 1 February 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx603.html (accessed 31 January 2009).)
William H. Pickering, a former Director of NASA’s JPL, died at the age of 93. Pickering had begun his career at JPL in 1944 and had served as Director from 1954 to 1976. Soon after becoming Director of JPL, Pickering had led a project that had successfully launched the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 into Earth orbit on 31 January 1958. During the remainder of Pickering’s tenure, JPL had launched the Ranger and Surveyor missions to the Moon and the Mariner missions to Mars and Venus. Pickering had received numerous awards during his lifetime: NASA had presented him with its Distinguished Service Medal, President Gerald R. Ford had awarded him the National Medal of Science, and the Queen of England had given him an honorary knighthood.(NASA, “NASA Remembers William H. Pickering, Former Director of JPL,” news release 04-094, 16 March 2004.)
Passing by Saturn’s furthest moon Phoebe, the Cassini spacecraft returned analyses of the moon indicating that Phoebe’s chemical composition is similar to the composition of comets, a finding that supported previous scientific theories about the enigmatic Phoebe. Because Phoebe has an unusually dark appearance and orbits Saturn in a direction opposite that of the planet’s other moons, scientists had theorized that the moon is a captive object of Saturn. Cassini’s analyses of Phoebe indicated that the diminutive moon’s surface is composed of carbon dioxide, water ice, water-bearing minerals, and various organic chemicals. The results indicated possible chemical similarities between Phoebe’s composite materials and materials observed in comets. The Cassini spacecraft was one of two in the Cassini-Huygens mission, a joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA. Besides Cassini―an orbiter designed to orbit Saturn, studying the planet and its system of moons―the project included the probe Huygens, created to examine Saturn’s largest moon Titan. (Richard A. Kerr, “Dirty Old Ice Ball Found at Saturn,” Science 304, no. 5678 (18 June 2004): 1727; Warren E. Leary, “Craft Confirms a Comet Link for Peculiar Moon of Saturn,” New York Times, 24 June 2004.)
The SMART-1 spacecraft, the first of ESA’s Small Missions for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART), successfully completed its first orbit of the Moon. ESA had launched SMART-1 in September 2003 to study the Moon’s surface. SMART-1 was noteworthy for its use of a host of techniques and technologies to reach lunar orbit―including a solar-electric propulsion system or ion engine, which made the journey of 52.2 million miles (84 million kilometers) from Earth to the Moon using only 130 pounds (59 kilograms) of the 181 pounds (82 kilograms) of xenon fuel that it had carried. That fuel consumption rate was equivalent to more than 5 million miles per gallon. The 809-pound (367-kilogram) spacecraft was able to achieve this rate of fuel efficiency using solar panels. During 13 months of expanding orbits around Earth, the solar panels had charged the xenon gas atoms, providing the spacecraft with occasional thrusts. ESA hoped to replace conventional propulsion systems―which were either too expensive or incapable of fulfilling the same objective―with the new solar-panel technology, to propel future spacecraft further into space.(ESA, “Europe Reaches the Moon,” ESA news release 60-2004, 16 November 2004, http://www.esa.int esaCP/SEM2S8WJD1E_index_0.html (accessed 2 February 2010); David Rising for Associated Press, “Europe’s First Moon Mission Successful,” 17 November 2004.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bush’s exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASA’s possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, “NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort,” Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
.html (accessed 14 January 2009); Justyn R. Maund et al., “The Massive Binary Companion Star to the Progenitor of Supernova 1993J,” Nature 427, no. 6970 (8 January 2004): 129–131. billion from existing space programs over the next years to fund the development of the technology to travel to the Moon and Mars. President Bush also extended an invitation to other countries to cooperate in attaining the objectives of the Vision. Major newspapers described the Vision for Space Exploration as a response to the Columbia disaster and a means of regaining public support for continued space exploration.(Patty Reinert, “Bush Aims for ‘Worlds Beyond Our Own’,” Houston Chronicle, 15 January 2004; David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson, “Bush Backs Goal of Flight to Moon To Establish Base,” New York Times, 15 January 2004; NASA, “The Vision for Space Exploration,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 55584main_vision_space_exploration-hi-res.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space concerning NASA’s budget request for FY 2005. NASA had requested US$16.2 billion for FY 2005, an increase of 5.6 percent over its budget for FY 2004. Much of O’Keefe’s testimony and the Senate subcommittee members’ questions were concerned with the likelihood of NASA’s achieving the objectives that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration, announced in January 2004. Those objectives included human flights to the Moon and replacing the Space Shuttles with a new space-exploration vehicle.(NASA, “Administrator O’Keefe’s Senate Testimony,” news release, 1 April 2004; Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Chief Faces Lawmakers’ Queries,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 April 2004.)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, “New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond,” New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASA’s JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSC’s Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASA’s JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, “Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director,” Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, “NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy,” news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
Cassini-Huygens became the first spacecraft to successfully navigate Saturn’s rings and to orbit the planet. A joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA, the mission comprised two spacecraft: the orbiter Cassini and the probe Huygens. The space agencies had planned for Cassini to conduct 76 orbits of Saturn during a four-year survey of the planet and its moons. They had designed the Huygens probe to analyze the atmosphere of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon. If the probe survived its descent to Titan, it would analyze the moon’s surface, as well.(ESA, “Cassini-Huygens Enters Orbit Around the Ringed Planet,” ESA news release 36-2004, 1 July 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Cassini First To Orbit Saturn,” Washington Post, 1 July 2004.)
A commission created by President George W. Bush released its report outlining how NASA and other organizations might implement President Bush’s new policy: the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration. The President’s Commission, led by Edward C. Aldridge Jr., endorsed the Vision for Space Exploration’s goals―to explore Mars and the Moon. In addition, the commission recommended that, to meet those goals, NASA needed to make numerous changes; the federal government needed to establish a permanent council to develop and coordinate space exploration policies; and the private sector needed to become more involved in space operations. Specific changes that the commission recommended were that NASA should focus on the research and development of space technology, and that private industry should conduct operational activities, such as launching payloads to low Earth orbit. The report also recommended that NASA pursue partnerships with the scientific community and with foreign space agencies.(President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, A Journey To Inspire, Innovate, and Discover: Report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (Washington, DC, June 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/news/reports/index.html (accessed 6 April 2009); Warren E. Leary and John Schwartz, “NASA Is Urged To Widen Role for Business,” New York Times, 15 June 2004.)
NASA announced the selection of six proposals to provide research and payload instruments for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), the first spacecraft that NASA would build under the new Vision for Space Exploration. NASA planned the LRO as a robotic mission, which would orbit near the Moon, obtaining measurements to use in planning future human and robotic landing sites. The selected proposals included remote-sensing instruments, such as the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter, which would conduct high-resolution measurements of landing-site slopes, and the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector, which would measure the Moon’s radiation.(NASA, “NASA Selects Investigations for Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter,” news release 04-407, 22 December 2004.)
The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft completed the closest approach ever made to Titan, Saturn’s largest moon, as well as the only moon in the solar system known to have an atmosphere. Soon after Cassini pierced Titan’s viscous atmosphere, the spacecraft beamed images of the moon’s surface to mission scientists at NASA’s JPL. ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA had launched the mission in 1997 to study Saturn and its moons. Even though it is too cold to support life, scientists remain greatly interested in Titan, because they suspect that conditions on the planet are similar to those on Earth before the development of life.(ESA, “Cassini-Huygens Makes First Close Approach to Titan,” ESAnews release, 26 October 2004.)
NASA’s Cassini orbiter successfully released ESA’s Huygens probe on a controlled course to Saturn’s largest moon Titan. ESA, NASA, and the Italian Space Agency had created the Cassini- Huygens mission to study Saturn and its moons, scheduling the Huygens probe―specifically designed to analyze Titan’s atmosphere and surface―to enter the moon’s atmosphere in January 2005.(ESA, “Huygens Begins Its Final Journey into the Unknown,” ESA news release 67-2004, 25 December 2004, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMVR53AR2E_index.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
A group of scientists led by Enric Pallé of the New Jersey Institute of Technology published research indicating that, since 1999, the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface had declined. Analyzing NASA’s data on cloud cover, along with data from Earth-based telescopes, the team had calculated how much sunlight Earth reflected to the Moon, using the results to determine the amount of sunlight that reached Earth. They reported that the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface had begun to increase in the mid-1980s, but had started to decline in the early 1990s, a trend that the team attributed to the increasing pollution of Earth’s air. The air pollution had reduced the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface and had increased the amount of water droplets condensing in the atmosphere, thereby increasing the amount of cloud cover blocking sunlight.(Enric Pallé et al., “Changes in Earth’s Reflectance over the Past Two Decades,” Science 304, no. 5676 (28 May 2004): 1299–1301; Kenneth Chang, “After a Period of Brightness, Earth Dims, Researchers Say,” New York Times, 28 May 2004.)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASA’s first Director of Manned Space Flight Safety, died at the age of 101. Lederer, an aviation-safety expert, had introduced notable aviation-safety technologies, such as blinking anticollision lights and flight-data recorders. Lederer had started his career in aviation safety in 1926 as an aeronautical engineer for the U.S. Air Mail Service, where he had redesigned the service’s airplanes to prevent them from igniting after crashes, a frequent cause of death of the pilots. In the 1950s, he had helped establish the agency that later became the FAA. In 1967, after a fire on Apollo 1 had killed three astronauts during a launchpad test, NASA had asked Lederer to establish an Office of Manned Space Flight Safety. In 1970 NASA had appointed Lederer as the safety director for all NASA activities. Lederer had retired two years later. Later, Lederer had taught at the University of Southern California and had served two three-year terms on the Advisory Council for the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations.(Stuart Lavietes, “J. F. Lederer, 101, Dies; Took Risk Management to the Sky,” New York Times, 9 February 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
Former astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper died at age 77 in Ventura, California. One of the original seven astronauts for the Mercury program, the United States’ first human spaceflight program, Cooper was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma, on 6 March 1927. He had joined the U.S. Air Force in 1949, and NASA had selected him as a Mercury astronaut in April 1959. In May 1963, Cooper had piloted the program’s last mission, which lasted 34 hours and 20 minutes―longer than all the combined duration of all previous Mercury missions. Cooper had made his second and final trip to space on Gemini 5 in August 1965, in a two-person mission that had set a record for space endurance of 191 hours. The mission had demonstrated that humans could survive in a weightless environment and, therefore, that a trip to the Moon was feasible. In addition, Cooper had been the first American astronaut to make two spaceflights, to sleep in space, and to appear in a televised broadcast from space. After retiring from the Air Force in 1970, he had run several companies, including a consulting firm specializing in projects ranging from aerospace to hotel development.(John Johnson, “Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr., 77,” Los Angeles Times, 5 October 2004; Matthew L. Wald, “Gordon Cooper, Astronaut, Is Dead at 77,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
