720Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 614, 1 January 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx614.html (accessed 5 June 2009). around Saturn. Voyager’s best images of Iapetus had a resolution of 8 kilometers (4.97 miles) per pixel, but Cassini had produced a resolution of about 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) per pixel.(BBC News, “Cassini Passes ‘Two-Faced’ Moon,” 3 January 2005.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate issued a request for proposals (RFP) for the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) that NASA intended to use to transport astronauts beyond low Earth orbit and to the Moon by 2020. NASA had set the deadline for submissions for 2 May 2005 and planned to select two contractors in September 2005. The two contractors would develop competing prototypes with a December 2008 completion date, at which time NASA would select the prime contractor. NASA stipulated that the minimum specifications for the CEV were that the craft weigh 20 tonnes (18.14 tons) or less; house as many as four astronauts, for as long as 16 days; have the ability to rendezvous and dock with future lunar landers and interplanetary modules; and allow a safe abort throughout all phases of its flight. NASA stipulated that it would permit contractors to design spacecraft that exceeded these specifications. For instance, the RFP permitted the design of craft that could maintain a crew in space for longer than 16 days or accommodate a crew of six. The RFP also gave contractors the flexibility to decide whether the CEV would be able to dock with the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Issues Solicitation for Crew Exploration Vehicle,” news release 05-063, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05063_crew_exploration.html (accessed 2 September 2009); Robert Zimmerman for United Press International, “Space Watch: Spacefaring by Bureaucrats,” 18 March 2005. 753 NASA, “NASA Research Aids UNESCO Global Conservation Efforts,” news release 05-061, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05061_unesco-global.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
NASA’s Cassini spacecraft made a close pass of Saturn’s moon Iapetus, flying within 123,400 kilometers (76,677 miles) on its closest approach, and coming about 10 times closer to the moon than Voyager 2 had come in 1981. Cassini’s closest approach had occurred over the moon’s mysterious dark terrain, which scientists had never before seen at close range. Scientists described the dark coating, the origin of which was unknown, as rich in carbon-based molecules. The dark terrain blankets the side of Iapetus that leads in the direction of the orbital motion
NASA announced that it had awarded Rice University’s Carbon Nanotechnology Laboratory (CNL) an US$11 million contract to produce a prototype power cable constructed of carbon nanotubes. The engineers expected the so-called quantum wires to conduct electricity up to 10 times better than copper, at 1/6th the weight. NASA anticipated that the technology would help return humans to the Moon and enable travel to Mars and beyond. Richard E. Smalley, the project’s Lead Investigator, explained that the Space Shuttle’s primary power-distribution system accounted for almost 7 percent of its weight. However, NASA’s next generation of human and robotic spacecraft would need far more power to support additional instrumentation and broadband communications, requiring a copper power-distribution system that would account for up to 25 percent of the craft’s weight. Under the contract, CNL would provide NASA with a 1- meter (3.2-foot) prototype of quantum wire by 2010, a task requiring major breakthroughs in the production of nanotubes. To date, scientists had succeeded in producing wires no longer than several centimeters. At the time NASA awarded the contract, only armchair nanotubesa type comprising 2 percent of all nanotubes were suitable for use as quantum wires. Researchers at CNL planned to grow these nanotubes like crystals, placing “seeds” in a laboratory reactor and pumping in a source of carbon, such as carbon monoxide, with the hope of creating perfect, long armchair nanotubes each time. The researchers would then twist the tubes together to produce a quantum wire according to NASA’s specifications.(NASA, “NASA Awards $11 Million “Quantum Wire” Contract to Rice,” news release J05-018, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/J05-018.html (accessed 9 September 2009); Amit Asaravala, “NASA Funds ‘Miracle Polymer’,” Wired News, 28 April 2005.)
ESA announced that its Huygens probe, which had undertaken a seven-year journey through the solar system, aboard NASA’s Cassini spacecraft, had successfully landed on the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan. ESA intended Huygens to provide the first direct and detailed sampling of Titan’s atmospheric chemistry, the first photographs of its surface, and a detailed weather report of the moon. ESA had selected Titan as the probe’s destination because Titan’s nitrogen atmosphere is rich in methane, and scientists believe its surface may contain chemicals similar to those that existed on the young Earth, before life evolved. Before the landing of Huygens, scientists had been unable to see Titan’s surface, because the methane in the atmosphere reacts with sunlight, creating a permanent blanket of smog. ESA had designed the Huygens probe specifically to breach that shroud.(ESA, “Europe Reaches New FrontierHuygens Lands on Titan,” ESA news release PR 03-2005, 14 January 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_3_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 14 August 2009); NASA JPL, “NASA Salutes Successful Huygens Probe,” news release 2005-017, 14 January 2005, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/newsreleases/newsrelease20050114-3/ (accessed 14 August 2009); Guy Gugliotta, “Probe Lands on Moon of Saturn: A First Glimpse of Smog-Covered Titan,” Washington Post, 15 January 2005. 731 Agence-France Presse, “Russia and Europe Sign Space Agreement,” 20 January 2005.)
NASA announced a major discovery: images from the Cassini spacecraft had revealed geological activity on Saturn’s moon Enceladus. ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA had jointly created Cassini to study Saturn and its moons. Although scientists had previously believed that Enceladus is too small to be geologically active, data from Cassini had revealed that the moon is one of the solar system’s most geologically dynamic objects. The images showed surface features such as deep canyons and flowing material, a south polar hot spot, and jets of icy particles supplying matter to one of Saturn’s rings.(NASA, “NASA’s Cassini Images Reveal Spectacular Evidence of an Active Moon,” news release 05-422, 6 December 2005; Jeffrey S. Kargel, “Enceladus: Cosmic Gymnast, Volatile Miniworld,” Science 311, no. 5766 (10 March 2006): 1389–1391.)
The U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA’s proposal to reduce spending on aviation research by 20 percent over five years, which would necessitate the closure of some wind tunnels and other centers. Overall, the Bush administration had proposed a 2.4 percent increase in NASA’s budget, with most of that increase directed toward funding travel to the Moon and Mars, initiatives requiring NASA to eliminate or reduce its other programs, such as aviation research. NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Research J. Victor Lebacqz defended the program, remarking that the United States remained a global power in aviation and had developed technologies to improve safety, reduce environmental impact, and increase efficiency of aviation operations. However, Lebacqz stated that NASA needed a clearer vision for the goals of the program. John M. Klineberg, a retired NASA official and industry executive, who had headed a National Research Council (NRC) study group in 2004, testified before the committee. The NRC study group had published a review of NASA’s aeronautics programs. Klineberg warned against using the group’s recommendations out of context to justify major cuts in programs. He testified that NASA’s proposed aviation-research budget was a disaster, putting the program at risk of becoming irrelevant to the future of aeronautics in the United States and throughout the world. In an interview following the hearing, Klineberg emphasized that the study group had suggested consolidating and focusing programs but did not support budgetary cuts eliminating entire areas of research.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Proposal To Reduce Spending for Aviation Research by 20% Dismays Experts,” New York Times, 17 March 2005; Malia Rulon for Associated Press, “Lawmakers Question Proposed NASA Cuts,” 17 March 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The Future of Aeronautics at NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 16 March 2005.)
NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASA’s HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenite―composed of iron, oxygen, and titanium―as a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source,” New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, “Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals,” Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-155, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005, which authorized NASA’s appropriations for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 and directed NASA to pursue particular programs during that period. More specifically, the new law directed NASA’s Administrator to ensure that NASA would pursue a balanced set of programs related to aeronautics research and development, human spaceflight, and scientific research―including robotic missions to the Moon. Among the specific programs the law directed NASA to pursue was the launch of the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) at a date as close to 2010 as possible, and the landing of Americans on the Moon by 2020. Both objectives were components of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, the law specifically authorized appropriations for only two years―US$17.9 billion for FY 2007 and US$18.7 billion for FY 2008.(H.R. Rep. 109-354, at 22 (2005) (Conf. Rep.).)
NASA’s Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASA’s first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, “NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, “STS-114: Return to Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, “Return to Flight: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, “NASA Grounds Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it had finalized an agreement with the Boeing Company to compete as a team to develop NASA’s new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and related human lunar-exploration systems, in anticipation of NASA’s formal request for proposals (RFPs). NASA intended the CEV to serve as the central human space-transportation system within the Project Constellation, which would incorporate human and robotic space systems, ferrying astronauts to the Moon and beyond. According to the agreement, Northrop Grumman’s Integrated Systems sector would serve as team leader and prime contractor during the initial development phase, Spiral 1. During the Spiral 1 phase, the team hoped to demonstrate the CEV’s ability to operate safely in low Earth orbit with astronauts aboard. Boeing NASA Systems, an operating unit of Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, would serve as principal subcontractor. The two companies’ roles would reverse to implement the second phase, Spiral 2. During the Spiral 2 phase, NASA intended to begin to expand human space exploration to the Moon and beyond.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing Finalize Space Exploration Teaming Agreement,” news release, 24 January 2005, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=71298 (accessed 17 August 2009); Los Angeles Business Journal, “Northrop, Boeing Finalize Deal To Team for NASA Contract,” 25 January 2005.)
Scientists using NASA’s HST announced the discovery of two new rings and two new moons around the planet Uranus. The newly discovered rings―faint bands of dust that undergo continual change, with dust spiraling out of the rings―are replenished by debris from collisions between asteroids and the newly discovered Uranian moon called Mab. The discovery of the rings increased the number of known Uranian rings to 13. The discovery of the two moons, which the scientists named Cupid and Mab after mythological and Shakespearean characters, increased the number of known Uranian moons to 27, the most of any planet in the solar system. Scientists also remarked that the orbits of known Uranian moons had changed since Voyager 2 had last observed them in 1986. Scientists described the dynamic nature of Uranus’s moons and rings as indicative of dynamism throughout the solar system. Scientists hoped that observing Uranus would help them better understand this dynamism.(Mark R. Showalter and Jack J. Lissauer, “The Second Ring-Moon System of Uranus: Discovery and Dynamics,” Science 311, no. 5763 (17 February 2006): 973–977; Frank D. Roylance, “Hubble Images Show More Rings, Moons Around Uranus,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 23 December 2005.)
NASA and the Florida Space Research Institute (FSRI) announced the third Centennial Challenges competition: the Moon Regolith Oxygen (MoonROx) challenge. The MoonROx challenge would require teams to develop hardware, within mass and power limits, able to extract a minimum of 5 kilograms (0.005 tonnes or 0.006 tons) of breathable oxygen from simulated lunar soila volcanic ash called JSC-1within a period of 8 hours. The first team to accomplish the oxygen-production goal before June 2008 would win US$250,000. Existing state-of-the-art technologies were incapable of extracting oxygen from simulated lunar soil. FSRI Executive Director Samuel T. Durrance remarked that oxygen-extraction technologies would be critical for robotic and human missions to the Moon.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Centennial Challenge,” news release 05-128, 19 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05128_Centennial_Challenge.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Jeremy McGovern, “Astro Bytes: Extracting Oxygen from ‘Lunar’ Soil,” Astronomy News, 24 May 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
