NASA announced its selection of the seven research teams that would become the first members of NASA’s Lunar Science Institute, headquartered at Ames Research Center (ARC). NASA had established the Institute to support scientific research related to NASA’s existing lunar science programs, in coordination with U.S. space exploration policy. NASA had selected the members using a competitive evaluation process that had begun in June 2008. The seven teams were from Brown University in Rhode Island; Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland; the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston, Texas; NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland; Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado; the Lunar University Node for Astrophysics Research at the University of Colorado in Boulder; and NASA’s Lunar Science Institute of the Colorado Center for Lunar Dust and Atmospheric Studies at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Proposals for lunar research included the study of the history of lunar impacts and how such impacts have affected the Moon’s evolution; the study of the Moon’s formative years; the study of the dynamic response of the lunar environment; and the use of the Moon as a base from which to study the cosmos. NASA had modeled the Lunar Science Institute after its Astrobiology Institute, also housed at ARC.(NASA, “NASA Selects Research Teams for Lunar Science Institute,” news release 09-004, 9 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-004_Lunar_Institute_members.html (accessed 1 February 2011).)
The People’s Republic of China’s State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense announced that Chang’e-1, China’s first lunar probe, had impacted the Moon at 4:13 p.m., Beijing time, successfully ending its 16-month mission. China had launched Chang’e-1 on 24 October 2007, on a mission to produce the first full map of the Moon’s surface. Chang’e-1 had accomplished the mission using stereo radar. The planned lunar impact, the culmination of the first phase of China’s three-stage Moon mission, would enable China to acquire experience that would help it land the second Chinese lunar probe, scheduled to launch in 2012.(Xinhua News Agency,, “China’s Lunar Probe Chang’e-1 Impacts Moon,” 2 March 2009; BBC News, “Chinese Probe Crashes into Moon,” 2 March 2009.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASA’s safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASA’s diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAP’s annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bush’s 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares I’s and Orion’s initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report,” media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, “Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, “Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, “The Budgetary Implications of NASA’s Current Plans for Space Exploration” (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
NASA announced that three teams out of a field of 19 had claimed a total of US$750,000 in prizes at the 2009 Regolith Excavation Challenge on 18 October, marking the first time that any team in the competition’s three-year history had qualified for a cash prize. NASA required the competitors to use mobile, robotic digging machines to excavate a minimum of 330 pounds (149 kilograms) of regolith, or simulated Moon dirt, and to deposit the regolith into a container within 30 minutes. NASA had further stipulated that the vehicles must contain their own power source and weigh no more than 176 pounds (79.8 kilograms). Paul’s Robotics of Worcester, Massachusetts, had earned first place and US$500,000, for excavating 1,103 pounds (500 kilograms) of regolith within the allotted time of 30 minutes. Three-time returning competitor Terra Engineering of Gardena, California, had won second place and US$150,000 for excavating 595 pounds (270 kilograms) of regolith, and first-time competitor Team Braundo of Rancho Palos Verde, California, had earned third place and US$100,000 for excavating 580 pounds (263 kilograms) of regolith.(NASA, “Teams Win at NASA National Lunar Robotics Competition,” news release 09-245, 19 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-245_Regolith_winners.html (accessed 30 September 2011).)
NASA announced that X-Prize Foundation and NASA would host the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander X-Prize Challenge (NGLLXPC) awards at a ceremony in Washington, DC. Masten Space Systems, led by David Masten, had won a first prize of US$1 million for its Xoie rocket prototype, which had competed in the Level-1 contest. Masten Space Systems had also won a second place award of US$150,000 in the Level-2 contest for its Xombie rocket. Texas-based Armadillo Aerospace’s Scorpius rocket had qualified for the Level-1 prize in September but had lost to Xoie in its flight on 30 October in the accuracy category, receiving US $500,000 for second place. Modeled after the US$10 million Ansari X-Prize competition for private-sector spaceflight, NGLLXPC was one of NASA’s Centennial Challenges, intended to encourage the development of new rocket technologies for use in future spacecraft. NASA required contestants to build and fly a rocket-powered vehicle simulating the flight of a vehicle to the Moon. The lander had to take off vertically, travel horizontally, and fly a mission profile designed to demonstrate both power and control, before landing accurately at another spot. Then the craft must take off again, travel horizontally back to its original launch point, and land successfully. The lander must complete the entire exercise within 2 hours and 15 minutes. NASA provided the prize money for the Level-1 and Level-2 contests, and the X-Prize Foundation managed the competition, with commercial sponsorship from Northrop Grumman.
NASA announced that its Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), on board ISRO’s Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft, had detected water molecules in the polar regions of the Moon. Data from the Visual and Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (VIMS), on NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had helped to corroborate the findings, as had data from the High-Resolution Infrared Imaging Spectrometer on NASA’s spacecraft EPOXI—Extrasolar Planet Observations and Characterization (EPOCh) and Deep Impact Extended Investigation (DIXI). M3’s spectrometer had measured light reflecting off the Moon’s surface at infrared wavelengths, splitting the spectral colors small enough to reveal a new level of detail in surface composition. The M3 science team found that the pattern of absorption of the wavelengths at the lunar surface was consistent with the absorption pattern for water molecules and hydroxyl, which is a molecule consisting of one oxygen atom and one hydrogen atom. In 1999 Cassini’s VIMS instrument had also collected data showing water molecules and hydroxyl, but that data had never been published. Roger N. Clark, a U.S. Geological Survey scientist in Denver who had been a member of both the VIMS and the M3 teams, remarked that the data from the two instruments closely agreed, showing as much as 1,000 water molecule parts per million in the lunar soil. To confirm the VIMS and M3 data further, scientists examined EPOXI mission data from June 2009. EPOXI data not only confirmed the findings but expanded on them. Jessica Sunshine, a member of the University of Maryland’s EPOXI team, as well as Deputy Principal Investigator and member of the M3 team, remarked that the extended spectral range and the views over the Moon’s north pole had enabled scientists to explore the distribution of both water and hydroxyl as a function of temperature, latitude, composition, and time of day. She added that the analysis unequivocally confirmed the presence of water molecules and hydroxyl on the lunar surface, revealing that the entire surface of the Moon’s north pole appeared to be hydrated during some portion of the lunar day.(NASA, “NASA Instruments Reveal Water Molecules on Lunar Surface,” news release 09-222, 24 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-222_Moon_Water_Molecules.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “It’s Not Lunacy, Probes Find Water in Moon Dirt,” 24 September 2009; Kenneth Chang, “In Surprise, Moon Shows Signs of Water,” New York Times, 24 September 2009.)
NASA announced that its LCROSS Mission had successfully created dual impacts on the Moon’s surface, in search of water ice. NASA had launched the LCROSS spacecraft on 18 June 2009 as a companion mission to LRO. The LCROSS craft had traveled 5.6 million miles (9.01 million kilometers) over 113 days. To prepare for the mission finale, the LCROSS satellite had separated from its Centaur upper-stage rocket approximately 54,000 miles (86,905 kilometers) above the Moon on 8 October at 6:50 p.m. (PDT). The Centaur had traveled toward the lunar surface at a speed of 1.5 miles (2.41 kilometers) per second, crashing into the Cabeus crater, a permanently shadowed region near the Moon’s south pole, shortly after 4:31 a.m. (PDT). Instruments aboard LCROSS had observed the impact for approximately 4 minutes, while traveling through the dust created by Centaur’s crash, before impacting the crater itself at 4:36 a.m. (PDT). NASA reported that other observatories, as well as the amateur astronomy community, had captured images and video of both impacts, commenting that NASA intended to share its data with the LCROSS science team. Jennifer L. Heldmann, ARC coordinator of the LCROSS observation campaign, explained that one of the mission’s goals was to encourage people to view the LCROSS impacts in as many ways as possible. She anticipated that the LCROSS campaign would provide an enormous amount of corroborated information, fascinating to many observers.
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moon’s south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor,” news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA announced the selection of the Avcoat ablator system for the Orion crew module’s thermal protection system at the base of the craft. During reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, the base of the spacecraft would endure more heat than any other area of Orion, but the Avcoat system would enable the base to erode, or “ablate,” in a controlled way, transporting heat away from the crew module during its descent. Over a period of three years, NASA’s Orion Thermal Protection System Advanced Development Project had considered eight different candidate materials before choosing the two final candidates—Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) and Avcoat, both of which had proven successful in space missions. NASA had used Avcoat for the Apollo capsule heat shield and on select regions of the Space Shuttle’s orbiter in its earliest flights and had resumed production of Avcoat for the study. Avcoat was made of silica fibers with an epoxy-novalic resin filled in a fiberglass-phenolic honeycomb. NASA engineers had manufactured it directly onto the heat-shield substructure. Unlike Avcoat, PICA was manufactured in blocks and attached to the vehicle after fabrication. NASA had used PICA on its first robotic space mission dedicated to exploring the comet Stardust, the first mission to return samples since Apollo. Project engineers had performed rigorous thermal, structural, and environmental testing on Avcoat and PICA, comparing the two materials’ mass, thermal and structural performance, life-cycle costs, ease of manufacturing, reliability, and certification challenges. NASA and Orion’s prime contractor Lockheed Martin ultimately chose Avcoat as the more robust, reliable, and mature system.(NASA, “NASA Selects Material for Orion Spacecraft Heat Shield,” news release 09-080, 7 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-080_Orion_Heat_Shield.html (accessed 17 May 2011). 53 NASA, “Space Station Crew Lands in Soyuz After Successful Mission,” news release 09-081, 8 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-081_Exp18_Landing.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Associated Press, “U.S. Space Tourist’s Return Put Off by a Day,” 3 April 2009.)
NASA announced that it had concluded two weeks of technology-development tests on two prototype lunar rovers in the Arizona desert at Black Point Lava Point, as part of the decade-old program Desert RATS (Research and Technology Studies). The annual Desert RATS excursions allowed NASA to analyze and to refine technologies and procedures in extreme environments on Earth. For the lunar-rover test, two crew members—an astronaut and a geologist—had simulated a 14-day mission, living for more than 300 hours inside NASA’s prototype Lunar Electric Rover and scouting the area for features of geological interest. They had worn spacesuits to conduct simulated moonwalks in which they collected samples; docked to a simulated habitat; driven the rover across difficult terrain; performed a rescue mission; and made a four-day trip across lava. Before the test, NASA’s K10 scout robot had identified areas of interest for the crew to explore. NASA’s All-Terrain Hex-Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (Tri-ATHLETE), a heavy-lift rover, had carried the simulated habitat to which the rover had docked.(NASA, “NASA Concludes Robotics Tests for the Moon in Arizona,” news release 09-214, 15 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-214_Desert_RATS_concludes.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced that its Cassini craft had detected sodium salts in ice grains of Saturn’s outermost ring, an indication that Saturn’s moon Enceladus might harbor a reservoir of liquid water beneath its surface. In 2005 Cassini had discovered on Enceladus water-ice jets, which replenish Saturn’s outermost ring with tiny ice grains and vapor. Analysis of the data from Cassini’s cosmic-dust detector concluded that only the presence of liquid water could account for the dissolution of the significant amounts of minerals necessary to produce the levels of salt detected in the ring. Frank Postberg, Cassini scientist for the cosmic-dust analyzer at the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg, Germany, explained that the grains include table salt and carbonates, like soda, in concentrations that match the predicted composition of an Enceladus ocean. He added that, if the liquid source is indeed an ocean, its presence, coupled with the heat measured near the moon’s south pole and the organic compounds found in the plumes, creates an environment suitable for the formation of life precursors.(NASA, “Salt Finding from NASA’s Cassini Hints at Ocean Within Saturn Moon,” news release 09-147, 24 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-147_Cassini_Enceladus_Salts.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttle’s successor craft. The Shuttle’s successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Program’s Ares I-X mission management office at NASA’s JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASA’s KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicle’s first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rocket’s booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, “NASA’s Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test,” news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA’s New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight,” 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break,” New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, “Ares I-X Flies—But Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
ISRO ended its US$82 million Chandrayaan mission after failing to restore communication with the craft. ISRO had lost contact with Chandrayaan 1 on 29 August. Chandrayaan 1, known as Moon Craft, had launched on 22 October 2008 on a mission to map the lunar terrain in preparation for a future mission that would land a rover on the Moon’s surface. ISRO had designed the craft to orbit the Moon for two years, at an altitude of 100 kilometers (62 miles). Chandrayaan 1 carried 11 payloads, including an Indian-designed terrain-mapping camera, ESA mapping instruments, radiation-measuring equipment belonging to the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, and two NASA devices designed to assess mineral composition and to look for ice deposits. ISRO Chief Madhavan Nair reportedly told the state-run broadcaster Doordarshan that a malfunction in computers on board the craft had led to the failure in communications. Nair also stated that a committee of scientists would investigate the incident.(Ed Johnson, “India Ends Lunar Mission After Losing Probe Signal,” Bloomberg News, 31 August 2009; Associated Press, “Indian Moon Orbiter Loses Contact,” 29 August 2009.)
JAXA’s first lunar probe Kaguya (Selene) successfully completed its approximately one-year- and-a-half mission when it made a controlled crash landing on the Moon. JAXA had launched Kaguya in September 2007. Kaguya had conducted nominal operations for approximately 10 months, performing an extended operational phase for an additional seven months. Before undergoing the controlled crash landing, Kaguya had orbited the Moon, to map the lunar surface and to study the Moon’s mineral distribution and gravity levels.(Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, “Kaguya (Selene) Slam Crashed to the Moon,” JAXA press release 11 June 2009, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2009/06/20090611_kaguya_e.html (accessed 27 July 2011); Shino Yuasa, “Japan’s First Lunar Probe Ends Mission,” Associated Press, 11 June 2009.)
