NASA released a long awaited report of a task force, headed by Dr. Sally K. Ride, set up to assess NASA's future space policy in the wake of the Challenger disaster. The 63page report, delivered to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher the preceding week, urged that the United States build a permanent outpost on the Moon as the first step toward the ultimate goal of "exploring, prospecting, and settling Mars." Ride emphasized, however, that while settling Mars should be "our eventual goal," it should not be "our next goal." She recommended a strategy of "natural progression which leads step by step, in orderly, unhurried way, inexorably toward Mars." (LA Times, Aug 18/87; NY Times, Aug 18/87; W Post, Aug 18/87; W Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA scientists successfully ordered the Voyager 2 space probe, which was some 2 billion miles away from earth, to fire its thrusters changing the spacecraft's course for its 1989 encounter with the planet Neptune. The course was altered so that Voyager 2, launched on August 20, 1977, would avoid the debris that might be orbiting the planet. The spacecraft was expected to arrive on August 24, 1989, within 3,100 miles of cloud tops above Neptune's north pole and was expected to pass within 25,000 miles of Neptune's moon Triton. (B Sun, Mar 14/87; P Inq, Mar 15/87)
NASA announced that it was studying four major initiatives to help determine the next major goal in space. The initiatives emerged from proposals by NASA's Strategic Planning Group and by a group headed by astronaut Dr. Sally Ride. The four initiatives were a considerably expanded study of Earth systems, an enhanced program of solar system exploration, establishment of a permanent scientific base on the moon, and human exploration of Mars preceded by untended missions. At the same time, the independent NASA Advisory Council recommended that exploration of Mars be the Nation's primary goal in space. (NASA Release 8736)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) departed NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for Guam to study the Sun's atmosphere during the total solar eclipse of March 1718. A team of seven scientists aboard KAO was to make a flight through the shadow of the Moon as it moves across the Pacific Ocean. The scientists were interested in the few seconds at the beginning and end of the solar eclipse when the Sun would be almost completely covered by the Moon and when the edge of' 0*the solar disk would begin to reappear from behind the Moon. The Kuiper would intercept the path of the eclipse about 600 miles northwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C141 jet transport aircraft, is fitted with a 36inch diameter telescope and flies at 41,000 to 45,000 feet. Measurements of the solar atmosphere would be made at the farinfrared wavelengths of 30, 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 micrometers, representing the first attempt to record simultaneously these wavelengths from the Sun on such a narrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 8837; ARC Release
NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 1 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. Phobos 1 and Phobos 2, scheduled for0*launch the following week, would carry 100pound landers designed to analyze Phobos, the larger of the two moons of Mars. The 17milelong, potatoshaped Phobos and its smaller moon Deimos were thought to be asteroids captured by the gravitational field of Mars. Tracking support for the Soviet missions would be provided by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN), whose primary mission would be to provide essential tracking data to permit landings on Phobos. The DSN would then shift to enabling a key scientific goal of the mission, to track Phobos very precisely. The 13,000pound Phobos spacecraft would carry more than two dozen robotic instruments on their 200day journey to Mars. (FBISSov88131, Jul 8/88; SSR 1988 058A; NASA Release 8887; UPI, Jul 8/88; NY Times, Jul 8/88; W Post, Jul 8/88;)
NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
After 23 years in solar orbit, Pioneer 6, the oldest operating spacecraft, returned to the vicinity of its launch. The craft passed within 1.16 million miles of the Earth, roughly five times the distance between the Earth and its Moon. This distance was the closest Pioneer 6 had ever approached Earth since launch from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida in 1965. With only five lunar distances separating them, Earth's gravitational pull was strong enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, thereby increasing time in orbit for Pioneer 6 by six days (from 311 to 317 days) and 6 million miles. The spacecraft was designed to study the Sun's atmosphere, the heliosphere. After 23 years, two of Pioneer 6's original instruments were still transmitting information on the turbulence of the solar wind to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Three sister probes followed Pioneer 6 into solar orbit. During the period from 1966 to 1970, Pioneers 7, 8, and 9 were launched into coordinated orbits. With Pioneer 6, this spacecraft team formed a network of solar weather stations monitoring the heliosphere, triangulating information back to Earth from the far side of the Sun, and increasing understanding of solar effects on Earth's magnetic field. (SSR 1965 105A; ARC Release 8881)
In a severe setback for the Soviet Union's planetary exploration program, Soviet ground controllers lost stable radio contact with the untended Phobos 2 Mars probe, the Tass news agency reported. Phobos 2 stopped responding to ground control commands shortly after the craft was ordered to perform a delicate maneuver around the Mars moon Phobos. The maneuver was an initial step toward landing a probe on the Martian moon. During its transit toward Mars, Phobos 2 had experienced a failure of its main radio transmitter, forcing ground controllers to rely on a lowpower backup transmitter for all communications with the spacecraft. A companion spacecraft, Phobos 1, was also lost in September as a result of a ground control command error. The loss of communications with Phobos 2 was described by Western experts as having occurred at the "worst possible time" because few of the main mission objectives had yet been fulfilled. (FBISSov89059, Mar 29/89; UPI, Mar 28/89; AP, Mar 29/89; NY Times, Mar 29/89; W Post, Mar 29/89; W Times, Mar 29/89; P Inq, Mar 29/89)
The Tass News Agency reported that the Soviet Phobos 2 spacecraft had begun to transmit high quality closeup images of the Mars moon Phobos. Phobos 2 was expected to dispatch two small robot landers to the surface of Phobos. (FBISSov89034; LA Times, Feb 23/89; W Post, Feb 27/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that Earthbased radar observations of Saturn's moon Titan had shown that it is not entirely covered by an ocean of liquid ethane. Radar echoes bounced from Titan between June 3 and0*6 showed the planet to have some dry land surfaces. Previous observations by the Voyager 2 space probe had shown that Titan had large oceans of liquid ethane and methane. (W Times, Jun 27/89)
The Soviet Union's Phobos 2 Mars observer spacecraft entered into Martian orbit after firing its braking engine. In addition to various instruments for remote observation of Mars, Phobos 2 carried a lander module to be deposited on Mar's moon Phobos in early April. Phobos 1 became inoperative in August 1988 after a flight command error disoriented the spacecraft and misdirected its solar power arrays. The schedule for Photos 2 was moved forward by several days because of electrical problems that might endanger the mission. (FBISSOV89018, Jan 30/89; NY Times, Jan 30/89; LA Times, Jan 30/88; P Inq, Jan 30/89) During January: Using data from the orbiting Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), astronomers at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor discovered several dim galaxies in an area of the universe previously believed to be devoid of large celestial objects. The discovery of seven dim galaxies in the "Bootes Void" challenges accepted theories of the structure of the universe, which is believed to consist of filaments or "bubbles" of matter surrounding less dense areas of relatively empty space. The Michigan astronomers said they planned to continue studying IRAS' infrared data in hopes of finding more dim galaxies. (W Post, Jan 16/89)
Soviet and western planetary scientists announced results from the Phobos 2 mission to Mars and the moon Phobos. Despite the premature loss of spacecraft transmissions because of a computer error, scientists revealed that valuable data had been obtained from the twomonth period preceding the loss of communications. The new findings showed that Mars has no magnetic field of its own and that incoming solar particles impact directly with the planet's ionosphere. Researchers hypothesized that the direct interaction between the solar wind and Mars' upper atmosphere may have been responsible for the depletion of the planet's original atmosphere, as ionospheric particles were gradually electrified by the incoming solar particles. The observations suggested that Mars may have had an atmosphere comparable to Earth's during the first billion years after planet formation, and that conditions for the appearance of life may have prevailed during that time. (NY Times, Oct 19/89)
Engineers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology returned from a visit to the Soviet Union with photographs of a crewassisted lunar landing vehicle that was to be used to land Soviet cosmonauts on the Moon in 1968. The westerners were given the first concrete evidence of a Soviet lunar landing program when they were shown components of a lunar lander at the Moscow Aviation Institute and were allowed to take photographs. Soviet officials confirmed that a race to land astronauts on the Moon had indeed occurred during the 1960s but that the Soviets had0*fallen behind the United States as a result of several launch failures of their N1 rocket. At the time of the successful lunar mission of Apollo 11, the Soviet Union had denied having a crewtended lunar landing program. (UPI, Dec 18/89; NY Times, Dec 18/89; USA Today, Dec 18/89; W Post, Dec 18/89; W Times, Dec 18/89; P Inq, Dec 18/89; C Trib, Dec 18/89; B Sun; Dec 18/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) confirmed that the Voyager 2 space probe had discovered a third moon orbiting Neptune. The moon, temporarily designated 1989 N1, was estimated to be between 125 and 400 miles in diameter and to be in a nearcircular orbit 57,600 miles above Neptune's equator. Additionally, JPL announced that a pair of dark atmospheric bands had been discovered around Neptune's south pole. The scientists compared the 2,700 milewide belts to jet streams on Earth and to the belts seen around Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus. The photograph showing the south pole bands also revealed evidence of comparable bands around Neptune's north pole. Voyager 2 was scheduled to fly to within 3,000 miles of Neptune on August 24. `"(NASA Release 89110, Jul 7/89; JPL Voyager Status Report, Jul (#7/89; AP, Jul 5/89; W Post, Jul 6/89; UPI, Jul 7/89;NY Times, Jul 8/89; W Post, Jul 8/89; LA Times, Jul 8/89; C Trib, Jul 8/89; P Inq, Jul 8/89)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that Voyager 2 photographs taken during the August encounter with Neptune had revealed the presence of an active volcano or geyser on Neptune's moon, Triton. The photographs revealed a dark plume nearly 5 miles high and 90 miles in length emanating from the surface of Triton. Triton became only the third object in the solar system known to have active eruptions from its surface. (NASA Release 89156, Oct 2/89; Voyager Bulletin/Mission Status Report No. 95, Oct 2/89; AP, Oct 3/89; UPI, Oct 3/89; NY Times, Oct 3/89; USA Today, Oct 3/89; P Inq, Oct 3/89; C Trib, Oct 3/89)
Planetary scientists working with data from a Voyager 2 encounter with Neptune announced that the spacecraft had recorded wind speeds on the planet of up to 1,500 miles per hour. These wind speeds exceeded those observed on Saturn and were believed to be the highest in the solar system. The scientists also reported the discovery of at least two additional volcanic plumes on Neptune's moon, Triton. (AP, Dec 6/89; C Trib, Dec 6/89; NY Times, Dec 7/89)
NASA named 18 astronauts to fly on future Space Shuttle missions, including the first AfricanAmerican woman and the first member of the Coast Guard to fly aboard the Shuttle. Dr. Mae Jemison, a physician, would become the first African American woman to fly in space. She was scheduled for the June 17, 1991, Spacelab mission aboard Discovery. (AP, Sep 9/89; UPI, Sep 29/89; USA Today, Oct 4/89; W Times, Oct 2/89) During September: The Soviet news magazine Izvestia published an article confirming that the Soviet Union had established a secret program in the 1960s to beat the United States in landing astronauts on the Moon. The Izvestia article claimed that the Soviet Union had secretly conducted a crewassisted lunar landing program from 1961 to 1969 comparable to the Apollo program and had developed a boosterknown as the N1comparable to the United States Saturn V. The Soviet lunar program was eventually abandoned after three attempts to launch the N1 failed; the United States successfully landed astronauts on the Moon in 1969. (FBISSov89210, Nov 1/89; H Chron, Sep 17/89)
Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin Jr., and Michael Collins participated in the first of several planned ceremonies at NASA facilities commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted lunar landing on July 20, 1969. Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins gathered at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, with a crowd of 6,000 NASA employees and their families to commemorate the launching of their Saturn V rocket from KSC on July 16, 1969. The ceremony included a playback of the final three minutes of the Apollo 11 countdown and statements by the former astronauts. Following the ceremony, the astronauts rode in a 20mile motorcade to Cocoa Beach, where they `"attended a luncheon in their honor. (UPI, Jul 16/89; USA Today, Jul (#17/89; B Sun, Jul 17/89)
The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA's 1991 budget. The bill drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiative and cut $863.6 million from the planned Space Station. The measure was to go to a conference committee to iron out differences with the House appropriations bill before being sent to President George Bush. (WSJ Oct 4/90)
The White House began looking at other ideas for astronaut expeditions to the Moon and Mars besides those presented by NASA. The unprecedented move stemmed from NASA's cost and time estimate, $400 billion over 30 years for the project. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met in the previous week, and the National Research Council planned to review its own efforts to seek innovative ideas later in the week. NASA joined the search for sources of outside ideas as well. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for Aeronautics, called the move "highly appropriate" and added, "A lot of our ideas are good, but we certainly haven't covered the waterfront." NY Times, Jan 15/90)
The Department of Defense and NASA announced the appointment of contractors to continue research and development on the National AeroSpace Plane. General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, United Technologies (Pratt & Whitney), and Rockwell International planned to jointly pursue hypersonic technologies. (NASA Release 9071)0*May 31: The Apollo 204 Capsule, which caught fire on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Florida, and claimed the lives of three astronauts on January 27, 1967, remains at Langley Research Center in Virginia, where it has been stored since shortly after the accident. The capsule was slated to be entombed with the illfated Space Shuttle Challenger in an abandoned missile silo at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release 9076)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
Japan launched a lunar probe from Uchinoura, on their southern coast, making it the third nation, after the United States and the Soviet Union, able to send up a moon probe. The flight schedule was to go into elliptical orbit around the Earth until it came within 10,000 miles of the Moon, launch an instrument package to orbit the moon, and send back data concerning temperatures and electrical fields. (WSJ, Jan 25/90; W Post, Jan 25/90; NY Times, Jan 25/90)
A Government industry board selected the gas generator power cycle engine, similar to the J2 engine used on the Saturn moon rockets, for the rocket engine to be designed and built to power the NASA/USAF Advanced Launch System. Chosen over the closed expander power cycle, the engine would power next century launch vehicles, capable of delivering a wide range of payloads into Earth orbit at a reduced cost. (NASA Release 90113)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
NASA's 1991 budget would be cut by $1 billion dollars, warned Congress. The Space Station, planned explorations of the Moon and Mars, and the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle were slated to be trimmed. Money for the Earth Observation System was earmarked for an increase. (Sp News, Mar 26Apr 1/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
The House passed a $44 billion, 3year spending authorization bill for NASA that included establishment of a Moon base and a crewassisted expedition to Mars. The bill was to next go to a conference committee to work out differences with the Senate. (LA Times, Sep 29/90) During September: Astronaut Bruce McCandless retired from NASA and as Captain from the U.S. Navy. He helped develop the space agency's Manned Maneuvering Unit, a jetpowered backpack he was the first to wear during a Space Shuttle Challenger mission in February 1984. (W Times, Sep 12/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
President George Bush announced his plans for a cooperative effort with the Soviet Union in the humanassisted exploration of space, including voyages to the Moon and Mars. On a related note, Japan agreed to open its doors to foreignmade satellites by lifting its ban on government agencies and businesses that required them to buy only Japanese spacecraft. The Japanese law was created in order to help Japan's fledgling H&space industry. (NY Times, Apr 3/90; Apr 4/90; W Times; Apr 4/90; WSJ, Apr 4/90)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory began testing its prototype for the Planetary Rover Navigation Test Bed Vehicle, a selfnavigating vehicle, about the size of a small car, for use in planned outposts on the Moon and Mars. (Daily News, Mar 13/90)
A NASA official announced that Mark Showalter, at the Ames Research Center in California, had discovered another moon orbiting Jupiter. He found it while doing analysis of images taken in 19801981 by Voyager 2. The smallest of the planet's known satellites was dubbed 1981S13. (B Sun, Jul 25/90; W Post, Jul 25/90; NASA Release 90103)
NASA selected investigators and science teams from 11 U.S. universities, 3 NASA centers, 3 other U.S. laboratories, and 13 foreign countries for the Saturn orbiter portion of the Cassini mission scheduled for launch in 1996. The mission would include 62 investigations for analysis of Saturn's atmosphere, its ring particles, and moons within them. The orbiter would also send a probe to Saturn's moon, Titan, and later map it. (NASA Release
Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, devised a way to salvage the Japanese lunar mission that successfully orbited a probe around the Moon but did not send data back because of a failed transmitter. The mother ship that launched the probe was in an elliptical orbit around the Earth and could achieve lunar orbit by taking advantage of the "fuzzy boundary." The "fuzzy boundary" is an area about 1 million miles from Earth where gravitational forces emanating from our planet and the Sun cancel each other out. The limited supply of fuel carried by the spacecraft was not sufficient to allow it to reach a lunar orbit by conventional means. Success with the plan, they determined, would mean an enormous fuel savings should lunar bases be built in the future. (LA Times, July 16/90)
The same publication discussed the way in which Michael Griffin, described as "NASA's new moon/Mars czar," was shaking up NASA's space exploration initiative. Reportedly, Griffin wanted to move fast on launching a "relatively inexpensive, high-visibility space mission," such as sending an unmanned spacecraft to scout for a permanent base on the moon. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
The New York Times cited a report by Jean O. Dickey, a geodesist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and Raymond Hide, a geophysicist at Oxford, published in the journal Science. They analyzed the rotation of the earth, which is fitfully and almost imperceptibly slowing. More accurate measurements than in the past were possible by bouncing laser signals off quartz reflectors left on the moon by Apollo astronauts. (NY Times, Aug 9/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the six moons of Neptune discovered by Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 were given names by the International Astronomical Union's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. In addition, Saturn's newest moon, Pan, was discovered by Mark Showalter, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (P Inq, Sep 28/91)
The Washington Post cited the Synthesis Group unpublished report stating that although a Space Station in Earth orbit was preferable, if such could not be built in timely fashion and with the desired capabilities, one could consider using the moon as a preparatory environment for a Mars mission. (W Post, May 25/91)
The Los Angeles Times indicated that various scientific teams from the United States, Japan, and Europe, were trying to develop solar-sail spacecraft to race to the moon. At the time of writing, the Russian Federation was ahead of the other teams and planned to launch a test craft in October 1992. None of the research teams was government-sponsored and financing was a problem. Theoretically, the sail craft were to be propelled through space by tiny solar particles called photons. (LA Times, Dec 27/91)
The report of the committee appointed by the Bush Administration, headed by Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, produced favorable comments from industry, according to the New York Times. Industrialists believe that the report showed greater realism about the space program, with its emphasis on unmanned flights and request for larger funding for NASA. In contrast to this complimentary review, Alcestis Oberg in Space News maintained that the Augustine panel's recommendations were irrelevant and a new agency was needed to pursue moon and Mars initiatives. (NY Times, Feb 7/91; SP News, Feb 4-10/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Paris Observatory, using data from the Voyager 1 spacecraft, for the first time had described an anti-greenhouse effect on a solar system body. In an article in Science magazine, they also described the temperature structure and energy balance on Titan, Saturn's largest moon. (NASA Release 91-143)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
An article by Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic  discussed arguments by foes of the Space Station and concluded that a bold new initiative in the form of a moon base was a preferable next step in space. (P Inq, Jun 18/91)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
An article by S. Fred Singer, guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, where he is completing a book on space policy, discussed the Space Station and the Stafford committee report. He advocated Martian moon exploration as NASA's best solution. (H Post, Jun 20/91; W Times, Jun 25/91)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
University of Colorado astronomer Jack Brandt talked of the discoveries of the Hubble Space Telescope, in spite of its fuzzy focusing. Discoveries included proof that Pluto has a moon and dramatic photographs of a star spewing hot gases during its birth in the Orion constellation. (W Times, Feb 14/91)
Exploring the Moon and Mars, a report by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment, was quoted. The report advocated the need for the United States to take the development and use of robotic technology more seriously if robots are to be used in a mission to Mars. Furthermore, the report projected that robots would be considerably cheaper than human exploration that NASA appeared to favor. (W Times, Aug 30/91)
In a commentary on the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program, released in December 1990, Alston Chase pointed out that the report stressed that among NASA's major problems were that it "has grown too large and is trying to accomplish very complex tasks in which there is little margin for error." As an example of NASA's growth, the report cited that Viking involved some 13,000 people, whereas Apollo involved 180,000. (W Times, Jan 8/91)
A mysterious object was scheduled to fly near Earth in December. Scientists do not know whether it is a new type of asteroid or a 20-year-old Apollo rocket that shot past the moon and was returning home. Subsequently, it was reported to be a tiny asteroid in circular Earth orbit. However, further reporting by another team of observers indicated it was more probably a cartwheeling rocket carcass. (W Times, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 21/91; P Inq, Dec 1/91; W Post, Dec 9/91)
Ivan Bekey, a NASA space power expert, was quoted by the New York Times in connection with an article on solar power from space. Bekey said that power beaming was not a problem. Rather, the difficulty was getting a large enough satellite into orbit. Currently large satellites ran between 20,000 to 30,000 pounds whereas a satellite to enable developing solar power would need to be some 100 times larger than that. Another possibility would be to mine the silicon for the solar cells and the aluminum for the structure from the moon. Those materials might make up 90 percent of the mass, meaning less weight would need to be launched from Earth. Bekey foresaw that developing power from space would be 20 or 30 years away. (NY Times, Dec 25/91)
NASA announced that it had signed an agreement with the National Science Foundation (NSF) by which the two organizations would use Antarctica as a testing site to prepare for future missions to the Moon and Mars. The agreement would enable NASA to benefit from NSF's 33 years of experience in scientific research in the harsh Antarctic environment. Scientists believe that Antarctica's climate, terrain, temperature, and isolation provide an environment on Earth that most closely parallels the conditions of isolation and stress to be faced on long-duration human missions in space. (NASA Release 91-13)
NASA Associate Administrator Spence Armstrong met with Marshall Space Flight Center officials on December 4. He said NASA's programs put it in a good position to continue to attract top engineering talents. NASA would need to attract engineers from several previously underrepresented groups, including blacks, women, the disabled, and other minorities. (Htsvl Tms, Dec 5/91)
The Christian Science Monitor carried a descriptive article about programs of the Howard B. Owens Science Center in Prince Georges County, Maryland. Schoolchildren spend two hours there simulating either landing on the moon or rendezvousing with Halley's comet. The program is part of the Challenger Center for Space Science Education, founded by the families of astronauts killed in the Challenger disaster and to which NASA contributed.
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of General Spence M. Armstrong, USAF (Retired) for the newly established position of Associate Administrator for Human Resources and Education. (NASA Release 91-138)
A policy paper by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington think tank, said defense and national security should be top priority for the US space program. Exploration of the moon and Mars should occur as a result of "market incentives" or interest of research organizations. Environmental research should be the province of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the Department of Energy. If NASA's functions could be performed by other agencies, it should be closed. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
As the thirtieth anniversary of his trip as America's first space pioneer approached, Alan Shepard reminisced about his vivid recollections of that flight on May 5, 1961 as well as the 33 hours he spent on the Moon 10 years later. Since that day in 1961, NASA has launched 70 manned flights with 161 individuals. (LA Times, Apr 28/91)
The Washington Times reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center near Houston had 842 pounds of moon rocks brought back by 12 moonwalkers on six Apollo flights between 1969 and 1972. The rocks are loaned to scientific groups for study. Each nation in the world also has a small piece of moon rock, sent at President Nixon's instruction in the early 1970s. (W Times, May 24/91)
NASA scientist Thomas J. Miller said NASA would establish a Nuclear Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center in early 1991 to develop nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. The Defense and Energy departments would join in this project; the NASA FY 1991 budget included about $1 million for nuclear propulsion development. Such propulsion could significantly reduce the time required from Earth to the moon or Mars. (AvWk, Jan 7/91)
NASA issued a release indicating that as a result of Apollo data findings NASA scientists and other researchers had a revised theory of the origin of life on earth. Life may have begun more than once and been wiped out several times by rare, planet-melting superimpacts on the Earth. Evidence of such early solar system impacts is well-preserved on the moon. (NASA Release 91-87; UPI, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; San Jose Mercury News, Jun 6/91)
A lengthy account in the New York Times dealing with asteroids and the threat they posed to early life as well as the continuing possibility they might destroy Earth, referred to NASA's findings about early life forms based on a survey of impact craters on the moon. Several scientists' findings, discussed in the journal Cell, were also reported. The newspaper also published an article citing NASA's expenditure of somewhat less than $1 million a year to search for Earth-crossing asteroids. NASA reportedly was also studying the feasibility of nudging asteroids aside and in this connection is to help sponsor the first International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids. (NYT, Jun 18/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced a nationwide search for a senior official to direct NASA's activities to send people to the Moon and to explore Mars. This announcement represented an implementation of a recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program to create a new Office of Exploration under an Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 91-24)
Nippon Television Network asked to borrow from the Smithsonian the Space Shuttle Enterprise, an Apollo capsule, a moon conveyor vehicle, a rocket, and a spacesuit. The Enterprise is stored at Dulles Airport and transporting it--the back of a 747 or by ship would be difficult. The space gear was to be used to celebrate the company's fortieth anniversary in Tokyo in 1993. (W Post, Feb 23/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
An article on interactive computer graphics and the virtual reality system they involve stated that NASA's Visualization for Planetary Exploration project might use such technology. It would enable the creation of environments of the moon and planets that would use data gathered by space probes and satellites to allow users to feel they were visiting those bodies. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
Scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation detailed experimental projects scheduled to be undertaken in the winter in Antarctica. The Antarctic Space Analog Program was to use the harsh, frigid conditions of the Antarctic continent to test technology and techniques for future missions to the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-200)
James V. Correale, 69, a native of Philadelphia who figured out how to clean the air that Apollo 13 astronauts rapidly were running out of during their mission to the moon in 1970, died Saturday at a hospital in Nassau Bay, Texas. (P Inq, Mar 17/92)
NASA launched a rocket carrying a Japanese scientific satellite called "Geotail" that will swing by the moon and be flung by lunar gravity nearly a million miles into space. The satellite was intended to explore the effect of the solar wind on the tail of the magnetosphere, a comet- shaped region surrounding Earth and containing radiation belts. The $160 million, four-year mission was a joint project between NASA and the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science. (W Post, Jul 25/92; APn, Jul 24/92)
NASA's funding remained flat as Congressional appropriations committees completed work on NASA's 1993 budget. Although some high-profile programs such as the Space Station and a  constellation of environmental monitoring satellites emerged virtually unscathed, newer or less visible efforts suffered setbacks. An advanced series of tracking satellites, robotic missions to the moon, and a new generation of launchers were among the efforts put on hold for at least the next year. Spending on space research and technology was reduced by 13 percent. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
It was reported that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was studying aurorae on the giant planet Jupiter. The HST made observations of Jupiter over a four-day period when ESA/NASA Ulysses spacecraft swung by the giant planet. While passing Jupiter, Ulysses made measurements of Jupiter's powerful magnetic field and the flow of subatomic particles along magnetic field lines. Simultaneously, HST was looking at aurorae, one visual manifestation of these electrical fireworks. These joint observations provided a unique opportunity to combine ultraviolet images and spectra with information on particles and fields. By studying the activity of Jupiter's aurorae, astronomers hoped to learn more about the dynamics of Jupiter's immense magnetic field, the structure of the giant planet's upper atmosphere, the effects of aurora on the chemistry of the polar regions on Jupiter, and Jupiter's interaction with the moon Io via a magnetic "flux tube." (NASA Release 92-22)
It was reported that the spacecraft Ulysses had revealed unexpected changes in the violent vicinity of Jupiter since the last Earth probe flew past in 1979, including a swelling of the giant planet's magnetic field and an apparent abatement in volcanic eruptions on the Jovian moon Io. (W Post, Feb 12/92; NY Times, Feb 12/92; USA Today, Feb 12/92; W Times, Feb 12/92; AP, Feb 11/92; B Sun, Feb 9/92; P Inq, Feb 9/92)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
Michael Griffin, associate administrator of NASA, told an opening session of a NASA was conference, that NASA in trouble with the tax-paying public because its hadn't been running efficient programs. Griffin said NASA risks losing support for its projects--like proposed returns to the moon and manned missions to Mars--because the public perceives it is employing more people than it needs and not giving a good return for the money it spends. (Birmingham News, Mar 25/92)
Cornell University astrophysicist Thomas Gold said in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences" that there is probably more life inside the Earth than there is on its surface. This life would be in the form of bacteria and other microorganisms, and its overall volume probably surpasses that of all the plants and animals living on the planet's surface. NASA scientist Stephen Maran said that if Gold's ideas prove correct, "they will revolutionize scientific theories of geology and the evolution of life on Earth." Gold speculated that similar life forms may exist inside the moon and other planets in our solar system. "The surface life on Earth, based on photosynthesis for its overall energy supply, may be just one strange branch of life. The deep, chemically supplied life, however, may be very common in the universe," Gold commented. (P Inq, Jul 1/92)
In an interview in Huntsville, Alabama, Vice-Presidential candidate Al Gore said that a Clinton administration would support a return to the moon and Mars but would not commit major resources to such efforts. Given other current NASA priorities, Gore said the longer-range mission to Mars "must be pursued according to a sensible timetable." (Htsvl Tms, Sept 11/92)
James Edwin Webb, 85, whose work as the chief of America's space agency was instrumental in putting a man on the moon, died March 27 at Georgetown University Hospital. During Mr. Webb's tenure, America's first manned space flight took place as well as the first orbital flight by John Glenn and the first walk in space by Edward White. (W Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 29/92; W Post, Mar 29/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
According to Michael Griffin, NASA's associate administrator for exploration, NASA needs $3 billion annually to conduct a program of human exploration of the moon and Mars. Those funds would have to come from sacrificing other space projects if NASA's overall budget could not be increased, Griffin said. (Space News, Apr 13/92)
NASA's Galileo spacecraft flew by the Earth at 10:09 a. m. EST, completing a three-year gravity-assist program and setting course to reach Jupiter in December 1995. The spacecraft was programmed to measure the near-Earth environment and to observe Earth and the moon during this flyby. (NASA Release 92-217; UPI, Dec 2/92, Dec 7/92, Dec 8/92; Dec 9/92; AP, Dec 1/92, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92; W Post, Dec 9/92; WP, Dec 9/92)
The eight-legged rappeling robot Dante was placed in position on the rim of the Antarctic volcano Mt. Erebus in preparation for its exploration of the interior of the crater and its lava lake. NASA and the National Science Foundation hoped that the Dante project would help develop technology and telecommunications capabilities that NASA could use in future explorations of the Moon or Mars or in ongoing research activities in the Antarctic. (NASA Dante Advisor #3; UPI, Dec 28/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 31/92)
Harrison A. Storms, Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, at age 76. Storms's designs and leadership played a key role in developing B-25 and P-51 Mustang fighters in World War II and in Project Apollo's billion-dollar race for the moon in the 1960s. He served as an advisor to NASA, the Air Force, and the Pentagon. (NY Times, Jul 16/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
Scientists reported that enhanced versions of the pictures taken from the Voyager 2 spacecraft reveal what look like three gigantic ice-gushing volcanoes on Neptune's frozen moon Triton. (NY Times, Feb 18/92; AP, Feb 14/92)
After hearing complaints from employees across the nation, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin unexpectedly announced he was changing the agency's logo. Goldin killed the despised "worm," which displayed "NASA" in high-tech red lettering, and restored the insignia affectionately known as the "meatball." The meatball, which served the agency from 1959 to 1975, consists of the agency's name surrounding a starry blue background, a red wing shape and the flight path of a spaceship. It was worn by astronauts on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions. (W Post, May 26/92)
NASA announced that extended observations by the Hubble Space Telescope indicated that Jupiter's moon Io has a smaller atmosphere than previously thought, with very dense regions possibly over volcanoes and surface frost. The observations also showed that despite continual volcanic activity, Io's surface has remained largely unchanged since first photographed by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. (NASA Release 92-163)
NASA scientists released pictures and results from spacecraft Galileo's December 8 flight over the moon's north pole and 189 miles above the southern Atlantic Ocean. The flyby allowed Galileo to practice for Jupiter by studying Earth as if it were an alien planet. The craft detected radio signals that changed frequencies in a repeating, artificial way, indicating intelligent life on Earth. It also detected ice clouds in the stratosphere that help create a hole in the protective ozone layer above Antarctica and found evidence that the moon once was more volcanically active than thought. (AP, Dec 22/92, 23/92; C Trib, Dec 23/92; W Times, Dec 23/92; NY Times, Dec 23/92; UPI, Dec 23/92)
The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.
The countdown began for the Hubble Telescope repair mission, considered by many to be NASA's biggest challenge in space since the Apollo moon landings. The Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to lift off on the 11-day flight on December 1. (B Sun, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; USA Today, Nov 29/93; P Inq, Nov 29/93; NY Times Magazine, Nov 28/93; USA Weekend, Nov 26-28; W Post, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; RTw, Nov 27/93, 28/93; APn, Nov 27/93, Nov 28/93; UPn, Nov 26/93, Nov 28/93; W Times, Dec 1/93)
At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego proposed returning to the moon for a 21-day, two-person mission in 1999. The mission would use a capsule and return vehicle transported by the U.S. Space Shuttle and a Titan 4 rocket with a Centaur upper stage; the proposal did not call for the construction of a new launcher. However, NASA's head of exploration called many of the calculations in the proposal overly optimistic. NASA's own rough draft for a lunar base program entailed construction of a new launcher and higher costs than those projected in the General Dynamics proposal. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
Astronauts assigned to the Space Shuttle Columbia mission in the fall of 1993 were scheduled to conduct experiments on rats while in orbit. After beheading the rats, they were to dissect them. This would be the first dissection of an animal in space, to NASA's knowledge. The remaining rats aboard the Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned to Earth.  NASA's Willy Hinds, a biologist and immunologist who is in charge of the project, said that "these tissues...are the biological equivalent of the moon rocks."  (AP, Aug 30/93; LA Times, Sept 5/93)
NASA announced that the Clementine mission to orbit the moon and to visit an asteroid would be headed by Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geologic Survey, Flagstaff, Arizona. Clementine, sponsored by the Strategic Defense Initiative Office (SDIO), was scheduled to launch a small spacecraft in January 1994 to orbit the moon for several months. The mission would test new, lightweight sensors in a space radiation environment and demonstrate autonomous navigation and spacecraft operation. (NASA Release 93-66)
The New York Times reported that astronomers were worried about growing light pollution, which makes it very difficult for even the strong 200-inch telescope on Mount Palomar in California to pick up faint galaxies. Some cities, hoping that brighter lighting would deter crime, were installing white street lights as opposed to low-pressure sodium lamps, which are easily filtered from telescopes. In addition, a Georgia company announced plans to put a one-mile-reflective panel into space some time in 1996; the satellite, which would appear nearly as large as the moon, would add to the light pollution. (NY Times, May 9/93)
Lowell Nesbitt, an artist who documented the Apollo 9 and 13 space launches for NASA, was found dead in his Manhattan studio on July 8. Death was attributed to natural causes. He was 59. (UPI, Jul 8/93)
Arthur L. H. Rudolph, a German-born scientist who played a crucial role in developing the Saturn 5 rocket used in the American moon landings, lost his attempt to regain his American citizenship. He gave up his citizenship in 1984 when he faced deportation for Nazi war crimes.
The journal Science reported that the brightness of a full moon, thought to be caused by a process called shadow hiding, in which the sun shining directly on the moon minimizes shadows, is really caused by a phenomenon known as coherent backscatter.
NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)
NASA announced that scientists had found water molecules frozen in the surface ices of Jupiter's moon Io. According to Dr. Farid Salama, University of California, Berkeley, who led the project at NASA, "This is the first strong evidence of solid water on the surface of this satellite." (NASA Release 93-107; NY Times, June 15/93)
French scientists, led by Dr. Jacques Laskar of the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris, writing in the journal Nature, and Dr. Jack Wisdom, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writing in the journal Science, described the implications of chaos in the solar system. New computer simulations have revealed that over great spans of time, small gravitational disturbances from neighboring planets, combined with their own wobbly rotations, can cause significant fluctuations in the orbits and orientations of the planets, leading to, for example, great temperature fluctuations. Mars, for example, is still undergoing great variations. According to scientists, Earth may be spared such variations because of the stabilizing influence of the moon, the only large satellite in the inner solar system. (NY Times, Mar 2/93; Time, Mar 8/93)
NASA said that its mission to send a robot into an Antarctic volcano had opened the way for exploration of the moon and Mars. Despite the fact that the mission had to be aborted, David Lavery, director of the Dante project, noted that the objectives of controlling the robot from afar and testing sophisticated hardware in a harsh environment had been met.
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
Sotheby's auction house announced that it had agreed to sell more than 200 items from the Soviet space program, including the first moon rock fragments ever to go up for sale.  The items were being sold by family members of the top participants as well as the state factories that produced the space suits and capsules being offered for sale. The Russian government  was not involved in the sale.  ((Rtw, August 9/93; AP, Aug 11/93)
NASA announced that 14 astronauts who orbited the Earth during Project Gemini were installed in the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame. The new inductees were John E. Young, James A. McDivit, the late Edward H. White II, Charles Conrad Jr., Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Thomas P. Stafford, Neil A. Armstrong, David R. Scott, Eugene A. Cernan, Michael Collins, Richard F. Gordon Jr, and Buzz Aldrin. (UPI, Mar 18/93, March 22/93; Reuters, March 22/93; AP, Mar 22/93; P Inq, Mar 21/93)
Martin Marietta Corporation reported that its Martin Marietta Astronautics Group had received a $35 million contract from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build the propulsion module subsystem for NASA's Cassini spacecraft mission that was to study Saturn, its moon Titan, and the rest of the Saturnian system. The Cassini was scheduled for launch in October 1997. (W Times, Apr 13/93)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off on schedule, and the seven astronauts, including the first Japanese woman in space, began their experiments. The embryonic newts were thriving, and the adult female newts had produced additional eggs. The astronauts also began performing tests to determine how their bodies were adapting to weightlessness. One effect of the absence of gravity was that astronauts tended to grow two or more inches in space because of an elongated spine; they would revert to normal height on Earth. Findings could help in treating back pain on Earth. Among the animals carried for experimental purposes were four pregnant newts. By July 17 the second newt had died for an undetermined reason. The scientists also levitated a pea-sized drop of gold inside an electromagnetic field to investigate ways to exploit the absence of gravity in manufacturing. The astronauts worked in two shifts around the clock in order to complete all but one of the planned 82 experiments. A blown fuse in the French-built electrophoresis unit kept the astronauts from conducting their final experiment before preparing to return to Earth. On July 20 the astronauts marked the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. Because of heavy rainstorms, the projected landing on July 22 was postponed; because of the delay, the mission set a new Space Shuttle flight duration record. In the course of the flight, a number of the eggs hatched, and scores of eggs were laid by the various animals aboard. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; C Trib, Jul 9/94; NY Times, Jul 9/94; W Post, Jul 9/94; W Times, Jul 9/94; Reuters, Jul 9/94;B Sun, Jul 10/94; W Post, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; UP, Jul 10/94; Reuters, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Times, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94; Reuters, Jul 11/94; B Sun, Jul 12/94; W Post, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; AP, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; UP, Jul 18/94; Reuters, Jul 18/94; NY Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; AP, Jul 19/94; UP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 20/94; AP, Jul 22/94; UP, Jul 22/94; Reuters, Jul 22/94)
Various special television programs were scheduled to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. In addition, the press planned to feature accounts recalling events of the first moonwalk. (B Sun, Jul 10/94; C Trib, Jul 10/94; LA Times, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Post, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94)
The Defense Department said that robot spacecraft Clementine suffered a malfunction on May 7 that would prevent it from flying by and photographing the asteroid Geographos. However, Clementine was to continue to perform a military mission that would test 23 "advanced technologies." On May 19 the managers of Clementine were to fire its main thruster to ease the craft into a circular path between the moon and Earth, where they can continue to test its prototype military components in the upper reaches of the Van Allen radiation belts around the planet. Since its January 25 launch, Clementine has provided 1.5 million images of the moon at a bargain price. (W Post, May 10/94; NY Times, May 10/94; USA Today, May 10/94; W Post, May 11/94; W Times, May 13/94; W Post, May 19/94)
The approaching 25th anniversary of the first moon landing by Neil Armstrong occasioned a feature article on Gene Kranz, NASA Flight Director, who enabled the operation to occur. (LA Times, Jul 5/94)
In preparation for commemorating the 25th anniversary of Neil A. Armstrong's walk on the moon on July 20, 1969, the media featured various articles, books, films, television specials, and high-level conferences on the meaning of the moon landing. One article commented on the significance of these publications and events, with particular reference to Moonshot, a memoir cowritten by Alan B. Shepard Jr. and the late astronaut Deke Slayton. (LA Times, Jun 28/94)
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
Joseph P. Martino, senior research scientist at the University of Dayton Research Institute, examined space launch costs in a study released by the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation. Because of high costs, he noted that the United States was now farther away from having people on the moon than when President Kennedy launched the Apollo program. In 1994 it cost $3,500 per pound to put items into orbit. The cost increase started in the 1950s, when high performance of ballistic missiles was needed at any price and has been continued by NASA's policy of developing new technology for each new mission. Launch costs must be lowered and can be by three new approaches: use of commercial practices for vehicle construction, long production runs of single designs, and designing launchers to be reusable like aircraft instead of producing single-use like missiles. (W Times, Jan 25/94)
The publication of Moon Shot by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton was set for release one month before the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 lunar landing. The book gives a history of space flight and includes many little-known anecdotes. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
The 25th anniversary of the first moonwalk was the occasion of several articles looking back at the excitement of that event and developments since as well as an assessment of the current status of the space program. Noting that one-third of the U.S. population was not alive in 1969, the articles especially remarked upon lack of enthusiasm about space, together with expressing concern about earthly matters. Neil Armstrong's role in the moon landing and the fact that he never became a public hero also was touched upon. (W Post, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; WSJ, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; H Post, Jul 22/94; P Inq, Jul 22/94)
NASA announced that transmission of data from Galileo spacecraft indicated its observation of what was probably a satellite of the asteroid Ida, which would be the first moon of an asteroid ever sighted. The flyby of Ida occurred August 28, 1993. (NASA Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)
On April 9-10, radio astronomy experts from Stanford University and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena sent a signal from the Clementine spacecraft, which was engaged in a moon-mapping mission for the Pentagon, into a huge crater on the lunar South Pole. NASA's Deep Space Network picked up the reflection of the signal, and the Pentagon was scheduled to undertake a preliminary review of the data to determine whether the moon contained ice. (AP, Apr 16/94)
NASA astrophysicist Fred Espenak stated that an annular eclipse would be visible to observers within a 145-mile wide path from El Paso, Texas, through Toledo, Ohio, and much of New England on May 10. The moon will appear completely silhouetted against the sun, which will form a dazzling unbroken outer ring for up to six minutes. People outside the ground path will see only a partial eclipse. (Reuters, May 2/94; W Post, May 4/94; B Sun, May 8/94; W Times, May 8/94; W Post, May 9/94)
NASA determined it was cheaper to tear down the giant hammerhead crane originally built for the Apollo moon landing program rather than to refurbish it. Therefore, the crane was in the process of being dismantled at the Kennedy Space Center launch pad. (Fla Today, Dec 11/94)
Spence Armstrong, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Human Resources and Education, announced its Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This was a three-year, $500,000 annual award to six states as a new initiative to improve their research and competitive capability while expanding education and training opportunities for women and minorities. The funding would enable states to develop an academic research enterprise for long-term, self-sustaining, nationally competitive capability, contributing to the states' economic viability. The involved states were Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Montana, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
Findings about the moon resulting from the 71-day rendezvous of the military probe Clementine were reported at the recent American Geophysical Union meeting. It developed, according to geophysicist Maria Zuber of Johns Hopkins University and NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center, that "Now we know that we don't understand the moon as well as we thought we did." Instead of no activity on the moon in the preceding 3 million years, there was volcanic activity as recent as 1 billion years ago. The crust was very variable and the moon had a crater large enough to span the continental United States as well as another fresh-looking crater created by an impact recorded by 12th century monks. (LA Times, Dec 15/94)
On the 25th anniversary of the moon landing, President Clinton and Vice President Gore welcomed the three Apollo 11 astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, and Michael Collins, at a White House ceremony. The U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the 1969 event. (UP, Jul 20/94; Reuters, Jul 20/94; W Post, Jul 21/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94)
NASA announced that of the various devices left by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the moon 25 years ago, a laser ranging retroreflector continued to provide fundamental scientific data. From the data obtained and new observations scientists now believed that the moon might have a liquid core. Among other findings from the laser ranging experiments were a verification of Einstein's theory of relativity and the direct influence on the moon's orbit of ocean tides on Earth. (NASA Release 94-122)
The publication of former astronaut Jim Lovell's new book, Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13, led to an article recounting the Apollo 13 flight 24 years previously. He stated his belief that NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin should do more to use NASA's past successes to show how NASA had progressed since. (W Times, Oct 21/94)
NASA announced the death of Stuart Allen Roosa, one of six Apollo astronauts to fly solo around the moon. (NASA Release 94-210; UPI, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94)
Roger Bonnet, science director of the European Space Agency (ESA), stated in an interview that the ESA, a consortium of scientists from 14 countries, sought some $350 million from member states to fund the first in a series of lunar programs that could end in a manned moon station within 25 years. The first European emissary to the moon, a small, unmanned craft named LEDA (Lunar European Demonstration Approach), could land on the moon by 2001. LEDA would carry instruments to measure the darkness of the lunar sky, the frequency of meteorite impacts, and the stability of the ground, factors that would affect the functioning of a future astronomical observatory. LEDA would also need to analyze lunar soil for components to be used in the construction and operation of a permanent station. Such a European approach would bypass NASA's plans for an orbiting Space Station, a plan with which many European countries had become disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
Robot spacecraft Clementine successfully completed a two-month mission to map the moon's surface in unprecedented detail. Radar data indicate what scientists term an "astonishing" depth of 7.5 miles in one of the moon's ancient basins. Other data may reveal ice in a permanently shadowed spot at the lunar south pole. At 6:20 p.m. EDT, controllers were to command the spacecraft to fire its rockets for four minutes to remove it from lunar orbit, loop around Earth, and head for the small asteroid 1620 Geographos for a late August rendezvous. NASA provided funding to refocus the mission effort, substituting the moon and asteroids for man-made "Star Wars" objects. (W Post, May 3/94; NY Times, May 4/94)
NASA showed photographs taken by Galileo spacecraft revealing for the first time an asteroid orbited by its own moon. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory released the photos of asteroid Ida. (NASA Release 94-50; Reuters, Mar 23/94; P Inq, Mar 24/94; LA Times, Mar 24/94; W Post, Mar 24/94; USA Today, Mar 24/94; NY Times, Mar 24/94)
Clementine spacecraft, launched January 25 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, took just released high-resolution color photographs of the moon. The purposes of the spacecraft were to test anti-missile military technology and explore space. Reportedly, the pictures, which were available to the public, were of high quality and the cost of the program was relatively low. (Reuters, Mar 2/94; W Times, Mar 20/94)
NASA released new pictures of asteroid 243 Ida and its recently discovered moon taken by the Galileo spacecraft. Although similar in color and brightness, Ida and its moon appear to be composed of different types of material. (NASA Release 94-83)
The Italian Foreign Ministry announced that Italy and the United States would launch a spacecraft in October 1997 on a seven-year voyage to Saturn. The Cassini would leave a special probe, called Huygens, on the surface of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, to gather data on the atmosphere, magnetosphere, and chemical make-up of the rings of Saturn and the movements of its satellites. An agreement to conduct the mission, which was being developed by NASA and the Italian Space Agency, was signed by Italian Foreign Minister Antonio Martini and U.S. Ambassador to Italy, Reginald Bartholomew. (Reuters, Jul 21/94)
NASA announced that the International Astronomical Union had approved the name Dactyl for the tiny moon discovered on August 28, 1993 in orbit around the asteroid Ida by NASA's Galileo mission. Dactyl was the first natural satellite of an asteroid ever discovered and photographed. The name derived from the Dactyli, a group of mythological beings who lived on Mount Ida, where the infant Zeus was hidden. (NASA Release, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; H Post, Sep 21/94)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
NASA researchers hoped that, among other things, Endeavour's comparison radar images from its second environmental voyage would enable them to peer through the mists of Rwanda to track the imperiled mountain gorilla. In the category of experiments, shortly after liftoff, the crew of Endeavour were scheduled to engage in mixing up a batch of special order concrete, which was to be allowed to harden during the 10-day voyage. After the flight, Master Builders Inc. of Cleveland, who had prepared the ingredients, were to test the concrete to determine the critical particle dispersion that ensured hardness for possible future construction on the moon or elsewhere. An experiment in earthquake forecasting also was planned. Another planned experiment was the dumping of oil and algae byproducts into the North Sea off Denmark to see if Endeavour's radar could detect them. The countdown for the flight began August 15. (AP, Aug 13/94; AP, Aug 15/94; UP, Aug 15/94; Reuters, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 16/94; USA Today, Aug 16/94; AP, Aug 17/94; Reuters, Aug 17/94; NY Times, Aug 18/94; W Times, Aug 18/94; W Post, Aug 18/94; USA Today, Aug 18/94; AP, Aug 18/94; Reuters, Aug 18/94)
Spence Armstrong, NASA Associate Administrator for Human Resources, stated that in order to cut more than 1,000 jobs as Congress ordered, NASA needed to offer buyouts to staff. To restructure the Space Station Freedom project, NASA had to cut 1,300 positions, but employees were not leaving in normal attrition numbers--an attrition of only 600 to 700 persons was predicted for fiscal 1994, without buyouts. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said further cuts would endanger NASA's entire mission. The vice president's "reinventing government" group said NASA needed to accelerate its job cuts but stick with attrition and buyouts rather than reductions in force. The group offered no specifics as to positions NASA should cut. (Federal Times, Feb 24/94)
NASA announced that the Clementine mission, sponsored by the Department of Defense Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, had completed systematic mapping of the lunar surface to produce the first global digital map of the moon. NASA's Clementine science team mapped the topography and composition of major regions of the moon in detail and produced other important science results released at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore, Maryland. The digital data cover 38 million square kilometers of the moon mapped in 11 colors in the visible and near infrared parts of the spectrum during the mission's 71 days in lunar orbit. (NASA Release 94-84; B Sun, May 27/94)
The Earthwinds balloon flew 200 miles in seven hours from Reno, Nevada, over the Sierra Nevada and landed 200 miles north of Los Angeles in its fourth failed attempt since its initial try in February, 1992, to make the first nonstop round-the-world flight. The hourglass-shaped craft about the length of a football field consists of an upper teardrop-shaped, helium-filled bag separated by a three-man crew capsule from its lower round, air-filled anchor balloon. The project, sponsored mainly by hotel magnate Barron Hilton, has cost $7 million to date, with $700,000 for non-reusable balloons and helium for each flight. Project manager Don Engen expected no new flight this season, but project advisor, Apollo XVII commander Gene Cernan, predicted another attempt. (Reuters, Jan 12/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong made a rare public appearance at an airshow in New Knoxville, spoke briefly to reporters and signed autographs. He said he had accepted an invitation to the White House on the 25th anniversary of his moon walk. (Western Star, Jul 20/94)
Former General Electric Aerospace employee Vincent S. Maleche was sentenced to a two-month prison term and a fine for providing confidential NASA documents to an undercover agent. The charge of fraud occurred in connection with Operation Lightning Strike. On June 15, former Armstrong Laboratory employee at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, William C Alexander, pleaded guilty to providing documents to an FBI undercover agent. (Reuters, Jun 14/94; UPI, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 16/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the University of Arizona's Open Sciences Forum at which professors presented overviews of their space-related work. He assured the faculty and students that NASA would continue to fund University of Arizona research projects such as the $3.6 billion Cassini Saturn probe. He urged scientists to simplify the way in which they discuss their experiments so that lay people would understand them and thus increase scientific awareness. Stressing the concept that "small is better," he mentioned the development of robots that may one day extract fuel from the moon or Mars, thus reducing the amount of propellant that would need to be stored on moon- or Mars-bound spacecraft. (Tucson Citizen, Apr 9/94)
A lengthy review of the four-hour TBS documentary film "Moon Shot," described the extraordinary footage obtained from NASA, primarily from the Johnson Space Center, and the story behind the U.S. 10-year race to beat the Soviet Union to the moon. (TV Times, Jul 10-16/94)
Reporting on Spacecraft Clementine, an $80 million joint military-civilian venture, which sent the first close-up pictures of the moon in more than 20 years, the mission was considered a possible model for NASA. On May 3, Clementine's rocket was to be fired to leave lunar orbit and head for a rendezvous at the end of August with a small asteroid, 1620 Geographos. Soon thereafter Clementine might disappear from view; hence the name. Meanwhile Eugene M. Shoemaker, Clementine's chief scientist and a planetary geologist assigned by NASA, was studying pictures sent by the spacecraft, including the possible existence of ice at the lunar poles. The mission was considered an example of a "cheaper, faster, better" approach that could pay off. (NY Times, Apr 26/94)
According to an article in "Space News," the fate of a proposed U. S. mission to Pluto rested on the ability of NASA engineers to cut the program's cost below the existing $580 million estimate, presumably by incorporating high-risk technologies. U. S. scientists said time was running out for a Pluto mission. The planet is currently moving away from the sun. Scientists predicted that by 2025, Pluto's atmosphere will be completely frozen for centuries, precluding any effort to view the planet's surface. The existing plan called for launching two probes in 2001 that would map the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon before flying off into deep space. Cost-cutting measures being considered included reducing the amount of fuel for maneuvers at Pluto and the type of power source the craft will utilize for the mission. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95)
President Bill Clinton presented astronaut Jim Lovell with the Space Medal of Honor, 25 years after he brought his crippled Apollo 13 spacecraft home. Actor Tom Hanks, who played Jim Lovell in the film Apollo 13, was present at the ceremony. The president said that the extraordinary mission was made even more vivid by the recent Apollo 13 film. (W Post, July 27/95; W Times, Jul 27/95; USA Today, Jul 27/95; AP, Jul 26/95 & Jul 27/95; Reuters, Jul 26/95; UPI, Jul 26/95)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) found an oxygen atmosphere on Jupiters second moon, Europa. This detection was made by a team of researchers at Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Science Institute, both in Baltimore. They used data provided by HSTs Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph (GHRS) instrument from observations taken on June 2, 1994. Europas atmosphere is only one hundred billionth that of Earth. Europa, about the size of Earths moon, has an unusually smooth surface of solid water ice. The oxygen on Europa, whose surface temperature is -230 degrees Fahrenheit, is formed from purely non-biological processes. Water vapor and the gases oxygen and hydrogen are formed by the combination of sunlight and the bombardment of the dust and charged particles trapped in Jupiters intense magnetic field. (NASA Release 95-17; C Trib, Feb 23/95)
According to an article in "Space News," the fate of a proposed U. S. mission to Pluto rested on the ability of NASA engineers to cut the program's cost below the existing $580 million estimate, presumably by incorporating high-risk technologies. U. S. scientists said time was running out for a Pluto mission. The planet is currently moving away from the sun. Scientists predicted that by 2025, Pluto's atmosphere will be completely frozen for centuries, precluding any effort to view the planet's surface. The existing plan called for launching two probes in 2001 that would map the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon before flying off into deep space. Cost-cutting measures being considered included reducing the amount of fuel for maneuvers at Pluto and the type of power source the craft will utilize for the mission. (Space News, Jan 23-29/95)
Remotely controlled tests by Ames Research Center of a modified Russian planetary rover, Marsokhod, are planned for February 13-18 in a volcanic area that resembles the surfaces of the Moon and Mars. The test site is in Kilauea Volcanos summit caldera and southwest rift zone on the island of Hawaii. Marsokhod, which combines the Russian rover chassis with western avionics, is a sophisticated prototype of a long-distance rover. (NASA Release 95-14)
The U.S. Space Walk of Fame, based in Titusville, Florida, recognized with a two-day celebration the 20,000 men and women who worked on the Gemini space program. NASA had launched 10 Gemini missions between 1965 and 1966, each spacecraft carrying two astronauts. Many staff members and astronauts involved in the Gemini program went on to work on the Apollo Moon program. Gemini astronauts included Neil A. Armstrong, Jim Lovell, and Edwin E. Buzz Aldrin Jr. The event organizers celebrated the achievements of the Gemini missions, in addition to raising funds to establish a permanent monument to the Gemini program.(Marilyn Meyer, History-Making Gemini Team To Reunite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 June 1996.)
New audio recordings, gathered from the excursion of NASAs Galileo spacecrafts to Jupiters large moon Ganymede, contained a soaring whistle and hissing static, suggesting that the moon possesses a planet-like magnetosphere. According to Donald A. Gurnett, who had conducted the experiments using Galileos plasma wave instrument, the data is kind of like looking at a musical score. The sound patterns mimic those found on Earth, Saturn, and Jupiter. Gurnett suggested that the new findings would have broad significance for the scientific community, possibly allowing scientists to draw further conclusions about the interplay between magnetic forces and matter throughout the universe.(D. A. Gurnett et al., Evidence for Magnetosphere at Ganymede from Plasmawave Observations by the Galileo Spacecraft, Nature 384, no. 6609 (12 December 1996): 535; NASA, Big Icy Moon of Jupiter Found To Have a Voice After All; Europa Flyby Next for Galileo, news release 96-255, 12 December 1996.)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft completed a flyby of Jupiters largest moon, Ganymede, passing only 519 miles (835 kilometers) above the moons surface. NASA had equipped Galileo with 10 scientific instruments to gather data from the expedition. The instruments began making measurements on 23 June, as the probe approached Ganymede. Images revealed an icy surface, with bright, clean ice covering part of the moon and darker, dirty ice covering the rest. This was the first data gathered during a collection mission planned for 1996 and 1997, in which Galileo would pass Ganymede before completing 11 orbits of Jupiter and surveying the planets other moons. NASA monitored Galileos progress through its Deep Space Network, using control stations in California, Spain, and Australia. Scientists and engineers at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory had built the Galileo spacecraft.(NASA, Galileo Readies for Close Flyby of Jupiters Biggest Moon, news release 96-122, June 1996.)
Scientists announced the discovery of frozen water on the Moon, calling into question the long- held belief that the Moon lacked any form of hydration. The Clementine spacecraft had found the ice while using radar signals to examine the depths of the Moons craters. The discovery was the by-product of a US$75 million mission, co-sponsored by NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense, to test the Ballistic Missile Defense Organizations Star Wars sensors developed to detect and track missiles. The possible ice deposit, composed of the suspected ice crystals mixed with dirt and spread over a vast landscape, was termed a dirty lake. The scientists discovered the ice in a massive, extremely deep crater. One scientist described the crater as twice the size of Puerto Rico and deeper than the height of Mount Everest. Scientists discussing the significance of the discovery postulated that the presence of water on the Moon might be a boon to future space exploration, perhaps enabling the construction of a filling station on the Moon. Other scientists offered a more sober opinion of the findings, referring to reports that the presence of water on the Moon might someday allow for colonization as hyperbole.(John Noble Wilford, The Moon May Have Water, and Many New Possibilities, New York Times, 4 December 1996; Associated Press, Deep Within Lunar Crater, Small Frozen Lake Is Found, 3 December 1996; Joyce Price, Prospect of Ice on Moon Fires Hopes of Scientists, Washington Times, 4 December 1996; Curt Suplee, The Moons Dirty Lake Makes Waves, Washington Post, 4 December 1996.)
NASA announced the retirement of Jay F. Honeycutt, Director of KSC. A search for Honeycutts successor began immediately following the announcement. Honeycutt had joined NASA in 1966 after working as an engineer for Redstone Arsenal. He had begun as an engineer in flight operations and had worked at JSC, later training Apollo astronauts for the lunar landings, and had moved to NASA Headquarters in 1981. Honeycutt had transferred to KSC in 1989 as Director of Shuttle Management and Operations and had become Director of KSC in 1995. Honeycutt had won two Exceptional Service Medals, the Special Achievement Award, NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal, NASAs Equal Employment Opportunity Award, and the Meritorious Executive Presidential Rank Award.(NASA, KSC Director Jay Honeycutt To Retire, news release 96-215, 22 October 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russias Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, We are all so proud of you.(Associated Press, Space Shuttle, 26 September 1996; Associated Press, Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid, 26 September 1996; United Press International, Lucids Six-Month Mission Ends, 26 September 1996.)
In a study released in the journal Science, Charles P. Sonett detailed the results of his research measuring changes in the motion of Earth. Sonett reported that tidal forces from the gravitational force of the Moon had caused the Earths rotation to slow gradually over a period of millions of years. About 900 million years ago, according to Sonett, the length of the Earths day was only about 18 hours. The gravitational pull of the Moon, Sonett explained, acts like a brake on the Earth.(C. P. Sonett et al., Late Proterozoic and Paleozoic Tides, Retreat of the Moon, and Rotation of the Earth, Science 273, no. 5271 (5 July 1996): 100104; Associated Press, Astrodynamics: A Brake on the Earths Spin, 8 July 1996.)
NASA released new images of Io, one of Jupiters moons, obtained by the Galileo spacecraft. Michael J. S. Belton of the National Optical Astronomical Observatories pointed out that radical changes had occurred on the moon during the 17 years between Galileo and the first observation of Io, via the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. According to Belton, active volcanoes had altered the color of the moons surface, forming deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide that painted the surface white.(NASA, Galileo Finds Big Changes on Jupiters Volcanic Moon Io, news release 96-143, 18 July 1996.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had purchased most of the aerospace and defense holdings of its competitor Rockwell International Corporation. The US$3 billion deal restructured the two companies in drastically different ways, permitting Boeing to increase significantly its potential to win government aerospace contracts, while Rockwell International turned its attention to the lucrative commercial market in automation. Whereas Boeing solidified its established dominance in the commercial jetliner construction business, Rockwell left behind its signature industrythe company had been nearly synonymous with NASAs piloted space program. However, in the face of dwindling government contracts, Rockwell had been concentrating for years on developing its commercial product lines. Although the merger was not a surprise, the sale of the company responsible for engineering the Apollo spacecraft and the B-(NASA, NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown, HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, Federal Employees Face Backlog Here, Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
NASA released images from its Galileo spacecraft, indicating that water might have existed on Jupiters moon Europa in the past, or might still exist there. According to scientists studying the images, Europa may have warm ice on its surface. Finding such ice would help scientists determine whether Europas climate could support life. What we are really looking for is niches that could support life, Ronald Greeley, a Galileo team scientist clarified, at a press briefing releasing the images. At first glance, the pictures, shot from a distance of about 95,700 miles (154,000 kilometers), seemed to depict a series of white stripes stretched across Europas landscape. However, the stripes were actually ice glaciers, long of interest to scientists. Researchers had long suspected that Europa might be one of the places in the universe possessing water and, therefore, an environment that could support life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed skeptical optimism at the Europa findings and urged the scientific community to examine the pictures further, in a tempered reaction similar to his stance regarding the discovery, one week earlier, of microbiological evidence of life on Mars.(NASA, Statement by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Release of New Galileo Spacecraft Images of Europa, news release 96-166, 13 August 1996; Reuters, Galileo Hints at Water on Europa, 14 August 1996; NASA, Jupiters Europa Harbors Possible Warm Ice or Liquid Water, news release 96-164, 13 August 1996; Kathy Sawyer, Jupiter Moon May Contain Ice Floes, Sea, Washington Post, 14 August 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers funds on NASAs research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy. The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame, news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft discovered a giant iron core taking up half of the diameter of Jupiters moon Io, as well as a large hole in Jupiters magnetic field. Galileo Project Scientist Torrence V. Johnson of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) identified Io as the most geographically active body in the [s]olar [s]ystem. Galileo scientists also measured the intense heat Jupiter generates, noting that the planet has a massive gravity field. Galileo managed to come within 559 miles (900 kilometers) of Jupiter during its 1995 flyby, allowing scientists to locate the iron core and the hole in the magnetic field. Although they were still grappling with the significance of the completely unexpected finds, scientists reported their early analysis of the data in Science magazine.(J. D. Anderson, W. L. Sjogren, and G. Schubert, Galileo Gravity Results and the Internal Structure of Lo, Science 272, no. 5262 (3 May 1996): 709712; NASA, Galileo Finds Giant Iron Core in Jupiters Moon Io, news release 96-89, 3 May 1996.)
George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbeys distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management. Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbeys superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center, news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
In a once-in-a-century occurrence, eight planets lined up in the sky like pearls on a string from west to east. Astronomers could view, in one line of sight, Pluto, followed by Mercury, Mars, Venus, Neptune, Uranus, Jupiter, and Saturnwith a crescent Moon visible as well. Jack Horkheimer, host of public televisions Star Hustler described the event as naked-eye astronomy at its best, a boon for amateurs. According to computer calculations, the orbits of the planets would not line up in such a pleasing manner for observers on the Earth for at least another century.(Associated Press, Planets in Once-in-Century Lineup, 2 December 1997.)
The Cassini spacecraft lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a seven-year, 2.2 billion-mile (3.5 billion-kilometer) journey to and around Saturn. After several delays, including a two-day delay immediately before the launch because of high winds, the takeoff was flawless. Before the launch, activists had protested Cassinis fuel source, 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of radioactive plutonium; to calm public anxiety, NASA planned to sample air quality at 25 stations surrounding the launchpad, including several samples taken as far as 10 miles (16 kilometers) away. Additionally, a U.S. Department of Energy aircraft flew through the trailing gases of the rocket booster to make sure that no radioactive material had leaked. The US$3.4 billion mission set out to survey the planet Saturn, its rings, and its moon Titan. Engineers had programmed the Cassini spacecraft to conduct a number of gravity-assist swingbys, flying twice past Venus and once past Earth and Jupiter, to build up the speed necessary to make the long journey to Saturn. About seven years into the mission, NASA planned for Cassini to release a disc-shaped Huygens probe toward Titan. Throughout the mission, Cassini was to make more than 40 close flybys of Titan, gathering far more vivid images of the moon than ever before. NASA intended Cassinis camera to take more than 300,000 colored pictures of Saturn and its moons. Scientists hoped that the mission would expand considerably the knowledge of the planet gained through the earlier Voyager missions.(NASA, Cassini Launch, news release, October 1997; Earl Lane, Plutonium-Bearing Craft Set for Saturn Trip, Birmingham News (AL), 5 October 1997; Paul Hoversten, Nuclear Powered Craft Fuels Fury Before Launch, USA Today, 13 October 1997; Karl Grossman, The Risk of Cassini Probe Plutonium, Christian Science Monitor, 10 October 1997; Associated Press, Cassini Spacecraft Lifts Off for Saturn, 16 October 1997.)
The Galileo spacecraft made the closest ever flyby of Jupiters moon Europa and earned a place in space history by becoming the first spacecraft to orbit an outer planet. Galileo came within 124 miles (200 kilometers) of Europa, gathering images of what looked liked an icy ocean beneath the moons frozen crust. The prospect of water on the moons surface excited scientists, who had identified Europas climate as unique among the moons and planets of the galaxy. The images of the possible ocean seemed to show signs of slushy material pushing up against the surface ice, a sign of a heated core. The flyby was the first encounter to occur during Galileos two-year extension to its original mission. According to press accounts, Galileo, launched in 1989, had already gathered enough data to force scientists to rewrite textbooks.(NASA, Closest Europa Flyby Marks Start of Galileo Mission Part II, news release 97-286, 16 December 1997; K. C. Cole, Galileo Takes Close-Ups of Icy Europa, Los Angeles Times, 17 December 1997; Associated Press, Galileo Flies By Europe, Sees Indication of Ocean Under Ice, 17 December 1997.)
NASA released images taken from Galileo as it soared just 430 miles (690 kilometers) above the surface of Jupiters moon Europa. The images revealed the apparent traces of massive ice volcanoes. According to early analysis of the pictures, ice volcanoes and the movement of tectonic plates had reshaped the surface of Europa, one of the bodies in the universe that scientists believed might once have hosted life. The presence of water, organic compounds, and adequate heat, all of which would be present if ice volcanoes existed on the moon, had led scientists to focus on Europa as a location for possible development of life. According to Galileo team member Robert J. Sullivan, the apparent traces of ice volcanoes supported the even more significant possibility that an ocean might exist below the surface of Europa. Because NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) managed the Galileo Mission, the scientific community credited JPL with providing the vital new images of the surfaces of Europa and Jupiter that had led to further discussion about the possibility of life beyond Earth.(NASA, Ice Volcanoes Reshape Europas Chaotic Surface, news release 97-12, 17 January 1997.)
Educators, scientists, and politicians gathered to celebrate a new nationwide observanceSpace Daymeant to carry on President John F. Kennedys call to the nation for space exploration. On 25 May 1961, Kennedy had urged the United States to commit itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth, sparking NASAs successful development of human space travel. Advocates of Space Day argued that a day of celebrating previous achievements and calling for further advances would inspire future space explorers, particularly children. More than 1,900 schools across the nation participated in Space Day activities.(Martha Woodall for Knight-Ridder News Service, Space Day Today To Renew Interest in Outer Space, 22 May 1997.)
Geochemists from the University of Michigan and the University of Tennessee announced that they had arrived at the most accurate and precise estimation of the age and origin of the Moon yet calculated. They suggested that a collision between the Earth and another planet, 4.5 to 4.52 billion years ago, resulted in the creation of the Moon. To reach their conclusion, the researchers used a special spectrometry technique to examine 21 lunar samples. The scientists also concluded that the collision had set Moons orbit.(United Press International, Researchers Narrow Moons Origins, Age, 10 November 1997.)
Abe Silverstein received the Guggenheim Medal, honoring his significant contributions to the advancement of flight. Silversteins 40-year career at NASA had included a period as the Director of Lewis Research Center. The citation praised him for his leadership in the Mercury and Gemini programs and for advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance, as well as crediting him with proposing the name Apollo for the lunar landing mission. Previous winners of the Guggenheim Medal included Orville Wright, William E. Boeing, and Charles A. Lindbergh.(NASA, Former NASA Official Receives Guggenheim Medal, news release 97-177, 14 August 1997.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASAs more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlightnot enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecrafts instruments from freezing. NASAs policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the missionthe first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planetas NASAs boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.(NASA, Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet, news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission, news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, Protestors Set Stage, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the mens families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. Gus Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissoms footprints are on the moon. Besides Apollo 1s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad, 18 December 1997; Associated Press, Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal, 17 December 1997.)
NASA announced the completed construction of the Lunar Prospector spacecraft, scheduled for launch in September 1997. Engineers had designed the craft to obtain the first compositional and gravity maps of the Moon. G. Scott Hubbard, NASAs Lunar Prospector Mission Manager at Ames Research Center, praised contractor Lockheed Martin for its efficient construction and for keeping project costs at forecasted levels. NASA projected that the total cost to build Lunar Prospector and send it to the Moon would be about US$63 million. Scientists explained the need to return to the Moon, even though it was conquered decades ago, reminding the public that many important questions about the Moons history and its fundamental composition remained unexplored. Researchers hoped that Lunar Prospectors planned one-year mission orbiting the Moon would create a detailed map of the Moons surface composition and gravitational and magnetic fields. Lunar Prospector itself was compactonly 4.5 feet (1.37 meters) high, 4 feet (1.22 meters) in diameter, and weighing 660 pounds (300 kilograms). Even before its launch, scientists hailed Lunar Prospector as a new type of pathfinder, which had made history in terms of management style, technical approach, cost management, and focused science. Prospector used a gamma-ray spectrometer to provide maps of the composition of the Moon, thereby allowing scientists to understand better the elements present in the surface layer of the Moon.
Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey announced that the Galileo spacecraft had captured images revealing iceberg-like structures, suggesting the presence of frozen water on Jupiters moon Europa. The discovery provided strong support for the theory that an ocean once existed on the moons surface. Astronomers at NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the discovery mind-blowing and the clearest evidence to date that there is liquid water and melting close to the surface of Europa. Ronald Greeley, the Arizona State University geologist who managed the Galileo imaging team, described the structures in the Europa images as blocks of ice, similar to those seen on the Earths polar seas during springtime thaws. Greeley concluded that a thin icy layer covering water or slushy ice might possibly exist on Europas surface. The images revealed one possible ice formation that spread across Europas surface in patches as wide as 4 miles (6.4 kilometers). Scientists disagreed on exactly how to interpret the images and on whether future exploration would be able to prove the presence of an ocean. Nevertheless, excitement over the findings spread throughout the research community. In its use of the Galileo probe to explore Europa, NASA continued its mission to search the universe for other environments suitable for life. The Galileo probe almost lost the images when an antenna on the craft jammed, slowing data transmission to Earth. Galileo came within 363 miles (584 kilometers) of Europa to capture the highly celebrated pictures.(Kathy Sawyer, Signs of Ocean Found on a Jupiter Moon, Washington Post, 10 April 1997; Associated Press, Scientists Spot Water on Moon of Jupiter, 10 April 1997; NASA, New Images Hint at Wet and Wild History for Europa, news release 97-66, 9 April 1997.)
Mars Pathfinder scientists announced that Mars appeared to have a crust, a mantle, and an iron coreattributes similar to those of Earth. The researchers suggested that Mars may once have been warm and wet, although they remained unable to determine whether Mars had a molten core, such as that of Earth or Mercury, or a dead core, such as that of the Earths Moon. The findings contributed to growing evidence that Mars might be more than a solid ball of rock and that the planet might once have had water and life. Signs of possible erosion and weathering encouraged such hypotheses, as well, although scientists clarified that proof of such theories was still probably years away.(K. C. Cole, Internal Structure of Mars, Earth Similar, Scientists Say, Houston Chronicle, 9 October 1997; Associated Press, Mars Once Warm and Wet, Data Suggests, 9 October 1997; Associated Press, Three Mars Layers Suggests Life on Planet Was Possible, 9 October 1997.)
The U.S. Capitols Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, Houston, weve had a problem. Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigerts statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for womens admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, New Statue, USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert, 22 May 1997.)
NASA announced that it had restructured and renamed its Office of Aeronautics and Space Transportation Technology, known as Code R, appointing retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Spence M. Armstrong to head the newly reorganized Office of Aero-Space Technology. NASAs spokesperson said that NASAs management had created three new divisions within the OfficeGoals, Programs, and Institutionsto help NASA achieve its goals. Major goals included accessing space more cheaply, with reusable launch vehicle programs; creating greater synergy between aeronautics and space transportation technology; decreasing aircraft accident rates, while tripling the nations aviation-system capacity; diminishing aircraft noise and emissions; and reducing the cost of air travel and the cost of placing payloads in orbit. The role of the Goals Division would be to implement the challenging development of new technologies; that of the Programs Division would be to manage the various programs within the Office, and the Institutions Division would oversee institutional problems at the field centers.(NASA, Aeronautics Enterprise Reorganizes and Changes Name, news release 98-187, 14 October; Aerospace Daily, NASA Renames, Reorganizes Code R under Armstrong, 15 October 1998.)
Rocket engineer Max E. Nowak died of natural causes at the age of 89. An original member of Wernher von Brauns German rocket team, which developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets during World War II, Nowak had been among the first of the team members to move to the United States after the war. He had been the assistant to the director of the manufacturing engineering lab during the Apollo program and had directed the assembly of systems for the Saturn I nose cones and Saturn V launch systems.(Associated Press, 3 Rocket Scientists Die, 12 July 1998.)
NASA announced it had renamed the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility the Chandra X-ray Observatory, in honor of the late Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. NASA chose the name Chandra because it was the late scientists preferred name among friends and colleagues, and because it means moon or luminous in Sanskrit. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented that Chandrasekhar had made fundamental contributions to the theory of black holes and other phenomena, which the Chandra X-ray Observatory would study. NASA also announced that it had set a new launch date for the observatoryno earlier than 8 April 1999.(NASA, NASA Renames Telescope and Sets New Launch Date, news release 98-225, 21 December 1998. 644 Bill Scanlon, CSU Will Lead NASA Cloud Study $145 Million Project Is Designed To Improve Weather Forecasts, Study Global Warming, Rocky Mountain News (Denver), 30 December 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon. A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepards spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard, news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74, news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard, government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, Shepards Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age, USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: Pioneers Pioneer also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon, Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
NASA released unusually detailed images of Jupiters moon Ganymede taken by the Galileo probe in June 1996 and June 1997. Although the images did not indicate the existence of any form of life, they showed that life had been possible in Ganymedes oceans billions of years ago. At that time, the moon had water, heat, and organic material, brought by comets from outer space. The images also revealed geological formations, including mountain-like ridges and a valley system of volcanoes. Early in the moons history, the volcanoes had supplied water for Ganymedes oceans, which are now frozen.(Paul Hoversten, Photos Suggest Life Could Have Existed on Jupiters Moon, USA Today, 16 July 1998; New York Times, Hints of an Ocean on Jupiters Moon Yield Questions About Life, 16 July 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space, New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth, 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, Russias Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth, 25 August 1998.)
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena IIs first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, Late Flagstaff Astronomers Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute, Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers, 7 January 1998.)
NASA successfully tested a fuel tank made of a new metal mixture, aluminum lithium, never before used in major U.S. manufacturing. The tank made of the new alloy was 30 percent stronger and 5 percent lighter than the aluminum magnesium tanks in use since the days of the Apollo program. The tank showed no leaks, pressure bulges, or other problems, when loaded with 537,000 gallons (2,033,000 liters) of liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel. Lockheed Martin had developed the new fuel tank to help ensure that NASA would be able to haul large sections of the ISS into orbit.(Seth Borenstein, Shuttles New Fuel Tank Test a Success, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 May 1998.)
NASA researchers released images and temperature readings collected by Mars Global Surveyor. The images revealed that the Martian moon Phobos is covered in a layer of dust at least 3 feet (0.9 meters) deep, the result of the impact of meteoroids, occurring over millions of years. Surveyors thermal emission spectrometer revealed that, on Phobos, the temperature changes from -170oF to -25oF (-112oC to -32oC) between night and day. Scientists explained that dust accounts for some of the moons drastic temperature change, because Phobos does not have an atmosphere enabling it to trap heat. Therefore, the surfaces small particles have only 7 hours to absorb heat from the Sun, losing heat rapidly after sunset. Images of landslides on steep crater slopes indicated that Phoboss gravity, even at just 1/1,000th of that of Earth, is sufficient to pull objects downward.(NASA, Martian Moon Phobos Hip-Deep in Powder, news release 98-164, 11 September 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, Martian Moon, 12 September 1998.)
Scientists published a study in the journal Science, using images from the Galileo probe as evidence that an ocean beneath the surface of Europa, one of Jupiters moons, was once warm and salty. James K. Crowley of the U.S. Geological Survey stated that Galileo data showed that salt absorption patterns on Europa were similar to those on Earth. Gary B. Hansen, a University of Hawaii geophysicist, added the observation that the size of the salt bands on Europas surface are continuous and stretch across much of the moon, evidence of a salty ocean beneath the moons icy surface. Jeffrey S. Kargel, also of the U.S. Geological Survey, commented on his colleagues study in Science, saying that salt is an important piece in the puzzle, but in the absence of other evidence, does not prove that a salty ocean lies beneath Europas surface. Scientists seek other evidence, such as shifting ice plates, cracks in the frozen surface, and a magnetic field.(Michael Kahn for Reuters, Jupiter Moon Might Have Salt OceanU.S. Study, 22 May 1998; T. B. McCord et al., Salts on Europas Surface Detected by Galileo near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer, Science 280, no. 5367 (22 May 1998): 1242.)
The data transmission system of Galileo malfunctioned during its fifth flyby of Jupiters moon Europa when it went into safe mode. Although NASA engineers activated a backup system, the transmission system had lost all data collected when the craft passed within 1,141 miles (1,835 kilometers) of the moon. NASA was investigating the malfunction. NASA had launched Galileo in 1989, and the probe had entered Jupiters orbit in 1995, collecting data from moons Io, Europa, and Callisto during its initial two-year mission, completed in December 1997. NASA had extended the mission for two additional years.(Agence France-Presse, Galileo Probe Suffers Malfunction in Jupiter Moon Flyby, 22 July 1998; Associated Press, Spacecraft Galileo Working Again, 24 July 1998.)
The journal Science published data gathered from NASAs Lunar Prospector, indicating the presence of hydrogen, often bundled as water molecules, on the north and south poles of the Moon. Alan B. Binder, Chief Scientist for the Lunar Prospector mission, explained that the spacecraft had detected an abundance of hydrogen, and that the science team had interpreted the data to mean that the Moon has 110 billion tons (9109,100 kilograms or 0.99.1 billion tonnes) of water. In a previous mission to the Moon to collect data, the spacecraft Clementine had found radar indications of water on the Moons south pole. Paul D. Spudis, a member of the Clementine science team, remarked that Prospectors discovery was significant because the presence of lunar water has been confirmed by two different research methods.(D. J. Lawrence et al., Global Elemental Maps and the Moon: The Lunar Prospector Gamma-Ray Spectrometer, Science 281, no. 5382 (4 September 1998): 14841489; Reuters, Prospector Finds Water on Moon: NASA Spacecraft Locates Ice at the North and South Poles, Washington Times, 4 September 1998; Associated Press, Man in the Moon May Have Plenty To Drink: Abundance of Water Likely; Scientists Foresee Colonization, Chicago Tribune, 4 September 1998.)
NASA announced that Lunar Prospectors gamma-ray spectrometer had returned data about the Moons elemental composition. Scientists had used the data to develop the first global maps delineating compositional variations of thorium, potassium, and iron ore over the lunar surface. The maps provided insights into how the Moons crust had developed. Prospectors magnetometer and electron-reflectometer data indicated that the Moon contained magnetized rocks on its upper surface, which had created the two smallest known magnetospheres in the solar system. The crafts Doppler gravity experiment had enabled scientists to develop the first precise gravity map of the entire lunar surface, showing seven previously unknown lava-filled craters, which cause gravitational anomalies. NASA also announced that Lunar Prospector had supplied additional evidence of water-ice deposits on both poles of the Moon.(NASA, Latest Lunar Prospector Findings Indicate Larger Amounts of Polar Water Ice, news release 98-158, 3 September 1998.)
Lunar Prospector settled into its orbit after three flawless engine burns. The five scientific instruments (magnetometer, electron reflectometer, gamma-ray spectrometer, neutron spectrometer, alpha particle spectrometer, and Doppler gravity experiment using an S-band antenna) began transmitting streams of data. The neutron spectrometer scanned the lunar surface for evidence of hydrogen; the gamma-ray spectrometer determined concentrations of elements such as uranium and iron; and the alpha-particle spectrometer searched for indications of volcanic and tectonic activity.(Reuters, CorrectedU.S. Space Probe Begins Hunt for Water on the Moon, 14 January 1998; NASA, Solar System Exploration: Lunar Prospector, http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/missions/profile.cfm?MCode=LunarPr&Dis play=ReadMore (accessed 30 July 2007).)
At 7:15 a.m. (EST), Lunar Prospector executed the first of three engine bursts needed to settle into orbit. In a flawlessly executed maneuver, Prospector fired its engines for 30 minutes to slow down, permitting the Moons gravity to capture it. The small robotic spacecraft was NASAs first visitor to the Moon since the astronauts from Apollo 17 had walked on its surface in 1972. The Lunar Prospector project had cost about US$63 million.(Washington Times, After 25 Years, NASA Shoots for the Moon, 12 January 1998; Robyn Suriano, Prospector Slides into Lunar Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 12 January 1998.)
James L. Elliot, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues, together with Lowell Observatory and Williams College, published findings in the journal Nature based on data obtained from NASAs HST. The data indicated that Neptunes largest moon, Triton, had warmed up significantly since the Voyager spacecrafts visit in 1989. Tritons temperature had risen from 37 K (-393F or -236C) to 39 K (-389F or -234C), a 5 percent increase. The astronomers traced the warming trend to seasonal changes in Tritons polar ice caps attributed to an extreme southern summer, a cyclical phenomenon occurring every few hundred years. Other possible explanations included a changing frost pattern on Tritons surface, which could have caused the surface to absorb more of the Suns warmth; or changes in the reflectivity of Tritons ice, which could have caused it to absorb more heat. Because of the warming, Tritons frozen nitrogen surface was turning into gas, making its thin atmosphere denser. The scientists hoped their study of the changes on Triton would provide insight into global warming on Earth, which has a more complicated environment than Triton. HSTs detection of an increase in the moons atmospheric pressure, measured with one of the space telescopes three fine guidance sensors, had provided the clue to the increased surface temperature.(NASA, Hubble Space Telescope Helps Find Evidence that Neptunes Largest Moon Is Warming Up, news release 98-110, 24 June 1998; J. L. Eliot et al., Global Warming on Triton, Nature 393, no. 6687 (25 June 1998): 765767.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as chief of American rocketry efforts, died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimers disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germanys defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects. In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agencys Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89, New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
Scientists studying Galileo data published findings in the journal Nature describing the likely presence of a subsurface, liquid, salty ocean on Callisto, Jupiters second largest moon. Margaret G. Kivelson, space physics professor at the University of California at Los Angeles and NASAs Principal Investigator for Galileos magnetometer instrument, explained that data showed variability in Callistos magnetic field similar to that of another Jupiter moon, Europa. However, neither Callistos atmosphere, which lacks charged particles, nor Callistos icy crust, is a good conductor for generating a magnetic field. Kivelson explained that a layer of salty melted ice could carry sufficient electrical currents to produce the magnetic field. In addition, she noted that Galileo data indicated electrical currents flowing in opposite directions at different times, a key signature consistent with the idea of a salty ocean. However, scientists had concluded that, unlike Europa, Callisto was unlikely ever to support life, even if it had an ocean, because of its insufficient energy sources. Callistos only apparent source of heat is radioactive elements, whereas Europas closer position to Jupiter means it possesses tidal energy.(NASA, Jupiters Moon Callisto May Hide Salty Ocean, news release 98-192, 21 October 1998; K. K. Khurana et al., Induced Magnetic Fields as Evidence for Subsurface Oceans in Europa and Callisto, Nature 395, no. 6704 (22 October 1998): 777780.)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that Europes Infrared Space Observatory, which had been orbiting Earth for two and one-half years, had located water in unexpected places. The most intriguing of these was the water vapor detected in the atmosphere of Saturns largest moon, Titan. ESA Director of Science Roger M. Bonnet remarked, the moon may duplicate the conditions that led to the creation of life on Earth . . . and the only thing you need is a little heat to heat up Titan, maybe [the] birth of life may be seen. Chairperson of ESAs Astronomy Working Group Reinhard Genzel said that the Observatory had enabled scientists to see water throughout the universe, and that the water was likely brought to the icy outer planets by comets. He explained further that comets might have deposited the water on Earth during the early formation of the solar system, when many comets constantly collided with the Earth.
A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASAs Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiters moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data. James K. Erickson of NASAs JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileos instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, If we didnt have the automatic restart software, we wouldnt be getting any data at the encounters.(Michael A. Dornheim, Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo, Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
Researchers reported in the journal Science that NASAs Galileo spacecraft had detected hydrogen peroxide on Jupiters moon Europa. Hydrogen peroxide does not occur naturally on Earth. A scientific instrument aboard the craftthe Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (NIMS)had aided scientists in their study of Europas surface. Working like a prism, the instrument had broken up infrared light, detecting dark areas of hydrogen peroxide. The scientists reported that the chemical was forming constantly on Europa, through the process of radiolysis; in this case, the process involved intense particle radiation emanating from Jupiter. Principal Investigator for NIMS Robert W. Carlson explained that hydrogen peroxide begins breaking down almost as soon as it forms and, therefore, its life on Europa spans no more than a few months. The short lifespan of the chemical limited the scientists ability to study the long- term chemical history of Europa. However, scientists would be able to apply their observations of short-term chemical changes on Jupiter to the study of how the moons of Jupiter interact with the planet, as well as to the study of similar processes elsewhere in the solar system.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASAs Galileo Finds Bottle Blonde Chemical on Europa, news release 99-022, 25 March 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/europaperoxide.html (accessed 21 December 2007); R. W. Carlson et al., Hydrogen Peroxide on the Surface of Europa, Science 283, no. 5410 (26 March 1999): 2062 2064.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, established by Congress after the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire on 27 January 1967, submitted its annual report to NASA. The panel found Shuttle safety satisfactory, but cautioned that cutbacks, such as hiring freezes and budgetary restrictions, had created a looming crisis of future shortfalls in the workforce. The panel warned that NASA was at risk of losing the core competencies needed to conduct the nations spaceflight and aerospace programs in a safe and effective manner. Budgetary constraints had also caused NASA to postpone planned improvements to the Shuttle fleet and the International Space Station (ISS). The panels chairperson remarked that both programs were operating at an acceptable level of risk, but that updating Shuttle computers and refurbishing the supply of spare parts would make the programs safer.(NASA, Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel To Present Report to NASA, news release N99-8, 4 February 1999; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, Space Safety, 5 February 1999.)
At the American Geophysical Unions fall meeting in San Francisco, NASA presented images from the Galileo spacecrafts close flyby of Jupiters moon Io on 25 November, showing a curtain of lava erupting within a giant volcanic crater. Because of the intense heat and height of the lava fountains, NASAs Infrared Telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was also able to observe them. NASA scientists hoped to determine the temperature of the extremely hot lava on Io, by combining data from the telescope and from Galileo observations. Galileo scientist Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson remarked that capturing images of the fountains was a 1-in-500-chance observation. NASA announced that engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratorys (JPLs) Measurement Technology Center had been able to repair images damaged by radiation during Galileos 10 October flyby using LabVIEW software from National Instruments. JPLs Torrence V. Johnson compared the work to unscrambling a television cable signal: JPL engineers had to break the code that was inadvertently introduced by the radiation near Io.(NASA, Galileo Sees Dazzling Lava Fountain on Io, news release 99-148, 17 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-148.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Societys Division for Planetary Sciences, research group leaders from the University of Texas at Austin announced that scientists had sifted through the data from Earth-based observatories and from spacecraft such as the HST, obtained from the controlled crash of NASAs Lunar Prospector into a crater near the south pole of the Moon on 31 July. The researchers reported that they had identified no observable signature of water in the Moons crater. The announcement confirmed the conclusion reached at the time of the crash. The Lunar Prospector spacecraft had launched on 6 January 1998. In March 1998, mission scientists had announced the first tentative findings of the presence of water ice on both of the Moons poles. The controlled crash, proposed by engineers and astronomers at the University of Texas, was a low-budget attempt to wring one last bit of productivity from the low-cost mission. NASA had accepted the proposal because of the successful peer review of the idea, and because the crafts useful life was nearing its end.(NASA, No Water Ice Detected from Lunar Prospector Impact, news release 99-119, 13 October 1999; Associated Press, Crafts Crash into Moon Finds No Water, Los Angeles Times, 13 October 1999.)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft was unable to record its closest encounter with Jupiters moon Io, as it passed within 186 miles (299 kilometers) of the volcanic moons surface. Although radiation shut down the crafts instruments, NASA was able to restart the instruments 4 minutes later, permitting Galileo to complete more than half of its planned observations. The craft had encountered a similar problem when it had flown within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Io in October. NASA had added the close flybys of Io, located deep within the Jovian systems radiation belts, to the end of Galileos two-year extended mission. The spacecraft had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis on 18 October 1989, had begun orbiting Jupiter in December 1995, and had completed its primary mission in December 1997, thereafter, continuing an extended mission focused on Jupiters moon Europa, with flybys of the planets moons Callisto and Io, as well.(John Antozak for the Associated Press, Galileos Moon Shots Impeded by Radiation, Washington Times, 27 November 1999; John Antozak for the Associated Press, Galileo Spacecraft Faces Huge Doses of Radiation, USA Today, 26 November 1999.)
After a search of nearly two weeks, a team of salvagers funded by the Discovery Channel located the Liberty Bell 7, the Mercury space capsule flown by astronaut Virgil I. Gus Grissom, which had been lost at sea on 21 July 1961. Grissom had survived the splashdown and had been rescued from the Atlantic Ocean. He had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo I launchpad fire that he had done nothing that could have caused the hatch to blow out following the splashdown. The cause of the accident remained a mystery and forever marred Grissoms otherwise successful 15-minute suborbital flight, the nations second piloted spaceflight. The salvagers remotely operated submersible had located and recorded video of the capsule about 300 miles (480 kilometers) southeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the surface of the ocean. Expedition leader Curt Newport said the video showed that the capsule was in amazingly good condition. It was still shiny in spots, the window and parachute liner were intact, its periscope was extended, and the words United States and Liberty Bell were plainly visible. Newport explained the difficulty of locating the capsule, comparing the attempt to find it to searching for the Titanicthe Liberty Bells capsule, smaller than one of the Titanics boilers, was hidden in water 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) deeper than the doomed ocean liner. Although the submersible located two cameras and a tape recorder with the capsule, which might possibly help to explain why the hatch blew open prematurely, it was doubtful that the film from those items would be salvageable after 38 years underwater. Although the discovery of the hatch itself would more likely provide an answer, Newport estimated that the hatch could be a mile from the capsule. The capsule remained in the ocean, for recovery at a later unspecified date.(Washington Times, Salvagers Able To Locate Grissoms Space Capsule, 3 May 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Sunken Spacecraft, 3 May 1999.)
NASA released an image of Jupiters volcanic moon Io, captured at the closest range ever accomplished. The image, which NASAs spacecraft Galileo took during a flyby of the moon on 10 October, showed a lava field near the center of an erupting volcano named Pillan, with visible new lava flows from its volcanic center. To capture most of the new images of Io, Galileo had used a fast camera mode, in which the camera preprocesses the image, averaging the brightness in its adjacent parts. However, Ios radiation had disrupted the process, degrading the quality of the images. Radiation had not affected images, including the newly released image of Pillan, taken in other camera modes. Galileo Project Manager James K. Erickson remarked that Galileo would not use the fast camera mode during the next Io flyby.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Closest-Ever Picture of Volcanic Moon Io Released, news release, 22 October 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of ShuttleMir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector, news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
NASAs Galileo probe survived intense radiation emanating from Jupiter during a do-or-die effort, when the spacecraft came within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Jupiters volcanic moon Io. The craft experienced computer problems when passing through the densest part of Jupiters radiation belt, but 1 hour after Galileos closest encounter with Io, all of its systems had resumed normal functioning. Duane Bindschadler, Manager of Science Operations for the Galileo Program, explained that close-up study of Io could help scientists learn about the behavior of volcanoes, thereby helping them predict the behavior of volcanoes on Earth. However, because Jupiters radiation field could damage or destroy the spacecraft, NASA had planned the close flyby for the end of the two-year extended mission, following Galileos original two-year mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Galileo Succeeds in Historic Flyby of Jupiters Volcanic Moon, news release, 11 October 1999; Reuters, Galileo Probe Risks Ruin for a Closer Look at Io, Washington Post, 12 October 1999.)
Astronaut Charles P. Pete Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet. As an example of Conrads wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but thats a long one for me. Conrad had been a member of NASAs second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident, news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
NASA officials announced that the Galileo spacecraft was operating normally again after entering safe mode on 31 January. Galileos computer had become confused while flying past Jupiters moon Europa. David A. Senske, a member of the Galileo imaging team at NASAs JPL, explained that the unusual angle Galileo required for studying Europa had caused the computer to malfunction.(Associated Press, Galileo Craft Resumes Its Jupiter Mission, 13 February 1999.)
NASA announced that new findings from the Galileo spacecraft indicated the presence of sulfuric acid on the frozen surface of Jupiters moon Europa. Sulfuric acid is a corrosive chemical found in car batteries. Robert W. Carlson of NASAs JPL, the lead author of a paper published in the journal Science, was Principal Investigator for Galileos Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer, which located the chemical. The new findings corroborated Galileos earlier spectrometer data analyses, suggesting the presence of sulfate salts on Europa. Despite indications that a liquid ocean may exist under Europas crust, Carlson had initially thought the presence of sulfuric acid would end debate over whether it was possible for Europa to contain biological life. However, his colleague Kenneth H. Nealson suggested the opposite, remarking that sulfur and sulfuric acid are oxidantsenergy sources known to us on Earth. Therefore, Nealson proposed that the findings should encourage scientists to search for any possible links between the sulfur oxidants on Europas surface and natural fuels produced from Europas hot interior.(NASA, Battery Acid Chemical Found on Jupiters Moon Europa, news release 99-112, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-112.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); R. W. Carlson et al., Sulfuric Acid on Europa and the Radiolytic Sulfur Cycle, Science 286, no. 5437 (1 October 1999): 9799.)
NASAs Lunar Prospector crashed into a frozen crater on the Moon, but detected no water upon impact. Scientists, believing that the crater held frozen water, had hoped that the fire and violence of the collision would vaporize ice, sending a wet plume, detectable by special instruments, spiraling into the lunar sky. Telescopes equipped with ultraviolet detectors recorded hours of data after the impact, searching for the chemical signature of water. The Prospector mission, which had lasted 18 months following its 6 January 1998 launch, had used five instruments to map the magnetic, chemical and gravitational character of the [M]oon.(Associated Press, Spacecraft Smashes into Moon: Scientists Hoping for Evidence of Ice Vapor in Lunar Sky, Washington Post, 1 August 1999.)
NASAs JPL named Thomas C. Duxbury Project Manager for JPLs Stardust Mission, launched in February 1999 to collect a sample from Comet Wild-2 and return it to Earth. Duxbury, who had served as the Missions Acting Project Manager for the past year, replaced Kenneth Atkins, who had been heading a program to develop leadership for JPLs projects. Duxbury had joined the Stardust project in 1996 as Mission Manager, responsible for navigation, mission design, the ground-data system, science-data management, and mission operations. Before working on the Stardust project, Duxbury had served on planetary mission teams, including several Mariner missions, the Mars Viking mission, Pioneer 10 and 11 to Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 and 2 to the outer planets, the Soviet Phobos Mission to Mars, the Mars Observer Mission, and the Clementine Mission to study the Moon. Concurrent with his position as Stardust Project Manager, Duxbury planned to continue to serve as a member of the science teams for Mars Global Surveyors laser altimeter and for the ESAs Mars Express orbiter and lander, as well as continuing as lead scientist for geodesy and cartography in the Mars Exploration Office.
The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenns fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiters solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASAs Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiters moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileos magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelsons team had measured the moons magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings best explained by a thick layer of waterabout as salty as Earths oceanshidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath the moons surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileos Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface. Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiters intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Solar Systems Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean, news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiters Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life, Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
Chester M. Lee, who had served as Mission Director for six Apollo Missions to the Moon, including Apollo 13, died from complications of open-heart surgery. Lee had begun his 23-year career with NASA in 1965 after retiring from the U.S. Navy, specializing primarily on the Apollo Missions. He had also served as Program Director for the 19731975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the first joint venture between the United States and the former Soviet Union.(Associated Press, Chet Lee, Former NASA Worker, Dies at 80, 7 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, Obituaries Chester Lee; Navy Captain, Apollo Mission Director, 9 March 2000.)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundationnow a part of Illinois Institute of Technologyhad directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being military high ground. The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project, Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 1314; Associated Press, Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon, 18 May 2000.)
As Russias Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States Apollo with Russias Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold Warera mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed, news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons, 11 July 2000.)
NASA announced the creation of a new office dedicated to improving heath and safety for its workforce. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian as Chief Health and Medical Officer, giving him the responsibility for developing programs to research and implement the best medical procedures for astronauts and other NASA personnel. On the ground and in space, rapid advances in medical knowledge and tools need to be adapted and incorporated into our planning and practices, Goldin said when announcing the new position. Nicogossian faced the task of establishing NASAs Health Council, in keeping with NASAs commitment to making heath and safety its number-one priority.(NASA, NASA Creates New Office To Foster Heath and Safety, news release 00-69, 1 May 2000. 915 Associated Press, Glenn Honored for Test Pilots Role as Armstrong Watches, 3 May 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronauticss Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.(NASA, Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies, news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. Buzz Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. Bill Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fames Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More, 16 July 2000.)
NASA released recently obtained images that further supported the possibility that Jupiters moon Europa might be home to a liquid ocean. The Galileo spacecraft had captured the images when passing Europas north pole. Using a magnetometer instrument, Galileo had recorded changing currents in the moons magnetic fielda finding consistent with the presence of a conducting material such as a watery liquid.(NASA, Galileo Findings Boost Idea of Other-Worldly Ocean, news release 00-7, 10 January 2000.)
Margaret G. Kivelson and four coauthors from the University of California at Los Angeles published in the journal Science the strongest evidence to date that Jupiters moon Europa contains a salty, liquid ocean beneath its surface. The team had used data from the Galileo probes magnetometer to study Europas magnetic compass, finding that the presence of a layer of electrically conducting liquid, such as saltwater best explained the behavior of the moons magnetic compass. Kivelson explained that the team had inferred that the conductor must be a liquid ocean, since ice is not a good conductor of electricity. However, Torrence V. Johnson of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that the magnetometer data by itself was insufficient to conclude the presence of a liquid ocean. Johnson explained that scientists needed several further steps of inference, such as precise measurements of gravity and altitude, indicating the effects of tides.(NASA, Galileo Evidence Points to Possible Water World Under Europas Icy Crust, news release 00-131, 25 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-131.txt (accessed 6 May 2008); Margaret Kivelson et al., Galileo Magnetometer Measurements: A Stronger Case for a Subsurface Ocean at Europa, Science 289, no. 5483 (25 August 2000): 13401343.)
European Space Agency (ESA) engineers announced the discovery of a flaw in the European receiver on NASAs Cassini spacecraft, prompting an inquiry into why engineers had not identified the problem before NASA had launched the craft, and how the issue could be resolved before the craft reached its destination. Cassinis probe data relay subsystem (PDRS) lacked sufficient bandwidth to navigate the Doppler shift with the Huygens probe as the probe parachuted toward the surface of Saturns moon Titan. Therefore, the system would be unable to recover all of the data that Huygenss six instruments would generate. Cassini and Huygens launched on 15 October 1997, with Huygens scheduled to separate from Cassini on 6 November 2004, break through Titans atmosphere on 27 November 2004, and descend to the moons surface using a parachute system. The mission plan called for Huygens to measure the composition and winds of Titans atmosphere and to collect images. The probe would send the data via the S-band PDRS to Cassini, which would then transmit the data to Earth. However, the ESA stated that the inadequate bandwidth of the PDRS meant that link margins would degrade, because the Doppler shift on the data subcarrier would be outside the bandwidth of the receiver- phase lock loop, leading to a potential loss in the link of 10dB over what engineers had assumed for the mission.(Frank Morring Jr., ESA Sets Inquiry After Tests Reveal Flaw in Titan Probe Link, Aerospace Daily, 6 October 2000.)
Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. Gus Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASAs second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatchs failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissoms claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, Grissoms Capsule Back at Space Center, 14 June 2000.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institutions National Air and Space Museum for its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built. NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASAs predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonians National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners, news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
NASA made available the first large-scale images revealing a tail of electrified gas streaming from Earth toward the Sun. One of the images, which NASAs Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had produced, appeared on the cover of Science. The IMAGE technology had captured new views of previously unverifiable gas trapped within Earths magnetic field, known as the magnetosphere. The images placed in the context of the solar system the vast reach of the region affected by Earths magnetosphere, which extends past the Moon on the night side of Earth. Astronomers compared the perspective the new images provided them, to the perspective satellite images of Earth provide to scientists researching hurricanes.(NASA, NASAs Image Reveals Earths Invisible Magnetic Tail, news release 01-08, 25 January 2001; cover of Science 291, no. 5504 (26 January 2001).)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASAs JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Centers goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSCs Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director, news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
NASA released the first images taken by the recently launched Mars Odyssey spacecraft. Headed for the Red Planet, Odyssey pointed its camera Earthward to take calibrating shots as it traveled around the South Pole. Among the first images the vessel captured were the first thermal-infrared views ever taken of Earth and its Moon. The photographs demonstrated the technological sophistication of the instruments for the mission to Mars, which allowed close observation, producing images even with very little available light. The clarity of the images of Earth, particularly those of Antarctica, boded well for the success of the Mars mission. Mars Odyssey measured surface temperatures in Antarctica as low as minus 58F (14C), similar in range to temperatures the craft would experience during its survey of Mars.(NASA, Earth Day Portrait Is First One Snapped by NASAs 2001 Mars Odyssey, news release 01-81, 23 April 2001.)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the worlds leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the companys missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Societys Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist, Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk, Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
Continuing to gather data long after it had completed its original mission, the Galileo spacecraft made the closest ever pass of Jupiters largest moon, Callisto. Although regarded as the ugly duckling of Jupiters moons because it does not appear to have ever had liquid water present, Callisto still interested scientists who hoped to gather enough data to determine the size and number of craters on the moons surface. In the days leading up to the close pass of Callisto, problems with Galileos cameras had worried NASA controllers. Galileo scientists had anticipated the complications, however, predicting that the flyby, within 100 miles (161 kilometers) of the moon, would expose the probe to strong gravitational pulls and radiation belts. Galileo had originally begun orbiting Jupiter in 1995 and had already made 30 flybys of Jupiters largest moons.
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASAs Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silversteins work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASAs predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASAs true founding members, who had made possible NASAs robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies, news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program, New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA, 4 June 2001.)
A group of astronomers, including NASAs Christophe Dumas, announced the discovery of a new moon orbiting the planet Uranus. S/2001 U 1 was Uranuss 21st confirmed moon, one of six Uranian moons with an irregular orbit on a different orbital plane from that of the planets other moons. Moons with irregular orbits are hard to find, because they tend to be very distant from the planet they orbit and are so faint that they are difficult to distinguish from stars. The six Uranian moons with irregular orbits were the planets smallest moons, ranging in size from 10 to 20 kilometers (6 to 12 miles) in diameter. Scientists theorized that these smaller moons were the result of collisions that had occurred during the early stages of planetary formation.(NASA JPL, Scientists Boost Tally at Uranus, news release, 25 October 2002.)
The FBI and NASAs Office of Inspector General (OIG) announced the arrest of three students employed at NASAs JSC. The FBI had charged the students with the theft of lunar and meteorite samples. According to the FBI, the three student employees and another man had stolen a safe containing the samples and had attempted to sell the specimens. JSC had notified the FBI and NASAs OIG of the possible theft on 15 July.(NASA, NASA Cooperating in Investigation of Theft, news release 02-133, 22 July 2002; Los Angeles Times, 4 Charged in Theft of NASA Moon Rocks, 23 July 2002.)
In an article in the journal Nature, scientist Paul M. Schenk provided evidence that Jupiters moon Europa might not be able to support life, challenging many scientists previous assessments about the potential for life on the moon. Astrobiologists had theorized that Europa might be able to support life, based on the possibility that it might possess a heat source, liquid water, and organic material, all necessary for life to exist. However, researchers had also known that Europa is covered with a shell of ice, which might be sufficiently thick to prevent sunlight and oxygen from reaching water below the icy surface, thereby impeding Europas ability to support life. Using data obtained from NASAs Galileo and Voyager spacecraft, Schenk had calculated the thickness of Europas ice shell by comparing the depths of impact craters on Europa with those on Callisto and Ganymede, two other moons of Jupiter. Schenks analysis indicated that Europas ice shell is at least 19-kilometers (12-miles) thicknearly twice that suggested by previous studies and thick enough to prevent the existence of life.(Usha Lee McFarling, Life on Jupiter Moon Likely on Thin (or Thick) Ice, Los Angeles Times, 23 May 2002; Paul M. Schenk, Thickness Constraints on the Icy Shells of the Galilean Satellites from a Comparison of Crater Shapers, Nature 417, no. 6887 (23 May 2002): 419421.)
Thomas J. Kelly, designated by NASA as father of the lunar module, died at the age of 72 in Cutchogue, New York. Kelly had led a team of engineers at Grumman Aircraft Corporation in designing and building the Lunar Excursion Module known as the Eagle. Apollo 11 astronauts had used the Eagle to land on the Moon and to return to the orbiting command module for the trip back to Earth. In 1972 NASA had awarded Kelly with its Distinguished Public Service Medal for his work on the Apollo program. Kellys wife, six children, and 10 grandchildren survived him.(Warren E. Leary, T. J. Kelly, 72, Dies; Father of Lunar Module, New York Times, 27 March 2002.)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft took its last pictures, images of Io, a planet-sized moon orbiting Jupiter. Galileo had launched in 1989 from Space Shuttle Atlantis and had entered Jupiters orbit six years later. The spacecraft had eventually made 33 orbits around Jupiter, capturing nearly 14,000 images of the planet and the objects around it.(NASA, Farewell, Io; Galileo Paying Last Visit to a Restless Moon, news release 02-10, 15 January 2002; NASA, Solar System ExplorationGalileo: Overview, http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/ /index.cfm (accessed 31 July 2008); Andrew Bridges, NASA Awaits Last Photographs from Jupiter Probes Long Trip, Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2002.)
NASA appointed two veteran astronautsApollo Commander Thomas P. Stafford and Space Shuttle Commander Richard O. Coveyto lead the task force assisting NASAs return-to-flight team. The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), composed of distinguished experts and industry professionals representing a wide range of disciplines, would help the NASA team implement the CAIBs findings following the release of its final report. Stafford, a retired Lieutenant General in the U.S. Air Force who had flown four missions during the Gemini and Apollo programs, had also chaired the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on ISS Operational Readiness. Covey, a retired U.S. Air Force Colonel, had piloted the 1988 Shuttle Mission STS-26, the first flight following the Challenger accident. He had also piloted Mission STS-51I in 1985 and had commanded STS-38 in 1990 and STS-61 in 1993.(NASA, Former Apollo and Shuttle Commanders Lead Columbia Accident Report Task Force, news release 03-196, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03196_covey_lead.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
In its first mission to the Moon, ESA launched its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) spacecraft aboard an Ariane 5 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. SMART-1 was the first spacecraft since NASAs 1998 Lunar Prospector to attempt the journey to the Moon. ESA planned for the 770-pound (349.2-kilogram) craft, powered by an ion- propulsion engine, to reach the Moon in early 2005. SMART-1 carried 33 pounds (15 kilograms) of miniature instruments, which researchers from Finland, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom had provided, including a color camera the size of a human eye, a 4.4- pound (2-kilogram) infrared spectrometer, and an 11-pound (5-kilogram) x-ray spectrometer. The purpose of the SMART-1 mission was to solve certain mysteries about the Moons formation, its mineralogical composition, and the amount of water it has, if any. The Ariane 5 also carried into orbit two telecommunications satellitesthe INSAT 3-E for India and the European e-BIRD. ESA had delayed the launch of e-BIRD since 28 August to allow the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to make further checks on its satellite.(Frank D. Roylance, Europe Finally Ready for Mission to Moon, Baltimore Sun, 29 September 2003; Agence France-Presse, European Rocket Places Lunar Explorer, Two Satellites into Orbit, 29 September 2003.)
John E. Riley, a 33-year member of NASAs Public Affairs Department, broadcast voice of NASAs Mission Control for the Apollo program, and NASA spokesperson, died of cancer at the age of 78. He had begun working for NASA in 1959 and, as a member of the Apollo program team, had provided commentary during the first moonwalk. Riley had also initiated the practice of encouraging astronauts interviews with media and had traveled with astronauts internationally.(Matt Schwartz, Obituary: Riley, 78, Longtime Spokesman for NASA, Houston Chronicle, 21 April 2003.)
NASA announced the new charter and new members of its Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP). All members of the previous ASAP, which the U.S. Congress had initially chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire, had resigned in late September 2003 in the wake of the Columbia accident investigation. The original charter had intended the panel to act as an independent body to advise NASAs Administrator on safety issues, but over the years, additional administrative procedures had governed the panels work. In the new charter, NASA revoked those procedures to enable the panel to develop its agenda in accordance with CAIB findings. The ASAPs original 1967 charter formed the foundation of the new charter, with the following revisions: 1) the ASAP would make quarterly reports, instead of annual; 2) new members would have two-year terms, extendable to a maximum of six years; 3) members would have staggered terms to ensure fresh perspectives at regular intervals; and 4) the ASAP would focus on industrial and systems safety, risk management, trend analysis, and management of NASAs safety and quality systems. NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe named, as new members of the ASAP, Rear Admiral Walter H. Cantrell, Vice Admiral Joseph W. Dyer, Augustine O. Esogbue, Major General Francis C. Gideon Jr., Deborah L. Grubbe, Rosemary OLeary, John C. Marshall, Steven B. Wallace, Rick E. Williams, and ex officio member, Brigadier General Joseph A. Smith. The new members represented academic, military, and industrial sectors; no member was a current or former NASA employee or contractor.(NASA, NASA Names New Safety Advisory Panel, news release 03-370, 18 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03370_asap.html (accessed 5 February 2009); Patty Reinert, NASA Safety Panel Takes Flight Again with New Members, Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2003.)
The Japanese probe Muses-Crenamed Hayabusa (Falcon) after its deploymentlaunched from Kogoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu, aboard an M-5 solid- fuel rocket. The probes mission was to rendezvous with the asteroid 1998 SF36, gather surface samples, and return to Earth. Japans Institute of Space and Astronautical Science expected the 510-kilogram (1,124-pound) spacecraft to arrive at the asteroid in June 2005. The craft would then skim the surface several times over three months, collecting 1 gram (0.04 ounces) of surface material from various sites. The Institute had designed the mission to return the samples to Earth in a capsule in June 2007. If the probe succeeded, the samples would be the first space rocks collected since the end of the U.S. Apollo Lunar Exploration Program 30 years before.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japan Launches Rocket To Probe Asteroid, 9 May 2003.)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe accepted the resignation of all members and staff of the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), which the U.S. Congress had first chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire. ASAPs function was to provide an independent body to advise NASAs Administrator about the safety of NASAs operations, facilities, and personnel. In her resignation letter, ASAP Chairperson Shirley C. McCarty stated that the panel had decided to resign so that the NASAs Administrator and Congress would have an opportunity to revitalize ASAP and to reshape its charter and mission. The panel also noted its frustration that, over the years, legislation had weakened its authority and that the CAIB final report had described the ASAP as often not very influential. Experts had noted that NASA had often ignored warnings that the safety panel issued and that ASAP had possessed no authority to enforce its recommendations. In accepting the ASAP members resignations, OKeefe pledged to strengthen the panel by studying its original concept and determining how to help its successor panel best meet the needs of NASA.(NASA, NASA Administrator Accepts Aerospace Safety Panel Resignation, news release 03-301, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03301_asap_resign.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Paul Recer for Associated Press, Nine NASA Safety Panel Members Resign, 24 September 2003.)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeings ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeings efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space stations design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASAs development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims, 28 January 2003. 110)
A panel of five retired NASA and contractor managers, whose expertise dated to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs, testified in a public hearing before the CAIB that engineers had never designed orbiters wings to sustain strikes from any form of debris. The panel members agreed that engineers had known in the 1970s that the RCC panels along the leading edge of the orbiters wings presented a technical challenge, and that NASA should have taken appropriate precautions against debris striking the RCC panels. Milton A. Silveira, who had helped design the orbiter, remarked that wings of airplanes were also incapable of sustaining such strikes. Robert F. Thompson, another designer of the orbiter, who had headed the Space Shuttle Program in the 1970s, added that providing an impenetrable wing edge was impossible. According to Thompson, if NASA had insisted on that standard, it would have had to abandon the Shuttle project. Diane Vaughn, a sociologist affiliated with Boston College, who in 1996 had published the book The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and Deviance at NASA, spoke to the panel about NASAs approach to risk-management and decision-making systems. Vaughn observed that NASA had failed to address institutional problems present at the time of the Challenger disaster, and that as a result, NASA decision-makers had remained unable to access the type of data they needed to assess risk accurately and to act on that knowledge.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA Pioneers Testify on Shuttle Columbia Tragedy, 24 April 2003; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Mistakes Will Repeat Without Changes, Board Told, Washington Post, 24 April 2003.)
President George W. Bush formally established the Presidents Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, to provide recommendations on implementing elements of his recently announced Vision for Space Exploration. The Commission would make recommendations regarding the type of scientific research U.S. scientists would conduct on the Moon, the development of technologies to enable human and robotic exploration of the Moon and the planets, and the criteria for selecting future destinations for human space explorers. The appointed members of the Commission were Edward C. Aldridge Jr., Carleton S. Fiorina, Michael P. Jackson, Laurie A. Leshin, Lester L. Lyles, Paul D. Spudis, Neil deGrasse Tyson, Robert S. Walker, and Maria T. Zuber.(The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Executive Order Creating the Presidential Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, news release, 30 January 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/aldridge_executive_order.html (accessed 30 January 2009); The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Members of the Presidential Space Exploration Commission, news release, 30 January, 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/ aldridge_members.html (accessed 30 January 2009). 591 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 603, 1 February 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx603.html (accessed 31 January 2009).)
William H. Pickering, a former Director of NASAs JPL, died at the age of 93. Pickering had begun his career at JPL in 1944 and had served as Director from 1954 to 1976. Soon after becoming Director of JPL, Pickering had led a project that had successfully launched the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 into Earth orbit on 31 January 1958. During the remainder of Pickerings tenure, JPL had launched the Ranger and Surveyor missions to the Moon and the Mariner missions to Mars and Venus. Pickering had received numerous awards during his lifetime: NASA had presented him with its Distinguished Service Medal, President Gerald R. Ford had awarded him the National Medal of Science, and the Queen of England had given him an honorary knighthood.(NASA, NASA Remembers William H. Pickering, Former Director of JPL, news release 04-094, 16 March 2004.)
Passing by Saturns furthest moon Phoebe, the Cassini spacecraft returned analyses of the moon indicating that Phoebes chemical composition is similar to the composition of comets, a finding that supported previous scientific theories about the enigmatic Phoebe. Because Phoebe has an unusually dark appearance and orbits Saturn in a direction opposite that of the planets other moons, scientists had theorized that the moon is a captive object of Saturn. Cassinis analyses of Phoebe indicated that the diminutive moons surface is composed of carbon dioxide, water ice, water-bearing minerals, and various organic chemicals. The results indicated possible chemical similarities between Phoebes composite materials and materials observed in comets. The Cassini spacecraft was one of two in the Cassini-Huygens mission, a joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA. Besides Cassinian orbiter designed to orbit Saturn, studying the planet and its system of moonsthe project included the probe Huygens, created to examine Saturns largest moon Titan. (Richard A. Kerr, Dirty Old Ice Ball Found at Saturn, Science 304, no. 5678 (18 June 2004): 1727; Warren E. Leary, Craft Confirms a Comet Link for Peculiar Moon of Saturn, New York Times, 24 June 2004.)
The SMART-1 spacecraft, the first of ESAs Small Missions for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART), successfully completed its first orbit of the Moon. ESA had launched SMART-1 in September 2003 to study the Moons surface. SMART-1 was noteworthy for its use of a host of techniques and technologies to reach lunar orbitincluding a solar-electric propulsion system or ion engine, which made the journey of 52.2 million miles (84 million kilometers) from Earth to the Moon using only 130 pounds (59 kilograms) of the 181 pounds (82 kilograms) of xenon fuel that it had carried. That fuel consumption rate was equivalent to more than 5 million miles per gallon. The 809-pound (367-kilogram) spacecraft was able to achieve this rate of fuel efficiency using solar panels. During 13 months of expanding orbits around Earth, the solar panels had charged the xenon gas atoms, providing the spacecraft with occasional thrusts. ESA hoped to replace conventional propulsion systemswhich were either too expensive or incapable of fulfilling the same objectivewith the new solar-panel technology, to propel future spacecraft further into space.(ESA, Europe Reaches the Moon, ESA news release 60-2004, 16 November 2004, http://www.esa.int esaCP/SEM2S8WJD1E_index_0.html (accessed 2 February 2010); David Rising for Associated Press, Europes First Moon Mission Successful, 17 November 2004.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bushs exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASAs possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort, Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
.html (accessed 14 January 2009); Justyn R. Maund et al., The Massive Binary Companion Star to the Progenitor of Supernova 1993J, Nature 427, no. 6970 (8 January 2004): 129131. billion from existing space programs over the next years to fund the development of the technology to travel to the Moon and Mars. President Bush also extended an invitation to other countries to cooperate in attaining the objectives of the Vision. Major newspapers described the Vision for Space Exploration as a response to the Columbia disaster and a means of regaining public support for continued space exploration.(Patty Reinert, Bush Aims for Worlds Beyond Our Own, Houston Chronicle, 15 January 2004; David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson, Bush Backs Goal of Flight to Moon To Establish Base, New York Times, 15 January 2004; NASA, The Vision for Space Exploration, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 55584main_vision_space_exploration-hi-res.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean OKeefe testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space concerning NASAs budget request for FY 2005. NASA had requested US$16.2 billion for FY 2005, an increase of 5.6 percent over its budget for FY 2004. Much of OKeefes testimony and the Senate subcommittee members questions were concerned with the likelihood of NASAs achieving the objectives that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration, announced in January 2004. Those objectives included human flights to the Moon and replacing the Space Shuttles with a new space-exploration vehicle.(NASA, Administrator OKeefes Senate Testimony, news release, 1 April 2004; Gwyneth K. Shaw, NASA Chief Faces Lawmakers Queries, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 April 2004.)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda, Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond, New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASAs JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSCs Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASAs JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director, Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy, news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
Cassini-Huygens became the first spacecraft to successfully navigate Saturns rings and to orbit the planet. A joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA, the mission comprised two spacecraft: the orbiter Cassini and the probe Huygens. The space agencies had planned for Cassini to conduct 76 orbits of Saturn during a four-year survey of the planet and its moons. They had designed the Huygens probe to analyze the atmosphere of Titan, Saturns largest moon. If the probe survived its descent to Titan, it would analyze the moons surface, as well.(ESA, Cassini-Huygens Enters Orbit Around the Ringed Planet, ESA news release 36-2004, 1 July 2004; Guy Gugliotta, Cassini First To Orbit Saturn, Washington Post, 1 July 2004.)
A commission created by President George W. Bush released its report outlining how NASA and other organizations might implement President Bushs new policy: the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration. The Presidents Commission, led by Edward C. Aldridge Jr., endorsed the Vision for Space Explorations goalsto explore Mars and the Moon. In addition, the commission recommended that, to meet those goals, NASA needed to make numerous changes; the federal government needed to establish a permanent council to develop and coordinate space exploration policies; and the private sector needed to become more involved in space operations. Specific changes that the commission recommended were that NASA should focus on the research and development of space technology, and that private industry should conduct operational activities, such as launching payloads to low Earth orbit. The report also recommended that NASA pursue partnerships with the scientific community and with foreign space agencies.(Presidents Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, A Journey To Inspire, Innovate, and Discover: Report of the Presidents Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (Washington, DC, June 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/news/reports/index.html (accessed 6 April 2009); Warren E. Leary and John Schwartz, NASA Is Urged To Widen Role for Business, New York Times, 15 June 2004.)
NASA announced the selection of six proposals to provide research and payload instruments for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), the first spacecraft that NASA would build under the new Vision for Space Exploration. NASA planned the LRO as a robotic mission, which would orbit near the Moon, obtaining measurements to use in planning future human and robotic landing sites. The selected proposals included remote-sensing instruments, such as the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter, which would conduct high-resolution measurements of landing-site slopes, and the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector, which would measure the Moons radiation.(NASA, NASA Selects Investigations for Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, news release 04-407, 22 December 2004.)
The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft completed the closest approach ever made to Titan, Saturns largest moon, as well as the only moon in the solar system known to have an atmosphere. Soon after Cassini pierced Titans viscous atmosphere, the spacecraft beamed images of the moons surface to mission scientists at NASAs JPL. ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA had launched the mission in 1997 to study Saturn and its moons. Even though it is too cold to support life, scientists remain greatly interested in Titan, because they suspect that conditions on the planet are similar to those on Earth before the development of life.(ESA, Cassini-Huygens Makes First Close Approach to Titan, ESAnews release, 26 October 2004.)
NASAs Cassini orbiter successfully released ESAs Huygens probe on a controlled course to Saturns largest moon Titan. ESA, NASA, and the Italian Space Agency had created the Cassini- Huygens mission to study Saturn and its moons, scheduling the Huygens probespecifically designed to analyze Titans atmosphere and surfaceto enter the moons atmosphere in January 2005.(ESA, Huygens Begins Its Final Journey into the Unknown, ESA news release 67-2004, 25 December 2004, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMVR53AR2E_index.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
A group of scientists led by Enric Palle of the New Jersey Institute of Technology published research indicating that, since 1999, the amount of sunlight reaching Earths surface had declined. Analyzing NASAs data on cloud cover, along with data from Earth-based telescopes, the team had calculated how much sunlight Earth reflected to the Moon, using the results to determine the amount of sunlight that reached Earth. They reported that the amount of sunlight reaching Earths surface had begun to increase in the mid-1980s, but had started to decline in the early 1990s, a trend that the team attributed to the increasing pollution of Earths air. The air pollution had reduced the amount of sunlight reaching Earths surface and had increased the amount of water droplets condensing in the atmosphere, thereby increasing the amount of cloud cover blocking sunlight.(Enric Palle et al., Changes in Earths Reflectance over the Past Two Decades, Science 304, no. 5676 (28 May 2004): 12991301; Kenneth Chang, After a Period of Brightness, Earth Dims, Researchers Say, New York Times, 28 May 2004.)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASAs first Director of Manned Space Flight Safety, died at the age of 101. Lederer, an aviation-safety expert, had introduced notable aviation-safety technologies, such as blinking anticollision lights and flight-data recorders. Lederer had started his career in aviation safety in 1926 as an aeronautical engineer for the U.S. Air Mail Service, where he had redesigned the services airplanes to prevent them from igniting after crashes, a frequent cause of death of the pilots. In the 1950s, he had helped establish the agency that later became the FAA. In 1967, after a fire on Apollo 1 had killed three astronauts during a launchpad test, NASA had asked Lederer to establish an Office of Manned Space Flight Safety. In 1970 NASA had appointed Lederer as the safety director for all NASA activities. Lederer had retired two years later. Later, Lederer had taught at the University of Southern California and had served two three-year terms on the Advisory Council for the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations.(Stuart Lavietes, J. F. Lederer, 101, Dies; Took Risk Management to the Sky, New York Times, 9 February 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bushs new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, First Woman Directs Launch, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
Former astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper died at age 77 in Ventura, California. One of the original seven astronauts for the Mercury program, the United States first human spaceflight program, Cooper was born in Shawnee, Oklahoma, on 6 March 1927. He had joined the U.S. Air Force in 1949, and NASA had selected him as a Mercury astronaut in April 1959. In May 1963, Cooper had piloted the programs last mission, which lasted 34 hours and 20 minuteslonger than all the combined duration of all previous Mercury missions. Cooper had made his second and final trip to space on Gemini 5 in August 1965, in a two-person mission that had set a record for space endurance of 191 hours. The mission had demonstrated that humans could survive in a weightless environment and, therefore, that a trip to the Moon was feasible. In addition, Cooper had been the first American astronaut to make two spaceflights, to sleep in space, and to appear in a televised broadcast from space. After retiring from the Air Force in 1970, he had run several companies, including a consulting firm specializing in projects ranging from aerospace to hotel development.(John Johnson, Leroy Gordon Cooper Jr., 77, Los Angeles Times, 5 October 2004; Matthew L. Wald, Gordon Cooper, Astronaut, Is Dead at 77, New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate issued a request for proposals (RFP) for the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) that NASA intended to use to transport astronauts beyond low Earth orbit and to the Moon by 2020. NASA had set the deadline for submissions for 2 May 2005 and planned to select two contractors in September 2005. The two contractors would develop competing prototypes with a December 2008 completion date, at which time NASA would select the prime contractor. NASA stipulated that the minimum specifications for the CEV were that the craft weigh 20 tonnes (18.14 tons) or less; house as many as four astronauts, for as long as 16 days; have the ability to rendezvous and dock with future lunar landers and interplanetary modules; and allow a safe abort throughout all phases of its flight. NASA stipulated that it would permit contractors to design spacecraft that exceeded these specifications. For instance, the RFP permitted the design of craft that could maintain a crew in space for longer than 16 days or accommodate a crew of six. The RFP also gave contractors the flexibility to decide whether the CEV would be able to dock with the ISS.(NASA, NASA Issues Solicitation for Crew Exploration Vehicle, news release 05-063, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05063_crew_exploration.html (accessed 2 September 2009); Robert Zimmerman for United Press International, Space Watch: Spacefaring by Bureaucrats, 18 March 2005. 753 NASA, NASA Research Aids UNESCO Global Conservation Efforts, news release 05-061, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05061_unesco-global.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASAs detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASAs FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASAs long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the Presidents January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASAs priorities, changes that he described as almost staggering in terms of magnitude.(James Janega, House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget, Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, Lawmakers Question White House on NASA, Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
Scientists using NASAs HST announced the discovery of two new rings and two new moons around the planet Uranus. The newly discovered ringsfaint bands of dust that undergo continual change, with dust spiraling out of the ringsare replenished by debris from collisions between asteroids and the newly discovered Uranian moon called Mab. The discovery of the rings increased the number of known Uranian rings to 13. The discovery of the two moons, which the scientists named Cupid and Mab after mythological and Shakespearean characters, increased the number of known Uranian moons to 27, the most of any planet in the solar system. Scientists also remarked that the orbits of known Uranian moons had changed since Voyager 2 had last observed them in 1986. Scientists described the dynamic nature of Uranuss moons and rings as indicative of dynamism throughout the solar system. Scientists hoped that observing Uranus would help them better understand this dynamism.(Mark R. Showalter and Jack J. Lissauer, The Second Ring-Moon System of Uranus: Discovery and Dynamics, Science 311, no. 5763 (17 February 2006): 973977; Frank D. Roylance, Hubble Images Show More Rings, Moons Around Uranus, Baltimore Sun (MD), 23 December 2005.)
NASAs Cassini spacecraft made a close pass of Saturns moon Iapetus, flying within 123,400 kilometers (76,677 miles) on its closest approach, and coming about 10 times closer to the moon than Voyager 2 had come in 1981. Cassinis closest approach had occurred over the moons mysterious dark terrain, which scientists had never before seen at close range. Scientists described the dark coating, the origin of which was unknown, as rich in carbon-based molecules. The dark terrain blankets the side of Iapetus that leads in the direction of the orbital motion
ESA announced that its Huygens probe, which had undertaken a seven-year journey through the solar system, aboard NASAs Cassini spacecraft, had successfully landed on the surface of Saturns moon Titan. ESA intended Huygens to provide the first direct and detailed sampling of Titans atmospheric chemistry, the first photographs of its surface, and a detailed weather report of the moon. ESA had selected Titan as the probes destination because Titans nitrogen atmosphere is rich in methane, and scientists believe its surface may contain chemicals similar to those that existed on the young Earth, before life evolved. Before the landing of Huygens, scientists had been unable to see Titans surface, because the methane in the atmosphere reacts with sunlight, creating a permanent blanket of smog. ESA had designed the Huygens probe specifically to breach that shroud.(ESA, Europe Reaches New FrontierHuygens Lands on Titan, ESA news release PR 03-2005, 14 January 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_3_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 14 August 2009); NASA JPL, NASA Salutes Successful Huygens Probe, news release 2005-017, 14 January 2005, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/newsreleases/newsrelease20050114-3/ (accessed 14 August 2009); Guy Gugliotta, Probe Lands on Moon of Saturn: A First Glimpse of Smog-Covered Titan, Washington Post, 15 January 2005. 731 Agence-France Presse, Russia and Europe Sign Space Agreement, 20 January 2005.)
NASA and the Florida Space Research Institute (FSRI) announced the third Centennial Challenges competition: the Moon Regolith Oxygen (MoonROx) challenge. The MoonROx challenge would require teams to develop hardware, within mass and power limits, able to extract a minimum of 5 kilograms (0.005 tonnes or 0.006 tons) of breathable oxygen from simulated lunar soila volcanic ash called JSC-1within a period of 8 hours. The first team to accomplish the oxygen-production goal before June 2008 would win US$250,000. Existing state-of-the-art technologies were incapable of extracting oxygen from simulated lunar soil. FSRI Executive Director Samuel T. Durrance remarked that oxygen-extraction technologies would be critical for robotic and human missions to the Moon.(NASA, NASA Announces New Centennial Challenge, news release 05-128, 19 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05128_Centennial_Challenge.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Jeremy McGovern, Astro Bytes: Extracting Oxygen from Lunar Soil, Astronomy News, 24 May 2005.)
NASAs Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASAs KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASAs first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission, news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, STS-114: Return to Flight, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, Return to Flight: Mission Overview, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, NASA Grounds Shuttles, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASAs workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administrations 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASAs efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttles retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASAs failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASAs ability to accomplish this, such as NASAs near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the Presidents Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 119, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
NASA announced a major discovery: images from the Cassini spacecraft had revealed geological activity on Saturns moon Enceladus. ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA had jointly created Cassini to study Saturn and its moons. Although scientists had previously believed that Enceladus is too small to be geologically active, data from Cassini had revealed that the moon is one of the solar systems most geologically dynamic objects. The images showed surface features such as deep canyons and flowing material, a south polar hot spot, and jets of icy particles supplying matter to one of Saturns rings.(NASA, NASAs Cassini Images Reveal Spectacular Evidence of an Active Moon, news release 05-422, 6 December 2005; Jeffrey S. Kargel, Enceladus: Cosmic Gymnast, Volatile Miniworld, Science 311, no. 5766 (10 March 2006): 13891391.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bushs plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet, 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, Space Policy Goes Private, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, White House Releases New Space Strategy, Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
NASA announced that it had awarded Rice Universitys Carbon Nanotechnology Laboratory (CNL) an US$11 million contract to produce a prototype power cable constructed of carbon nanotubes. The engineers expected the so-called quantum wires to conduct electricity up to 10 times better than copper, at 1/6th the weight. NASA anticipated that the technology would help return humans to the Moon and enable travel to Mars and beyond. Richard E. Smalley, the projects Lead Investigator, explained that the Space Shuttles primary power-distribution system accounted for almost 7 percent of its weight. However, NASAs next generation of human and robotic spacecraft would need far more power to support additional instrumentation and broadband communications, requiring a copper power-distribution system that would account for up to 25 percent of the crafts weight. Under the contract, CNL would provide NASA with a 1- meter (3.2-foot) prototype of quantum wire by 2010, a task requiring major breakthroughs in the production of nanotubes. To date, scientists had succeeded in producing wires no longer than several centimeters. At the time NASA awarded the contract, only armchair nanotubesa type comprising 2 percent of all nanotubes were suitable for use as quantum wires. Researchers at CNL planned to grow these nanotubes like crystals, placing seeds in a laboratory reactor and pumping in a source of carbon, such as carbon monoxide, with the hope of creating perfect, long armchair nanotubes each time. The researchers would then twist the tubes together to produce a quantum wire according to NASAs specifications.(NASA, NASA Awards $11 Million Quantum Wire Contract to Rice, news release J05-018, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/J05-018.html (accessed 9 September 2009); Amit Asaravala, NASA Funds Miracle Polymer, Wired News, 28 April 2005.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-155, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005, which authorized NASAs appropriations for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 and directed NASA to pursue particular programs during that period. More specifically, the new law directed NASAs Administrator to ensure that NASA would pursue a balanced set of programs related to aeronautics research and development, human spaceflight, and scientific researchincluding robotic missions to the Moon. Among the specific programs the law directed NASA to pursue was the launch of the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) at a date as close to 2010 as possible, and the landing of Americans on the Moon by 2020. Both objectives were components of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, the law specifically authorized appropriations for only two yearsUS$17.9 billion for FY 2007 and US$18.7 billion for FY 2008.(H.R. Rep. 109-354, at 22 (2005) (Conf. Rep.).)
Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it had finalized an agreement with the Boeing Company to compete as a team to develop NASAs new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and related human lunar-exploration systems, in anticipation of NASAs formal request for proposals (RFPs). NASA intended the CEV to serve as the central human space-transportation system within the Project Constellation, which would incorporate human and robotic space systems, ferrying astronauts to the Moon and beyond. According to the agreement, Northrop Grummans Integrated Systems sector would serve as team leader and prime contractor during the initial development phase, Spiral 1. During the Spiral 1 phase, the team hoped to demonstrate the CEVs ability to operate safely in low Earth orbit with astronauts aboard. Boeing NASA Systems, an operating unit of Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, would serve as principal subcontractor. The two companies roles would reverse to implement the second phase, Spiral 2. During the Spiral 2 phase, NASA intended to begin to expand human space exploration to the Moon and beyond.(Northrop Grumman, Northrop Grumman, Boeing Finalize Space Exploration Teaming Agreement, news release, 24 January 2005, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=71298 (accessed 17 August 2009); Los Angeles Business Journal, Northrop, Boeing Finalize Deal To Team for NASA Contract, 25 January 2005.)
720Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 614, 1 January 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx614.html (accessed 5 June 2009). around Saturn. Voyagers best images of Iapetus had a resolution of 8 kilometers (4.97 miles) per pixel, but Cassini had produced a resolution of about 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) per pixel.(BBC News, Cassini Passes Two-Faced Moon, 3 January 2005.)
The U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASAs proposal to reduce spending on aviation research by 20 percent over five years, which would necessitate the closure of some wind tunnels and other centers. Overall, the Bush administration had proposed a 2.4 percent increase in NASAs budget, with most of that increase directed toward funding travel to the Moon and Mars, initiatives requiring NASA to eliminate or reduce its other programs, such as aviation research. NASAs Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Research J. Victor Lebacqz defended the program, remarking that the United States remained a global power in aviation and had developed technologies to improve safety, reduce environmental impact, and increase efficiency of aviation operations. However, Lebacqz stated that NASA needed a clearer vision for the goals of the program. John M. Klineberg, a retired NASA official and industry executive, who had headed a National Research Council (NRC) study group in 2004, testified before the committee. The NRC study group had published a review of NASAs aeronautics programs. Klineberg warned against using the groups recommendations out of context to justify major cuts in programs. He testified that NASAs proposed aviation-research budget was a disaster, putting the program at risk of becoming irrelevant to the future of aeronautics in the United States and throughout the world. In an interview following the hearing, Klineberg emphasized that the study group had suggested consolidating and focusing programs but did not support budgetary cuts eliminating entire areas of research.(Warren E. Leary, NASA Proposal To Reduce Spending for Aviation Research by 20% Dismays Experts, New York Times, 17 March 2005; Malia Rulon for Associated Press, Lawmakers Question Proposed NASA Cuts, 17 March 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The Future of Aeronautics at NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 16 March 2005.)
NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASAs HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenitecomposed of iron, oxygen, and titaniumas a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source, New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals, Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
establish the operational infrastructure necessary for eventual human missions to the Moon and possibly to Mars. NASA anticipated that human journeys to the Moon would begin in 2020.(NASA, NASA Unveils Global Exploration Strategy and Lunar Architecture, news release 06-361, 4 December 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/dec/HQ_06361_ESMD_Lunar_Architecture.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
In Bangalore, India, NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and G. Madhavan Nair, Chair of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), signed two Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs), agreeing to cooperate on Indias first uncrewed lunar missionChandrayaan 1 scheduled to launch in late 2007 or early 2008. The mission would fly two NASA scientific instrumentsthe Moon Mineralogy Mapper, to track the mineral and chemical composition of the Moon, and the mini synthetic-aperture radar (Mini-SAR) to map ice deposits in the Moons polar regions. Chandrayaan 1 would also carry three scientific instruments from European research centers. At the signing ceremony, Griffin said that he hoped that as we extend the reach of human civilization throughout our solar system, the United States and India will be partners on many more technically challenging and scientifically rewarding projects.(NASA, NASA Agrees To Cooperate with India on Lunar Mission, news release 06-219, 9 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06219_griffin_india.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Gavin Rabinowitz for Associated Press, Indian Mission To Carry NASA Devices, 10 May 2006; Paul Watson, U.S. To Piggyback on Indias Mission To Orbit the Moon, Los Angeles Times, 10 May 2006.)
NASA announced the completion of the first systems requirements review (SRR) for its Constellation Program, a human spaceflight program aimed at sending astronauts to the Moon and possibly to Mars. NASA was conducting SRRs of human spacecraft systems to establish a foundation for the design, development, construction, and operation of those systems. NASA had completed its last review in August 1973 for the Space Shuttle program. The Constellation Program SRR examined the systems intended to replace the Shuttle systems, including the Orion spacecraft and the Ares I and Ares V launch rockets. The review confirmed numerous parameters of those systems, including Orions launch weight for lunar missions (61,000 pounds, or nearly 27,700 kilograms) and the Ares rockets capacity to provide sufficient thrust to launch Orion into orbit. NASA also announced that it was preparing detailed project-level reviews of the Constellation Programs systems, scheduled for completion in early 2007. After completing those reviews, NASA would conduct another full review to reconcile information gained in the project-level reviews with the data from the first SRR.(NASA, NASA Completes Milestone Review of Next Human Spacecraft System, news release 06-354. 16 November 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/nov/HQ_06354_Constellation.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
060329_saturn_moonlets.html (accessed 25 August 2010); see also Matthew S. Tiscareno et al., 100-Metre- Diameter Moonlets in Saturns A Ring From Observations of Propeller Structure, Nature 440, no. 7084 (30 March 2006): 648650. Saturn. The astronomers speculated that Saturns blue ring of small particles was the result of meteoroid impacts on the surface of Saturns moon Enceladus, impacts that had scattered debris into the moons orbit. The largest particles had remained within Enceladuss orbit, but various forces, including pressure from sunlight, had pushed the smallest particles out of the moons orbit, causing Saturns broad ring of smaller scattered particles, which reflect predominantly blue light. De Pater explained that this explanation of the color of Saturns outer ring was directly applicable to the blue ring observed around Uranus. However, he cautioned that astronomers did not yet understand the details of the process.(Robert Sanders, Blue Ring Discovered Around Uranus, University of California at Berkeley press release, 6 April 2006, http://berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/2006/04/ 06_bluering.shtml (accessed 25 June 2010); see also Imke de Pater et al., New Dust Belts of Uranus: One Ring, Two Ring, Red Ring, Blue Ring, Science 312, no. 5770 (7 April 2006): 9294.)
A team of scientists, led by Harold A. Weaver Jr. of Johns Hopkins University, S. Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute, and Richard P. Binzel of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, reported in Nature their discovery of two small satellites orbiting Pluto. The team had sighted the moons, which had diameters of an estimated 60 kilometers (37 miles) and 50 kilometers (31 miles), respectively, in May 2005, using the HST. Both small moons circle on the same orbital plane as Plutos large moon Charon. In addition, the durations of all three bodies orbital rotations are simple ratios of one another. These facts led scientists to conclude that the same collision event created all three moons. Furthermore, the evidence raised the possibility that the distant Kuiper Belt, which includes Pluto, could contain other multiple-body systems. The researchers also speculated that debris from impacts in the Pluto system could have formed rings or arcs around Pluto. Thus far, scientists have only documented ring systems around gas giant planets, such as Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.(Ker Than, Pluto Might Have Rings, Space.com 22 February 2006, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/ 060222_pluto_moons.html (accessed 8 September 2010); see also H.A. Weaver et al., Discovery of Two New Satellites of Pluto, Nature 439, no. 7079 (23 February 2006): 943945; S. A. Stern et al., A Giant Impact Origin for Plutos Small Moons and Satellite Multiplicity in the Kuiper Belt, Nature 439, no. 7079 (23 February 2006): 946948; and Richard P. Binzel, Planetary Science: Plutos Expanding Brood, Nature 439, no.7079 (23 February 2006): 924-925.)
Scientists published research on the dimmest stars ever observed in a globular star cluster, including findings that revealed important information about the universes age and provided supporting evidence for a theory of star transformation. Harvey B. Richer of the University of British Columbia, and his team of scientists, had used NASAs HST to observe faint light from white dwarf stars in the cluster NGC 6397. Astronomers often make estimates of the universes age based on the age of stars. They are able to determine the age of stars because stars decline in temperature as they exhaust their available energy over their lifetimes. White dwarf stars, which are burned-out relics of stars and cool at predictable rates, are particularly useful for this purpose. However, white dwarves also become less visible as their radiation declines. According to the teams observations of the light from the white dwarves in NGC 6397, the cluster is almost 12 billion years old. The light from the clusters white dwarf stars appears as faint as the light of a birthday candle on the Moon would appear to an observer on Earth. The HST images also revealed that the dimmest white dwarf stars in NGC 6397 have temperatures low enough to cause chemical changes in their atmospheres, making the stars appear blue rather than red. Scientists had theorized the existence of this phenomenon but had never observed it.
Russian space scientist Vladimir Sergevich Syromyatnikov died of leukemia in Moscow, Russia, at the age of 73. Syromyatnikov had begun working for Russias S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia) in 1956. He had later developed several important space technologies, including the first piloted spacecraft, Vostok, which Yuri Gagarin had flown in 1961. Syromyatnikov had also worked on the Voskhod spacecraft, the Venera probe to Venus, and the docking system that had linked the Soviet Soyuz and the U.S. Apollo space vehicles in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project of July 1975. Syromyatnikov had later developed the Androgynous Peripheral Assembly Systemthe docking system that connected NASAs Space Shuttles with Russias orbital facility Mir and with the ISS.(Patricia Sullivan, Vladimir Syromyatnikov; Designing Docking System for Space Capsules, Washington Post, 1 October 2006.)
The International Astronomical Union (IAU) announced the official naming of Plutos newest small moonsNix and Hydra, names from Greek mythology. The HST had discovered Nix and Hydra, previously known as S/2005 P1 and S/2005 P2, in May 2005. The two moons are approximately 5,000 times fainter than Pluto and approximately two to three times farther from Pluto than its larger moon Charon, discovered in 1978. The first initials of the two moonsN and Hare the same as the initials of the NASA spacecraft New Horizons, which launched in January 2006 toward the Pluto system. Scientists expected that New Horizons would map Nix and Hydra in detail when the spacecraft flew by Pluto in summer 2015.(Kenneth Chang, Moons of Pluto Renamed, New York Times, 23 June 2006; NASA, Pluto and Its Moons: Charon, Nix and Hydra, 23 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/hubble/plutos_moons_prt.htm (accessed 23 August 2010).)
James A. Van Allen, a major figure in physics and space exploration, died at the age of 91. Born in 1914, Van Allen had played a prominent role in early American rocket research, including the development of the radiation detectors contained in the United States first successful satellite, Explorer 1. Launched January 1958, Explorer 1 had captured data revealing two belts of charged particles above Earths magnetic fieldphenomena later known as the Van Allen radiation belts. The finding was among the first major scientific discoveries of the early space age. In 1958 Van Allen had chaired a group of scientists who recommended that the United States create an independent national space agency by 1960 and launch a human mission to the Moon by 1968. Van Allen later became involved in several NASA projects, including the development of Galileo, Pioneers 10 and 11, and several Mariner spacecraft. During his lifetime, Van Allen had received numerous awards, including the National Medal of Science and NASAs Medal of Exceptional Achievement.(Walter Sullivan, James A. Van Allen, Discoverer of Earth-Circling Radiation Belts, Is Dead at 91, New York Times, 10 August 2006; NASA, James A. Van Allen (19142006), http://history.nasa.gov/sputnik/vanallen.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
Scientists announced that images from the Cassini spacecraft had revealed the presence of lakes on Saturns moon Titan, the first time that astronomers had located lakes anywhere other than Earth. Cassini, a joint mission of NASA and ESA, had captured the images during a 22 July flyby of a region of Titan called Xanadu. The pictures indicated that Titan might have topographic features similar to those found on Earth, such as hills, valleys, and rivers emptying into lakes. NASA scientists theorized that, because temperatures on Titan are approximately - 180oC (-292oF), the liquid in the lakes is likely either methane or a combination of ethane and methane. Scientists speculated that the lakes could be the source of the hydrocarbon smog found in Titans frigid and thick atmosphere. NASA and ESA had created Cassini to explore Saturn and its system of moons, and Titans atmosphere was one of the missions major research topics.(Caitlin A. Griffith, Planetary Science: Titans Exotic Weather, Nature (London) 362, no. 1 (27 July 2006): 362 363, http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v442/n7101/full/442362a.html (DOI 10.1038/442362a; accessed 15 March 2010); NASA, Cassini Finds Lakes on Titans Arctic Region, news release 06-274, 28 July 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jul/HQ_06274_cassini_lakes_itan_prt.htm (accessed 15 March 2010).)
NASA announced that it had misplaced the original recordings of the first Moon landing, along with other tapes containing data from that same mission. NASA had initially transferred the tapes to the U.S. National Archives, later storing them at NASAs GSFC. NASA officials noted that NASA still had copies of all of the data on the tapes, including the footage of Neil A. Armstrongs historic first steps on the Moon. However, they also noted that the images on the copies were of lower quality than those on the original magnetic tapes, because NASA equipment had been incompatible with television technology when the first human mission to the Moon took place. NASA had displayed the original transmissions of the Moon landing on a monitor and pointing a television camera at the monitor to broadcast the images on television. NASA was continuing to look for the tapes.(Robert Colvile, One Giant Slip-Up for Mankind, NASA Has Mislaid the Original Footage of Neil Armstrongs Historic Moon Landing, Daily Telegraph (London), 14 August 2006; Washington Post, Tape of 1st Moon Landing Missing, 15 August 2006.)
At the National Space Societys International Space Development Conference, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced NASAs sponsorship of the Lunar Lander Challenge competition, with prizes totaling US$2.5 million, to develop rockets capable of landing on the Moon. The X Prize Foundation would manage the competition and award the Lunar Lander Challenge prizes at the presentation of the X Prize Cup in October 2006. The challenge would have two levels of difficulty, with prizes awarded at each level. Level 1 would require a vehicle to take off from a designated launch area, rocket to an altitude of 150 feet (50 meters), hover for 90 seconds, and land on a pad 100 meters (320.08 feet) from the launch point. Level 2 would require the same launch altitude and the same distance between launch and landing pad, but the rocket would have to hover for 180 seconds and to land on a rocky site simulating the lunar surface. California entrepreneur Peter H. Diamandis, founder of the X Prize competition, stated that entrepreneurial companies can build the lunar space ships [necessary for achieving NASAs goal of returning people to the Moon in the next decade], and a Lunar Lander Challenge can stimulate the required technology in an efficient and rapid fashion.(Maggie McKee, Lunar Lander Is NASAs Biggest Challenge, New Scientist, 5 May 2006; X Prize Foundation, X Prize Foundation and NASA Offer $2.5 Million Lunar Lander Challenge Competition To Take Place at 06 X Prize Cup in Las Cruces, 4 May 2006, http://www.xprize.org/llc/press-release/x-prize-foundation-and-nasa-offer- 2-5-million-lunar-challenge-competition-t (accessed 23 March 2010).)
NASA announced its selection of Lockheed Martin as the primary contractor to design, develop, test, and evaluate NASAs new CEV, Orion, which would replace the Space Shuttle as the crew transportation vehicle. Orion would be able to carry four crew members to the Moon, to
NASA launched the US$700 million New Horizons spacecraft aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 5 rocket, on a 3-billion mile (4.83-kilometer), 9-year journey to Pluto, at 2:00 p.m. (EST) from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The spacecraft left Earths orbit at a speed of 36,000 miles per hour (57,936 kilometers per hour). After the spacecrafts planned February 2007 flyby of Jupiter, to receive a gravity-assisted velocity boost, NASA projected that it would reach a top speed of 47,000 miles per hour (75,639 kilometers per hour), thereby reducing the flights duration by three to five years. NASA expected that the New Horizons spacecraft would have its closest approach to Pluto and its moons in July 2015. Powered by 24 pounds (10.9 kilograms) of plutonium, New Horizons carried seven scientific instruments. Three of these were cameras, which would capture visible-light, infrared, and ultraviolet images of the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon. Also on board were three spectrometers, to study the composition and temperatures of Plutos thin atmosphere and surface features. After flying past Pluto, the spacecraft would penetrate deeper into the Kuiper Belt, an outer zone of the solar system 9 comprising thousands of icy, rocky objects, including comets and small planets, such as Pluto.
NASA released to the public two long-term strategies for placing humans on the Moon and Mars. The first of these was the Global Exploration Strategy, which NASA had written at the request of the U.S. Congress. The Global Exploration Strategy outlined NASAs plan for accomplishing the objectives established in NASAs strategic plan and in President George W. Bushs Vision for Space Exploration. In this document, NASA stated that it intended to pursue human and robotic exploration of the Moon, as well as explaining what the planned lunar exploration mission would do when it reached the Moon. The second strategic plan that NASA made public was its proposal for lunar architecture, documenting requirements for implementing and enabling critical exploration objectives. The proposed architecture included robotic precursor missions to
A team of researchers reported in the journal Science that images from NASAs Cassini spacecraft revealed evidence of towering plumes of water vapor and ice particles erupting from the surface of Saturns moon Enceladus. Cassini had conducted three flybys of the moon in 2005. According to Carolyn C. Porco, leader of the Cassini Imaging Team at the Space Science Institute, Boulder, Colorado, the scientists surmised that Enceladus possessed water reservoirs under high pressure below its icy exterior. When the ice ruptured, the subsurface water shot out and froze into icy crystals. Porco stated that, if this assumption were correct, the discovery had significantly broadened the diversity of solar system environments where we might possibly have conditions suitable for living organisms. The Imaging Team reported that the discovery of water plumes on Enceladus was unique because the pockets of liquid water may be no more
ESA ended its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) with a planned crash landing of the SMART-1 spacecraft into the Moon. The spacecraft impacted at a speed of 4,500 miles per hour (nearly 7,200 kilometers per hour) in a volcanic plain called the Lake of Excellence. ESA had planned the crash so that scientists could study the composition of the resulting dust and debris. SMART-1 had launched on 27 September 2003, orbiting the Moon many times to acquire data about the chemical and mineralogical composition of the lunar surface. ESA had also used the mission to test deep-space communications techniques, autonomous spacecraftnavigation techniques, and other innovative technologies, such as an ion- propulsion engine and various miniaturized instruments.
President George W. Bush submitted his US$2.77 trillion budget for FY 2007, which included US$16.8 billion to fund NASA, a 3.2 percent increase over FY 2006. According to NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, the priorities established by this budget reflected NASAs commitment to implement the Vision for Space Exploration, to complete the assembly of the ISS with the fewest possible spaceflights, and to deliver an operational Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) no later than 2014. The budget provided for a reduction in funding for the Shuttle program, from US$4.78 billion in FY 2006 to US$4.06 billion in FY 2007, and a 3 percent increase in funding for the ISS, to US$1.81 billion. NASA had requested funds of US$3.98 billion for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, a 30 percent increase from the previous fiscal year. The Directorate would develop the CEV, two new launchers, and the lunar landers needed to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA had estimated the cost of completing ISS assembly with the minimum number of Shuttle flights, while ensuring the safety of Shuttle flights, and had calculated a budget shortfall of US$35 billion. To make up this shortfall, the FY 2007 budget would cut funding for aeronautics research by 18 percent, to US$724.4 million. In addition, the budget would cap the increase for NASAs science budget, which funded deep- space probes and Earth-observation satellites, at 1.5 percent in FY 2007, and at 1 percent annually for the following four years.(NASA, NASA Administrators Statement About FY 2007 Budget, news release 06-056, 6 February 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/feb/HQ_06056_Budget_Statement.html (accessed 10 September 2010); Warren E. Leary, Unexpected Costs Force NASA Cuts, New York Times, 7 February 2006; Brian Berger, NASA Seeks 30-Percent Increase For Explorations Programs, Space News, 6 February 2006.)
The IAU announced the official name of the second celestial body identified as a dwarf planet, calling it (136199) Eris and naming its moon Dysnomia. A team of astronomers led by Michael E. Brown of the California Institute of Technology had announced their discovery of Eris on 29 July 2005, based on data they had acquired in 2003. Initially, the astronomers had given the object the temporary name 2003 UB313 and the informal name Xena. The discovery team had subsequently proposed the formal name Eris, after the Greek goddess of discord and strife, to symbolize scientists disagreements about the IAUs classification of celestial bodies in Earths solar system. In August 2006, IAU members had voted to strip Pluto of its planetary status, officially designating it a dwarf planet.(International Astronomical Union, IAU Names Dwarf Planet Eris, news release iau0606, 14 September 2006, http://www.iau.org/public_press/news/detail/iau0605/ (accessed 17 March 2010).)
first human mission to the Moon to occur by 2020.(NASA, NASA Selects Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Prime Contractor, news release 06-305, 31 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06305_Orion_contract.html (accessed 15 March 2010). 108 ESA, Impact Landing Ends SMART-1 Mission to the Moon, news release 31-2006, 3 September 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_31_2006_p_EN.html (accessed 16 April 2010); Nic Fleming, The Dust Settles After Europe Lands a Mission on the Moon, Daily Telegraph (London), 4 September 2006.)
Four years behind its original schedule, JAXA successfully launched Kaguya, also called the Selenological and Engineering Explorer (SELENE), aboard an H-2A solid-fuel rocket from Tanegashima Island at 1:31 (UT). The 2.9-tonne (2,900-kilogram or 3.2-ton) lunar orbiter carried various instruments that would enable it to obtain detailed data about the lunar topography and surface-mineral composition. JAXA had promoted the mission as the most significant lunar expedition since Americas Apollo program of the 1960s and early 1970s, in terms of its scope and ambition. JAXA claimed that the mission would outpace the former Soviet Unions Luna program, NASAs Clementine mission of 1994, and NASAs Lunar Prospector mission of 1998 1999. Kaguyas launch occurred at a critical time for the Japanese space agency, which was facing accusations that it lacked a vision capable of challenging the ambition of the Peoples Republic of China to lead East Asia in space exploration. At the time of the launch, JAXA also lacked popular and political support. Japans citizens had such poor regard for the civilian space program that JAXA had to negotiate with the local fishermen of Tanegashima for acceptable launch times. Because September was one of two launch windows that Tanegashima fishermens unions had offered JAXA, Kaguyas launch took place during typhoon season. Kazuto Suzuki, a specialist in global space issues at Tsukuba University in Tokyo, explained that JAXA was only beginning to realize that, to enhance the political importance of Japans space initiatives, it would need to market Japans space program to appeal to the Japanese public.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647, 1 October 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx647.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Bruce Wallace, After Long Delay, Japan Launches Lunar Orbiter, Los Angeles Times, 14 September 2007; Associated Press, Japans Space Agency Launches Lunar Probe, 14 September 2007.)
Associate Administrator for NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missionsSTS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASAs efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitzs resignation, praising the former astronauts tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASAs decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttles reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA, news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, Scott J. Doc Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former), http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, NASAs Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family, Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
Russia and India signed an agreement in Moscow for India to participate in Russias 2011 Moon- Globe Program to design a spacecraft for lunar exploration. Under the terms of the agreement, Russia and India would jointly build a robotic laboratory, with India supplying the rocket and flight module and Russia developing and producing the landing module of a Moon rover and a scientific complex. The agreement allowed for joint lunar exploration through 2017.
for designing the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon and, eventually, to transport human explorers to Mars. Gilbrech had joined NASA in 1991 and had played a key role in helping NASA solve the problem of the Shuttles dangerous foam debris, which had caused the Columbia tragedy in 2003. Griffin also named Robert D. Cabana, Deputy Director of NASAs JSC in Houston since 2004, to replace Gilbrech as Director of NASAs SSC, where he would oversee all operations of NASAs primary center for rocket-propulsion testing and of the Applied Research and Technology Project Office. NASA had selected Cabana as an astronaut in 1985. He had flown twice as a Space Shuttle pilot and twice as a Shuttle commander, accumulating more than 1,000 hours in space.(NASA, NASA Administrator Announces Senior Leadership Appointments, news release 07-175, 10 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07175_Gilbrech_Cabana.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Mark Carreau, NASA Names New Leader for Moon Exploration, Houston Chronicle, 12 August 2007.)
NASA announced that it had selected proposals for future lunar-science activities and had established two new programs to enhance the research that the Vision for Space Exploration had made possible. Under the Lunar Sortie Science Opportunities (LSSO) Program, NASA had selected seven from among more than 70 proposals to develop simple, autonomous instrument packages that future astronauts could deploy on the lunar surface. Scientists planned to use these packages, known as suitcase science studies, to study the Moons interior; to examine lunar dust, which creates problems for astronauts; to search for natural resources on the lunar surface; and to use lasers to provide precise information about the position and features of the Moon. The studies complemented two new programs already established in the Science Mission Directorates Planetary Science Division at NASA Headquartersthe Lunar Advanced Science and Exploration Research (LASER) Program and the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) Participating Scientist Program. The LRO mission, scheduled to launch in 2008, would help NASA prepare for long-duration human operations on the Moon. For that program, NASA planned to fund researchers analyzing data from the orbiters six instruments. Under the LASER program, NASA intended to solicit proposals for research investigating the lunar environment to determine how to enable humans to live and work on the Moon in the future.(NASA, NASA Prepares for Performing New Science on the Moon, news release 07-141, 21 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07141_moon_science.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, NASA Sets New Lunar Science Programs, Aviation Week, 28 June 2007, http://www. aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/lro062707.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
NASA announced that it had begun testing two NASA robots in the Arctic Circle in preparation for a return to the Moon in 2020. For the mission to the Moon, scientists would need autonomous robots that could perform activities unsuitable for humans and could respond quickly to human commands. On 12 July, the research team had arrived at Haughton Crater at Devon Island, Canada, with two test robotsK10 Black and K10 Red. NASA planned to operate the robots until 31 July. The robots carried 3-D laser scanners, capable of mapping topographic features from 3,280 feet (1,000 meters), and ground-penetrating radar, which could map below ground to a distance of 16.4 feet (5 meters). The robots navigated using GPS, stereo cameras, laser scanners, and Sun trackers. For the practice session, the robots conducted a survey of an area called Drill Hill in Haughton Crater. Researchers sent commands to the robots from a base camp more than 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) away from Drill Hill. The key objective of the research expedition was to test the robots instruments and software, as well as the equipment and software that humans could potentially use to supervise the robots at lunar outposts. Scientists had chosen Haughton Crater as the test site because of its extreme environmental conditions, lack of infrastructure and resources, and geologic features. Haughton Crater bears geographic similarities to Shackleton Crater at the south pole of the Moonboth are impact craters measuring approximately 12.4 miles (20 kilometers) in diameter.(NASA, NASA Robots Practice Moon Survey in the Arctic Circle, news release 07-163, 20 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07163_Ames_Lunar_Sim_Robot_Survey.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Stefanie Olsen, NASA Tests Lunar Robots in Arctic Crater, CNET News.com, 20 July 2007, http://news. cnet.com/NASA-tests-lunar-robots-in-Arctic-crater/2100-11397_3-6198044.html?tag=mncol (accessed 8 July 2010). 106 Brian Berger, Pentagon Pulls Plug on Satellite Refueling Prototypes, Space.com, 25 July 2007, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/070725_darpa_orbitalexpress_end.html (accessed 9 June 2010); Stephen Clark, Satellite In-Space Servicing Demo Mission a Success, Spaceflight Now, 24 July 2007.)
During a ceremony rededicating its Glenn Research Center (GRC) Plum Brook site in Ohio, NASA announced its intention to use the Plum Brook Stations Space Power Facility (SPF) to test the CEV Orion. NASA had designed Orion, which was in development, to enable research on the Moon, Mars, and other destinations in Earths solar system. NASA intended for the SPFthe only facility in the world large enough to undertake full-scale testingto conduct environmental tests of the Orion spacecraft, using simulations of conditions during launch, in- orbit operations, and reentry. The facility would also conduct thermal, acoustic, mechanical- vibration, and electromagnetic-interference tests.
Former U.S. Navy pilot and astronaut Walter M. Wally Schirra Jr., one of the astronauts known as the Original Seven, died of a heart attack at the age of 84. Schirra was the only astronaut to participate in all three of the United States first human space projectsMercury, Gemini, and Apollo. Selected in 1959 as one of the first seven astronauts, Schirra had made his first spaceflight on 3 October 1962, piloting the fifth Mercury mission, in which Mercury orbited Earth six times in 9 hours and 13 minutes. On 15 December 1965, Schirra had flown aboard Gemini 6-A with Thomas P. Stafford II, in a mission that included the first rendezvous of maneuverable spacecraft. Gemini 6-A, carrying Schirra and Stafford, had flown in formation for 5 hours with Gemini 7, which carried astronauts Frank F. Borman II and James A. Lovell Jr. With his fellow Apollo 7 crew members Walter Cunningham and Donn F. Eisele, Schirra had tested the Apollos systems during an 11-day flight beginning on 11 October 1968, a test that proved that Apollo was ready to ferry astronauts to the Moon. The Apollo 7 flight, Schirras final mission for NASA, had been the first to provide televised images from orbit. Following his retirement from the U.S. Navy in 1969, Schirra had worked with Walter L. Cronkite Jr. as a news commentator for CBS. Schirra was also a founding member and director of the Mercury Seven Foundation. The U.S. military had awarded Schirra the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, three Distinguished Flying Crosses, three Air Medals, and the Philippines Legion of Honor. NASA had awarded him two Distinguished Service Medals and its Exceptional Service Medal.(NASA, Veteran Astronaut Walter Schirra Dies, news release 07-100, 3 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07100_Schirra_Dies.html (accessed 24 March 2010); Richard Goldstein, Walter M. Schirra Jr., Astronaut, Dies at 84, New York Times, 4 May 2007.)
The X Prize Foundation and Google announced the creation of the Google Lunar X Prize, a contest with a US$30 million prize purse, inviting private companies worldwide to compete to land a privately funded robotic rover on the Moon. The prize purse consisted of a US$20 million grand prize, a US$5 million second prize, and US$5 million in bonus prizes. To win the grand prize, the rover would need to complete several mission objectives, including roaming the lunar surface for at least 500 meters (1,640 feet) and sending data back to Earth, including video and still images. The grand prize would be worth US$20 million until 31 December 2012, and then would be worth US$15 million until 31 December 2014. If no team claimed the grand prize by 31 December 2014, the competition would terminate, unless Google and the X Prize Foundation extended it. To win the second prize, which would also be available until 31 December 2014, a team would have to land a craft, which would roam the lunar surface and transmit data to Earth. The sponsors would distribute bonus prizes to teams that successfully completed additional mission tasks such as roaming distances greater than 5,000 meters (16,404 feet); capturing images of human-made artifacts, such as Apollo hardware; discovering water ice; or surviving a cold lunar nightthe equivalent of 14.5 Earth days.
The Peoples Republic of China released the first image of the Moon that its Change-1 lunar probe had captured, marking the formal start of Chinas mission to document the lunar landscape. China unveiled the image at a ceremony at the Beijing Aerospace Control Center. Chinas Premier Wen Jiabao described the event as a major step in his peoples 1,000-year-old dream of exploring the Moon. Change 1 had become Chinas first circumlunar satellite on 5 November when it successfully entered the Moons orbit.(Associated Press, China Shows First Image from Lunar Probe, 26 November 2007; Xinhua News Agency, Chinas First Lunar Probe Enters Moons Orbit, 5 November 2007.)
of the ISS in preparation for the expansion of the space station.(Patrick Peterson, Docking Port Relocated, Attached to Harmony, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2007; Tariq Malik, Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port, Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010). 167 Xinhua News Agency, Russia, India To Develop Advanced Military Aircraft, 13 November 2007; Agence France-Presse, Russia, India To Join in Moon Mission, 12 November 2007.)
The Peoples Republic of China launched its lunar orbiter Change 1 aboard a Long March-3A rocket at 10:05 (UT) from Xichang Satellite Launch Center. China named the 5,070-pound (2,230-kilogram) craft for a Chinese goddess who, according to myth, had flown to the Moon. Change 1 carried several scientific instruments, including a stereo camera and spectrometer imager, laser altimeter, gamma-ray and x-ray spectrometer, microwave radiometer, high-energy particle detector, and solar-wind detectors. The Chinese Academy of Sciences and CNSA planned to use the instruments to identify 14 atomic elements, helping scientists determine the mineral content of the lunar surface. The goal of the mission was to analyze the chemical and mineral composition of the lunar surface.
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASAs SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSCs A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, NASAs Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration, news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the Peoples Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russias Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars, 28 March 2007.)
underwater telephone. The Atlantis had an on-board telephone connected to a satellite telephone, which could contact anyone on shore. Atlantis had telephoned NASAs JSC in Houston, Texas, where a high-powered dish transmitter had contacted the ISS directly. Oceanographers and astrobiologists were equally enthusiastic about the telephone call because much of the information oceanographers learn researching the sea floor applies to space exploration. Astrobiologist Richard Shand of Northern Arizona University described the feat of communicating with people who are not currently on Earths surface, using three different mediawater, air, and vacuumas an astonishing accomplishment. Apollo astronauts, who had called Houston from a distance of 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles), retained the record for a long-distance call. The call from the Alvin submersible to the ISS was a 253-kilometer (157-mile) long-distance call.(Christina Reed, Houston, We Have a Phone Call, Science Now, 26 January 2007.)
JAXA officials announced that, after project engineers had successfully put the probe through a series of maneuvers, Japans lunar satellite, SELENE, had reached orbit, marking the first time Japan had placed a satellite in orbit around the Moon. According to the mission plan, SELENE would place its main orbiter Kayuga in an orbit approximately 60 miles (96.6 kilometers) from the Moon and would then deploy two smaller satellites in polar orbits. The project constituted a key advance for Japan, which had launched its first satellite in 1972 but, since that time, had struggled to keep up with the Peoples Republic of China. Japan had launched SELENE on 14 September, following a four-year delay of the mission.(Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japans SELENE Probe Reaches Lunar Orbit, 5 October 2007.)
NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced the successful completion of subscale-main-injector hardware, an early step in the development of the RS-68 engine that would power the core stage of NASAs Ares 5. Under the Constellation Program, Ares 5 would serve as NASAs cargo launch vehicle, delivering large-scale hardware and systems to space, in support of NASAs exploration missions to the Moon. MSFC engineers had conducted multiple hot-fire tests on the inject hardware, a major component of the engine. The hardware would inject and mix liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants in the engines combustion chamber, where they would ignite and burn to produce thrust. Because injector hardware for the RS-68 and the J-2X engine systems shared design features, engineers planned to use data collected during the tests to develop the J-2X engine systems for the upper stages of Ares 5 and for Ares 1, the crew launch vehicle (CLV) that would carry the Orion spacecraft.(NASA, NASA Successfully Completes Engine Hardware Tests for Ares V, MSFC news release 07-053, 8 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/marshall/news/news/releases/2007/07-053.html (accessed 1 April 2010).)
Aeronautical engineer Jerome B. Hammack, who was one of the seven inventors of NASAs Mercury capsule and had been instrumental in creating the recovery team to retrieve Mercury astronauts from the ocean, died of cancer at the age of 85. After playing a key role in the Mercury program, NASAs first human space program, Hammack had carried out similar duties in the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, and Shuttle projects. In 1958 Hammack had joined National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASAs predecessor organization, and, in the early 1960s, he had been one of the 35-member group that came to Houston to establish the institution that became NASAs JSC.(Lynwood Abram, Hammack, Helped [Design] Vehicles for Space Program, Houston Chronicle, 24 August 2007.)
Four teams competed at NASAs Regolith Excavation Challenge to dig a minimum of 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of simulated lunar soilregolithwithin 0.5 hours, using no more than 30 watts of power. However, none of the teams succeeded in winning the US$125,000 first prize. The top performer was the entry from Technology Ranch of Pixmo Beach, California, the only machine to run for a full 30 minutes in its first attempt and to scoop up 75 kilograms (165 pounds) of regolith. The Regolith Excavation Challenge was the seventh centennial challenge NASA had held since 2005. However, the only person who had won any of the competitions was Peter K. Homer, who had won US$200,000 for his entry in the Astronaut Glove Challenge on 3 May. Kenneth Davidian, Program Manager of NASAs Centennial Challenges Program, stated that NASA would add the unawarded prize money to the winnings for the 2008 Regolith Excavation Challenge, increasing the value of the prize for that competition to US$375,000. Davidian said that he expected the number of teams competing in the challenge would double and that many more NASA engineers would observe the competition in the future.(Dana Mackenzie, No One Scoops the Prize at Moon Digger Contest, New Scientist, 14 May 2007.)
Harrison Jack H. Schmitt, a scientist, former astronaut, and former U.S. Senator, announced that he was resigning as Chair of the NASA Advisory Council. The NASA Advisory Council, a panel of experts in various fields, advised the NASA Administrator on major policy. Since becoming Chair in November 2005, Schmitt had led the Advisory Council in submitting over 100 recommendations to the NASA Administrator. He had been the primary advocate behind a February 2007 workshop that produced 35 scientific recommendations related to NASAs return to the Moon and had led the Advisory Councils efforts to build relationships fostering the use of the ISS as a national laboratory. NASA named Kenneth M. Ford as the new Advisory Council Chair. Ford had served on the Exploration Committee of the Advisory Council since June 2007. He was the founder and Director of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition. Ford had developed and directed NASAs Center of Excellence in Information Technology at NASAs ARC. He had also served as both Director and Associate Director of NASAs ARC. A recipient of NASAs Outstanding Leadership Medal and the Robert S. Englemore Memorial Award, Ford had served on the U.S. Air Force Science Advisory Board and the National Science Board. He was also a fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.(NASA, Schmitt Completes NASA Advisory Council service; Ford Named Chairman, news release 08-262, 16 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-261_Scmitt_Leaves_NAC.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Robert Jastrow, one of NASAs founding administrators and a popular commentator on NASAs missions to the Moon, died from complications of pneumonia at the age of 82. Jastrow had spent his early career at Yale and at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. When NASA formed in 1958, Jastrow had become Chief of the Theoretical Division. In 1961 he had become Director of NASAs Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), where he had worked on the Pioneer, Voyager, and Galileo probes. He had held positions at Columbia University and Dartmouth College before becoming chair of the Mount Wilson Institute in 1992. Jastrow had cofounded the George C. Marshall Institute in 1984 and still held the position of Chair Emeritus of the Institute at the time of his death. The public knew Jastrow well for his ability to explain science and space exploration in easily understood terms. Besides being a frequent guest on network television, he was the author of the 1967 best seller Red Giants and White Dwarfs and of the controversial How To Make Nuclear Weapons Obsoletethe 1985 defense of President Ronald W. Reagans Strategic Defense Initiative. Over the course of his career, Jastrow had received the NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, the Arthur S. Fleming Award for Outstanding Service to the U.S. Government, and the Columbia University Medal of Excellence.(John Schwartz, Robert Jastrow, Who Made Space Understandable, Dies at 82, New York Times, 12 February 2008; Thomas H. Maugh II, Robert Jastrow, 82; Astrophysicist Helped Shape NASAs Space Exploration, Los Angeles Times, 17 February 2008.)
The X Prize Foundation of Santa Monica, California, announced that two new teams, Independence-X Aerospace and Omega Envoy, had joined the Google Lunar X Prize competition, bringing the total number of registered teams to 14. Mohd Izmar Yamin led Independence-X Aerospace, a Malaysian team, and three University of Central Florida studentsJason Dunn, Justin Karl, and Rubin D. Nunezled Omega Envoy. The Google Lunar X Prize competition was offering a US$20 million grand prize to the first team to land a privately funded spacecraft on the Moon, move it 500 meters, and transmit data, images, and video back to Earth. The X Prize Foundation was also offering a US$5 million prize to the second-place winner, as well as additional bonus prizes valued at US$5 million. The deadline to collect the full purse was 31 December 2012.(Space.com, New Teams Join Private Race to Moon, 9 October 2008, http://www.space.com/5957-teams-join- private-race-moon.html (accessed 11 August 2011); Google Lunar X Prize, Announcing Our Newest Preferred Partner, Analytical Graphics, Inc., and Two New Teams, 7 October 2008, http://www.googlelunarxprize.org/lunar/ featured-article/announcing-our-newest-preferred-partner-analytical-graphics-inc-and-two-new-t (accessed 17 August 2011).)
The X Prize Foundation announced that four new teams had registered for the Google Lunar X Prize competition, bringing the total number of registered teams to 14. The Google Lunar X Prize race would grant US$20 million to the first team to build a privately funded spacecraft that would land on the Moon, move 500 meters, and transmit data, images, and video back to Earth. The deadline for receiving the full purse had been set for 31 December 2012; after that date, the X Prize Foundation would reduce the value of the grand prize. The X Prize Foundation had also offered a second prize and bonus prizes. One of the new teams that had joined the competition was a mystery team. The contest rules permitted a team to keep its identity a secret until 20 July 2009. Also joining the race were the contests first Asian team, Team Advaeros of Malaysia, led by Hanidy Yusof; the Juxtopia Urban Robotics Brilliant Application National (JURBAN) team, led by Jayfus T. Doswell and composed of both professional and student engineers; and Team STELLAR, led by Richard D. Dell and based in North Carolina.(Space.com, Four New Teams Join Moon Rover Race, 22 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5383-teams-join- moon-rover-race.html (accessed 29 March 2011).)
The Peoples Republic of Chinas Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense released the first photographs that China had captured of the Moons polar regions. The 2,350-pound (1,066-kilogram) Change-1 lunar probe had taken the photographs. Change-1 had been orbiting the Moon at an altitude of 200 kilometers (124 miles) since 7 November 2007. On 4 January 2008, Change-1s cameras had adjusted, enabling them to photograph areas of the Moon above 70 north or south latitude. China intended the probe to produce a three-dimensional lunar-surface survey and to provide data and images for use in other experiments.(Xinhua News Agency, Change-1 Captures Pictures of Moons Polar Areas, 31 January 2008, http://news. xinhuanet.com/english/2008-01/31/content_7532773.htm (accessed 14 December 2010).)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics conducted a review of the status of NASAs space exploration initiative. The Subcommittee focused on the effect that the FY 2009 budget request would have on the ability of NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate (ESMD) to implement the George W. Bush administrations 2004 Vision for Space Exploration (VSE). Among other things, the VSE had mandated that NASA return to the Moon by 2020. The ESMDs Constellation Program was developing vehicles, such as the Orion CEV and the Ares-I crew launch vehicle (CLV), to implement the VSE. NASA had proposed that the FY 2009 budget request include US$3.5 billion in funding for the ESMD. During the hearing, Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern that space exploration projects were underfunded and might become a drain on NASAs resources. Furthermore, Cristina T. Chaplain of the Government Accountability Office (GAO) testified that, because of the complexity of the Constellation Program, GAO was concerned about the reliability of cost estimates for the programs. However, Richard J. Gilbrech, Associate Administrator of the ESMD, asked Congress to support the FY 2009 budget request, asserting that it would provide NASA with a stable source of funding.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Subcommittee Examines Status of NASAs Human Exploration Initiative, press release, 3 April 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/PressRoom/Item.aspx?ID=94 (accessed 19 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Subcommittee Examines Progress and Plans of NASAs Exploration Initiative, press release, 3 April 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=2142 (accessed 15 March 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA s Exploration Initiative: Status and Issues, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 3 April 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/ pkg/CHRG-110hhrg41471/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg41471.pdf (accessed 4 March 2011).)
NASA announced that it had exhibited a new robot rover that would be able to drill into the lunar surface to find water and oxygen-dense soil. The rover, Scarab, would not travel to the Moon itself. Instead, NASA had designed Scarab as a research rover, to give scientists an opportunity to study drilling technologies that they could use in the difficult environment of the Moon, noted for its continuous darkness, minimal gravity, and extremely abrasive and dense soil. The rover was a joint effort among many institutions. NASAs ARC had built Scarabs navigation system, the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) had funded a camera; NASAs GRC had been responsible for its power-management system; the Northern Centre for Advanced Technology had built its drill; and Carnegie Mellon University had overseen the rovers design and testing. The Human Robotic Systems and In-Situ Resource Utilization projects at NASAs JSC, part of the Exploration Technology Development Programs that LaRC managed, had collaborated on the project.(NASA, NASA Demonstrates Robot Technology for Moon Exploration, news release 08-067, 27 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/HQ_08067_lunar_robot.html (accessed 28 December 2010); CBC News, NASA Shows Off Rover Armed with Canadian-Made Drill, 27 February 2008, http://www.cbc.ca/ technology/story/2008/02/27/tech-rover-drill.html (accessed 5 January 2011).)
94NASA, NASA Tests Moon Imaging Spacecraft at Goddard, news release 08-194, 31 July 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08194_LRO_Environment_Tests.html (accessed 18 May 2011). stickier than scientists had expected. After allowing some of the water to evaporate from a sample measuring 3 cubic centimeters (0.18 cubic inches), scientists had used Phoenixs whirling rasp to grate the soil into the TEGA. The TEGA had analyzed the vapor that the sample released when heated to the melting point of 32F (0C), confirming the presence of water in the soil. The analyzer had also examined the sample while it was heating to 1,800F (982.22C). Although the Mars Odyssey spacecraft had first sighted ice on the planets surface while orbiting Mars in 2002, Phoenixs test was the first chemical analysis to prove the existence of water ice on Mars. NASA announced that it planned to add 90 days to Phoenixs original mission, extending the mission through 30 September 2008.(Kenneth Chang, Test of Mars Soil Sample Confirms Presence of Ice, New York Times, 1 August 2008; NASA, NASA Spacecraft Confirms Martian Water, Mission Extended, news release 08-195, 31 July 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08_195_Phoenix_water.html (accessed 18 May 2008); David Perlman, NASA Craft Probes Ice on Mars, San Francisco Chronicle, 1 August 2008.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to the Houston-based firm Oceaneering International for the design, development, and production of a new line of spacesuits for the Constellation Program. Under the new contract, NASA would order 109 spacesuits for astronauts to use on voyages to the ISS and, later, to the Moon. The cost-plus-award-fee contract included a basic performance period and two contract options. The basic performance period of the contract included the design, manufacture, and first flight of the suit components. Valued at US$183.8 million, the basic performance period would run from June 2008 to September 2014. Option 1, the development and testing of the components of a spacesuit for use on the Moons surface, had a value of US$302 million and would run from October 2010 through September 2018. Option 2, the production of the Orion suit, had a value of US$260 million and would run from October 2014 through September 2018. NASA also announced the subcontractors for the Constellation Program: Air-Lock of Milford, Connecticut; David Clark of Worcester, Massachusetts; Cimarron Software Services of Houston, Texas; Harris Corporation of Palm Bay, Florida; Honeywell International of Glendale, Arizona; Paragon Space Development of Tucson, Arizona; and United Space Alliance of Houston. Oceaneering International had competed for the contract against Explorations Systems and Technology, which was a joint venture of Hamilton Sundstrand and ILC Dover. Hamilton Sundstrand had been the primary contractor providing NASAs spacesuits since the 1960s.(NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Constellation Spacesuit for the Moon, news release C08-037, 12 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_C08037_Constellation_Spacesuit.html (accessed 12 June 2011); Associated Press, Oceaneering International Awarded Contract for New Spacesuit, 12 June 2008.)
Robert C. Seamans Jr., who had served as NASA Deputy Administrator during the Apollo era, died of heart failure at age 89. Seamans had begun his career as a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the 1940s. In 1960 he had accepted a position with NASA as Associate Administrator, and, from 1965 to 1968, he had served as Deputy Administrator. During his tenure, NASA had worked to achieve President John F. Kennedys goal of landing a man on the Moon, and Seamans had been instrumental to the success of that mission. In 1968 Seamans had left his position at NASA to return to MIT, although he remained a consultant to NASAs Administrator. Later that year, he had assisted in making the controversial decision to send Apollo 8 to orbit the Moon, a move that had laid the groundwork for the lunar landing. Seamans had served as Secretary of the U.S. Air Force from 1969 to 1973. In 1974 he had been appointed Administrator of the Energy, Research and Development Administration, a predecessor agency to the Department of Energy. In 1977 Seamans had accepted a position as Dean of the School of Engineering at MIT, where he had continued to teach aeronautics classes even after his formal retirement in 1984.(Peter Schworm, Robert Seamans; Helped Lead NASA During Apollo Missions, Boston Globe, 30 June 2008. 79 NASA, Astronaut James Reilly Leaves NASA, news release 08-162, 30 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08163_Seamans_statement.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
Chandrayaan 1, Indias first lunar satellite, launched at 00:52 (UT), aboard a PSLV-C11 rocket from Sriharikota, India. The 1.4-tonne (1,400-kilogram or 3,086.47-pound) spacecraft was on a two-year mission to map the lunar surface. It carried 11 scientific instruments: five instruments from India, three from ESA, two from NASA, and one from Bulgaria. NASAs instruments were the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) and Mini Synthetic Aperture Radar (Mini-SAR). M3 was an imaging spectrometer that would create the first map of the Moons entire surface at high spatial and spectral resolution. Because the map would show the mineral content of the lunar surface, scientists could use it to understand the geological origin and development of the Moon and the terrestrial planets. Additionally, lunar astronauts could use the map to locate water or other resources. Mini-SAR, an imaging radar, would map the permanently shadowed polar regions, helping scientists learn about possible locations of water ice and the nature of objects that hit the Moon. NASAs ground tracking station at the Johns Hopkins University APL would provide space-communications support to Chandrayaan 1.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, NASA Returns to the Moon with Instruments on Indian Spacecraft, news release 08-263, 20 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-263_NASA_on_Chandrayaan-1.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
The X Prize Foundation announced that two new teams had entered the Google Lunar X Prize. Euroluna was a European team primarily made up of members from Denmark, Italy, and Switzerland. Led by Palle Haastrup, the team planned to launch a small rover, which would have no redundant systems, so that it could maintain a low weight. Markus Bindhammer led the team Selene, based in China. The team planned to launch its Selena-1 lander in its Lunar Rocket Car 1 (LuRoCa-1) rover. Fourteen other teams had signed up for the competition, which featured a US$20 million grand prize, a US$5 million second prize, and US$5 million in bonus prizes. The grand prize would go to the team that could land a spacecraft on the Moon, move it 500 meters (1,640.42 feet), and transmit images back to Earth.(Tariq Malik, New Teams Join $30 Million Moon Rover Contest, Space.com, 16 December 2008, http://www. space.com/6232-teams-join-30-million-moon-rover-contest.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
A team of scientists led by Robert H. Brown of the University of Arizona, Tucson, announced in the journal Nature that NASAs Cassini spacecraft had gathered evidence that Saturns moon Titan has at least one lake of liquid hydrocarbons. The discovery made Titan the only known celestial body, besides Earth, to have liquid on its surface. Data from previous fly-bys had shown that Titan has several features that appear to be lakes, but scientists had been unsure whether these bodies contained liquid or solid material. Then, in a December 2007 fly-by, Cassini had used its visual and infrared mapping spectrometer (VIMS) to gather data on a lake in the southern polar region named Ontario Lacus. The lake covers an area of 7,800 square miles (20,201.91 square kilometers) and is composed of a liquid ethane solution, along with methane, other hydrocarbons, and nitrogen. At the surface temperature of Titan, which is -300F (- 184.44C), these compounds exist both as liquid and as gas. Cassinis data showed that the lake had experienced some evaporation at summer temperatures. Titan has a methane-based hydrological cycle; therefore, the scientists believed that a precipitation of liquid methane fills Ontario Lacus.(Jeanna Bryner, Giant Lake Confirmed on Saturns Moon Titan, Space.com, 31 July 2008, http://www.space. com/5673-giant-lake-confirmed-saturn-moon-titan.html (accessed 18 May 2011); NASA, NASA Confirms Liquid Lake in Saturn Moon, new release 08-193, 30 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08_193_ Titan_lake.html (accessed 18 May 2011); see also R. H. Brown et al., The Identification of Liquid Ethane in Titans Ontario Lacus, Nature 454, no. 7204 (31 July 2008): 607610.)
NASAs Cassini spacecraft flew by Saturns moon Enceladus, photographing the ice jets that spew from gorges at the Enceladuss south pole and taking measurements of them. The craft passed within 30 miles (48.28 kilometers) of the moons surface, traveling at 64,000 miles per hour (102,998.02 kilometers per hour), while snapping the highest-resolution images ever taken of the ice jets. The photographs revealed the features of the gorges known as tiger stripes, which are approximately 980 feet (298.70 meters) deep. Tiger stripes have V-shaped sides that are strewn with large chunks of ice and dusted with a fine material, apparently composed of snow-like ice particles. Scientists were interested in studying Enceladuss ice jets because of the possibility that they might indicate the presence of liquid water beneath the moons surface.(Space.com, Cassini Spots Icy Jet Sources on Saturn Moon, 15 August 2008, http://www.space.com/5738- cassini-spots-icy-jet-sources-saturn-moon.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Kenneth Chang, NASA Has Its Closest Look at Geysers on Saturn Moon, New York Times, 16 August 2008.)
The X Prize Foundation and Google announced the names of the first 10 teams to qualify to compete in the Google Lunar X Prize competition, which would award US$20 million to the first team to send a rover to the Moon. The winning team must build a rover that would land on the Moon, transmit a data signal back to Earth, travel at least 500 meters (1,640 feet), and then transmit another data signal. The X Prize Foundation would also give US$5 million to the second team to accomplish this goal, as well as offering additional prizes for other lunar achievements, such as the detection of lunar ice. The teams qualifying for the competition were Aeronautics and Cosmonautics Romanian Association (ARCA) of Romania; Astrobotic Technology of the United States; Chandah of the United States; FREDNET, a multinational team; LunaTrex of the Unites States; Micro-Space of the United States; Odyssey Moon of the Isle of Man; Quantum3 of the 22 United States; Southern California Selene Group of the United States; and Team Italia of Italy. The U.S. Navy cruiser Lake Erie fired a missile interceptor that struck down a disabled American spy satellite over the Pacific Ocean. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) managed the 5,000-pound (2,268-kilgram) satellite, which was orbiting 130 miles (209 kilometers) above Earths surface, at over 17,000 miles per hour (27,359 kilometers per hour), when it was hit at 22:30 (EST). The satellite had been inoperative since shortly after its launch in December 2006. Officials had been concerned that its fuel tank, filled with 1,000 pounds (454 kilograms) of toxic hydrazine, could pose a risk to humans if the satellite fell in a populated area. A heat-seeking missile interceptor, retooled to track the frozen satellite, had accomplished the strike. Military officials had timed the strike to occur after Space Shuttle Atlantiss 20 February 2008 return to Earth, but before 1 March 2008, when the satellites fall into the upper atmosphere would disrupt its orbit, making it more difficult to hit. Officials stated that they believed that the impact had been strong enough to incinerate the fuel tank, although they would not know for 24 hours whether that had actually occurred.(Thom Shanker, Missile Strikes a Spy Satellite Falling From Its Orbit, New York Times, 21 February 2008. 24 NASA, NASA Selects New Deputy Associate Administrator of Strategic Partnerships and Space Program Manager, news release 08-065, 22 February 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/feb/ HQ_08065_ New_Shuttle_Manage.html (accessed 28 December 2010).)
NASAs Lunar Science Institute, along with nine other international space agencies, signed a statement of intent to consider participating in the International Lunar Network (ILN), a cooperative effort to install mobile science stations on the Moon. The stations would replace the technology that NASA astronauts had placed on the lunar surface during the Apollo program. The signing of the statement took place in the course of a four-day NASA Lunar Science Conference at NASAs ARC. The conference had gathered approximately 500 scientists, from Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, to discuss the future of lunar exploration. Although scientists from the participating agencies planned to refine the ILN concept, the agencies expected to make initial decisions regarding communications standards and potential landing sites, and to select a set of scientifically equivalent core instruments to perform specific measurements.(NASA, NASA Hosts International Meeting for Lunar Science Discussions, new release 08-190, 29 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08190_NASA_hosts_ILN.html (accessed 18 May 2011); David Perlman, Scientists Swap Moon, Mars Exploration Plans, San Francisco Chronicle, 22 July 2008.)
A team of scientists, led by Geraint H. Jones of the Millard Space Science Laboratory in London, announced in the journal Science that NASAs Cassini spacecraft had gathered evidence of the presence of rings around Saturns moon Rhea. Cassini had flown close to Rhea in November 2005. Using a set of six instruments to take samples and measurements of Rheas atmosphere, Cassini had detected a decrease in the number of electrons on either side of the moon. The team believed that a ring of debris orbiting Rhea had absorbed the electronsthe first time scientists had detected the presence of a ring of debris around a moon. The researchers estimated that the particles comprising the ring ranged in size from pebbles to boulders. NASAs JPL was managing the Cassini project, a joint mission of NASA, ESA, and the Italian space agency (Agenzia Spaziale ItalianaASI).(NASA, Saturns Moon Rhea Also May Have Rings, news release 08-074, 6 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08074_Rings_Around_Rhea.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Associated Press, Saturn Moon Rhea May Have Rings, 7 March 2008; G. H. Jones et al., The Dust Halo of Saturns Largest Icy Moon, Rhea, Science 319, no. 5868 (7 March 2008): 13801384.)
NASA and ATK successfully test-fired a launch-abort motor for the Orion CEV at ATKs facility in Promontory, Utah. The 5.50-second test was the first of its kind since the beginning of the Apollo Program and the first test ever of a motor with reverse-flow propulsion technology at such a scale. NASA had designed the launch-abort motor for use in case of an emergency on the launchpad or in the first 300,000 feet (91,440 meters) of ascent. If necessary, the motor could lift the crew module off the Ares-I rocket, using 500,000 pounds ( s) of thrust. The motor, which was more than 17 feet (5.18 meters) tall and 3 feet ( ) in diameter, featured a composite case and an exhaust turn-flow technology instead of a tower, a configuration that improved the motors weight and performance.(NASA, NASA, ATK Successfully Test First Orion Launch Abort Motor, news release 08-306, 20 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-306_OrionLASmotor_Success.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
NASA scientists released data that the Cassini spacecraft had collected on 12 March 2008, when it swooped through a geyser of water vapor erupting from the surface of Saturns moon Enceladus. The data revealed that the water vapor contained acetylene, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, methane, and propane. The organic material composing Enceladus closely resembled that of a comet, a discovery that surprised scientists and raised questions regarding the formation and origin of Saturns moons. Cassini had also generated new heat maps, which showed significantly warmer temperatures on Enceladus than anticipated, particularly along the moons tiger stripesthe deep fissures at its south pole. Temperatures along the fissures had registered at -135F (-93C), which was 63F (17C) warmer than previously recorded temperatures in that area and 200F (93C) warmer than the temperatures of other areas of the moon. Temperatures this warm raised the possibility that Enceladus could have subterranean liquid water.(NASA, Cassini Tastes Organic Material at Saturns Geyser Moon, news release 08-089, 26 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08089_Cassini_Enceladus_Flyby.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Dave Mosher, Seeds of Life Found Near Saturn, Space.com, 26 March 2008, http://www.space.com/5179- seeds-life-saturn.html (accessed 1 February 2011).)
NASA announced that Assistant Administrator for External Relations Michael F. OBrien had signed a joint statement of intent with Munki Lee, the Republic of Koreas (South Koreas) Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (MEST) Director-General for Big Science. The statement of intent, signed in Seoul, was an agreement between NASA and MEST to conduct dialogues that would identify new cooperative endeavors related to aeronautics research, Earth science, human spaceflight, planetary science, and space exploration. The agencies expected that they might discuss topics for possible collaborative endeavors, such as planning exploration architecture, exchanging research analysis and data, and contributing hardware and scientific instruments to future missions. They might also consider involvement in the Global Exploration Strategy, a discussion between 14 space agencies to increase cooperation in space exploration; the International Lunar Network, an initiative to establish a robotic network on the Moon; and the International Space Exploration Coordination Group, an international effort to coordinate space exploration activities. NASA and MEST expected to prepare a report after 8 months of dialogue. (NASA, NASA and Korea Sign Statement of Intent for Future Cooperation, news release 08-277, 30 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08277_Korea_Agreement.html (accessed 8 August 2011). 139 NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Mission, Crew Operations Support, news release C08-064, 31 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_C08-064_Mission_Ops.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Brauns German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Brauns program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew Americas first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.
A team of researchers led by Ralph D. Lorenz of Johns Hopkins Universitys APL announced in the journal Science that NASAs Cassini spacecraft had discovered evidence of an underground ocean composed of water and ammonia on Saturns moon Titan. During 19 flybys made between October 2005 and May 2007, Cassinis SAR had gathered images of the moons surface that showed that distinct features on Titans surface, such as lakes, canyons, and mountains, had shifted location over time by as much as 19 miles (31 kilometers). The scientists believed that this shifting had occurred because winds in Titans heavy atmosphere had moved the moons thin surface crust, which was separated from the moons core by an ocean, measuring 60120 miles (97193 kilometers) deep. Scientists had previously discovered evidence of underground oceans on other moons in Earths solar system. However, the researchers were particularly interested to discover the presence of liquid water on Titan, because that moon has many of the same organic compounds as Earth.(NASA, Cassini Spacecraft Finds Ocean May Exist Beneath Titans Crust, news release 08-085, 20 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08085_cassini_ocean.html (accessed 2 February 2011); Charles Q. Choi, Evidence for Ocean Found at Saturns Moon Titan, Space.com, 20 March 2008, http://www.space.com/ 5151-evidence-ocean-saturn-moon-titan.html (accessed 3 February 2011); Ralph D. Lorenz et al., Titans Rotation Reveals an Internal Ocean and Changing Zonal Winds, Science 319, no. 5870 (21 March 2008): 16491651.)
John S. Bull, a member of NASAs original class of 19 astronauts, died at the age of 73. He had never flown in space. Bull had begun to train as an astronaut in 1966. In early 1967, NASA had chosen him as a member of the crew of LTA-8, a thermal-vacuum test of the Moon lander. However, sinus problems had prevented him from participating in the mission. In November 1967, NASA had selected Bull for the support crew of the Apollo 8 mission. However, he had resigned from the astronaut corps in July 1968 because he had a rare pulmonary disorder. Bull had obtained a Masters degree and a PhD from Stanford University, returning to NASA in 1973. He had performed flight-test research at NASAs ARC until 1986 and had then managed NASA- wide research programs in autonomous systems technology for space applications, until his retirement in 1989.(Collectspace.com, John S. Bull, Former NASA Astronaut, Dies, 14 August 2008, http://www.collectspace.com/ news/news-081408a.html (accessed 15 July 2011).)
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced that its lunar orbiter craft, Chandrayaan 1, had dropped a Moon Impact Probe to the lunar surface. The 64-pound ( probe, which measured 14.70 inches (37.34 centimeters) by 14.7 inches ( by 18.5 inches (46.99 centimeters), landed on the Moon at 10:01 (EST). The probes mission was to test soft-landing technologies and to observe the lunar surface. It carried a mass spectrometer to study the lunar atmosphere, a radar altimeter to measure the probes altitude, and a video imaging system to photograph the descent. Chandrayaan 1, a US$80 million mission, had launched on 22 October 2008, joining China, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States as the only nations that had sent missions to the Moon.(Space.com, India Slams Probe into the Moon, 14 November 2008, http://www.space.com/6113-india-slams- probe-moon.html (accessed 25 August 2011); Associated Press, Indias First Lunar Probe Lands on the Moon, 15 November 2008.)
NASA announced the selection of the Avcoat ablator system for the Orion crew modules thermal protection system at the base of the craft. During reentry into Earths atmosphere, the base of the spacecraft would endure more heat than any other area of Orion, but the Avcoat system would enable the base to erode, or ablate, in a controlled way, transporting heat away from the crew module during its descent. Over a period of three years, NASAs Orion Thermal Protection System Advanced Development Project had considered eight different candidate materials before choosing the two final candidatesPhenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) and Avcoat, both of which had proven successful in space missions. NASA had used Avcoat for the Apollo capsule heat shield and on select regions of the Space Shuttles orbiter in its earliest flights and had resumed production of Avcoat for the study. Avcoat was made of silica fibers with an epoxy-novalic resin filled in a fiberglass-phenolic honeycomb. NASA engineers had manufactured it directly onto the heat-shield substructure. Unlike Avcoat, PICA was manufactured in blocks and attached to the vehicle after fabrication. NASA had used PICA on its first robotic space mission dedicated to exploring the comet Stardust, the first mission to return samples since Apollo. Project engineers had performed rigorous thermal, structural, and environmental testing on Avcoat and PICA, comparing the two materials mass, thermal and structural performance, life-cycle costs, ease of manufacturing, reliability, and certification challenges. NASA and Orions prime contractor Lockheed Martin ultimately chose Avcoat as the more robust, reliable, and mature system.(NASA, NASA Selects Material for Orion Spacecraft Heat Shield, news release 09-080, 7 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-080_Orion_Heat_Shield.html (accessed 17 May 2011). 53 NASA, Space Station Crew Lands in Soyuz After Successful Mission, news release 09-081, 8 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-081_Exp18_Landing.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Associated Press, U.S. Space Tourists Return Put Off by a Day, 3 April 2009.)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASAs safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASAs diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAPs annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bushs 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares Is and Orions initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report, media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, The Budgetary Implications of NASAs Current Plans for Space Exploration (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
The Peoples Republic of Chinas State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense announced that Change-1, Chinas first lunar probe, had impacted the Moon at 4:13 p.m., Beijing time, successfully ending its 16-month mission. China had launched Change-1 on 24 October 2007, on a mission to produce the first full map of the Moons surface. Change-1 had accomplished the mission using stereo radar. The planned lunar impact, the culmination of the first phase of Chinas three-stage Moon mission, would enable China to acquire experience that would help it land the second Chinese lunar probe, scheduled to launch in 2012.(Xinhua News Agency,, Chinas Lunar Probe Change-1 Impacts Moon, 2 March 2009; BBC News, Chinese Probe Crashes into Moon, 2 March 2009.)
2011); John Johnson Jr. NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped, Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASAs ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committees opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Marss moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen insteadfirst, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Marsplans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earths orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The reports main recommendations involved options for the United States path forward in space exploration. Three of the committees eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moons gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere, 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction, New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, See What the Committee is Doing, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASAs Human Space Flight Program: Report of Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA announced that its LCROSS Mission had successfully created dual impacts on the Moons surface, in search of water ice. NASA had launched the LCROSS spacecraft on 18 June 2009 as a companion mission to LRO. The LCROSS craft had traveled 5.6 million miles (9.01 million kilometers) over 113 days. To prepare for the mission finale, the LCROSS satellite had separated from its Centaur upper-stage rocket approximately 54,000 miles (86,905 kilometers) above the Moon on 8 October at 6:50 p.m. (PDT). The Centaur had traveled toward the lunar surface at a speed of 1.5 miles (2.41 kilometers) per second, crashing into the Cabeus crater, a permanently shadowed region near the Moons south pole, shortly after 4:31 a.m. (PDT). Instruments aboard LCROSS had observed the impact for approximately 4 minutes, while traveling through the dust created by Centaurs crash, before impacting the crater itself at 4:36 a.m. (PDT). NASA reported that other observatories, as well as the amateur astronomy community, had captured images and video of both impacts, commenting that NASA intended to share its data with the LCROSS science team. Jennifer L. Heldmann, ARC coordinator of the LCROSS observation campaign, explained that one of the missions goals was to encourage people to view the LCROSS impacts in as many ways as possible. She anticipated that the LCROSS campaign would provide an enormous amount of corroborated information, fascinating to many observers.
ISRO ended its US$82 million Chandrayaan mission after failing to restore communication with the craft. ISRO had lost contact with Chandrayaan 1 on 29 August. Chandrayaan 1, known as Moon Craft, had launched on 22 October 2008 on a mission to map the lunar terrain in preparation for a future mission that would land a rover on the Moons surface. ISRO had designed the craft to orbit the Moon for two years, at an altitude of 100 kilometers (62 miles). Chandrayaan 1 carried 11 payloads, including an Indian-designed terrain-mapping camera, ESA mapping instruments, radiation-measuring equipment belonging to the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, and two NASA devices designed to assess mineral composition and to look for ice deposits. ISRO Chief Madhavan Nair reportedly told the state-run broadcaster Doordarshan that a malfunction in computers on board the craft had led to the failure in communications. Nair also stated that a committee of scientists would investigate the incident.(Ed Johnson, India Ends Lunar Mission After Losing Probe Signal, Bloomberg News, 31 August 2009; Associated Press, Indian Moon Orbiter Loses Contact, 29 August 2009.)
NASA announced that its Cassini craft had detected sodium salts in ice grains of Saturns outermost ring, an indication that Saturns moon Enceladus might harbor a reservoir of liquid water beneath its surface. In 2005 Cassini had discovered on Enceladus water-ice jets, which replenish Saturns outermost ring with tiny ice grains and vapor. Analysis of the data from Cassinis cosmic-dust detector concluded that only the presence of liquid water could account for the dissolution of the significant amounts of minerals necessary to produce the levels of salt detected in the ring. Frank Postberg, Cassini scientist for the cosmic-dust analyzer at the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg, Germany, explained that the grains include table salt and carbonates, like soda, in concentrations that match the predicted composition of an Enceladus ocean. He added that, if the liquid source is indeed an ocean, its presence, coupled with the heat measured near the moons south pole and the organic compounds found in the plumes, creates an environment suitable for the formation of life precursors.(NASA, Salt Finding from NASAs Cassini Hints at Ocean Within Saturn Moon, news release 09-147, 24 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-147_Cassini_Enceladus_Salts.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA announced its selection of the seven research teams that would become the first members of NASAs Lunar Science Institute, headquartered at Ames Research Center (ARC). NASA had established the Institute to support scientific research related to NASAs existing lunar science programs, in coordination with U.S. space exploration policy. NASA had selected the members using a competitive evaluation process that had begun in June 2008. The seven teams were from Brown University in Rhode Island; Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland; the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston, Texas; NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland; Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado; the Lunar University Node for Astrophysics Research at the University of Colorado in Boulder; and NASAs Lunar Science Institute of the Colorado Center for Lunar Dust and Atmospheric Studies at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Proposals for lunar research included the study of the history of lunar impacts and how such impacts have affected the Moons evolution; the study of the Moons formative years; the study of the dynamic response of the lunar environment; and the use of the Moon as a base from which to study the cosmos. NASA had modeled the Lunar Science Institute after its Astrobiology Institute, also housed at ARC.(NASA, NASA Selects Research Teams for Lunar Science Institute, news release 09-004, 9 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-004_Lunar_Institute_members.html (accessed 1 February 2011).)
NASA announced that its Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), on board ISROs Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft, had detected water molecules in the polar regions of the Moon. Data from the Visual and Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (VIMS), on NASAs Cassini spacecraft had helped to corroborate the findings, as had data from the High-Resolution Infrared Imaging Spectrometer on NASAs spacecraft EPOXIExtrasolar Planet Observations and Characterization (EPOCh) and Deep Impact Extended Investigation (DIXI). M3s spectrometer had measured light reflecting off the Moons surface at infrared wavelengths, splitting the spectral colors small enough to reveal a new level of detail in surface composition. The M3 science team found that the pattern of absorption of the wavelengths at the lunar surface was consistent with the absorption pattern for water molecules and hydroxyl, which is a molecule consisting of one oxygen atom and one hydrogen atom. In 1999 Cassinis VIMS instrument had also collected data showing water molecules and hydroxyl, but that data had never been published. Roger N. Clark, a U.S. Geological Survey scientist in Denver who had been a member of both the VIMS and the M3 teams, remarked that the data from the two instruments closely agreed, showing as much as 1,000 water molecule parts per million in the lunar soil. To confirm the VIMS and M3 data further, scientists examined EPOXI mission data from June 2009. EPOXI data not only confirmed the findings but expanded on them. Jessica Sunshine, a member of the University of Marylands EPOXI team, as well as Deputy Principal Investigator and member of the M3 team, remarked that the extended spectral range and the views over the Moons north pole had enabled scientists to explore the distribution of both water and hydroxyl as a function of temperature, latitude, composition, and time of day. She added that the analysis unequivocally confirmed the presence of water molecules and hydroxyl on the lunar surface, revealing that the entire surface of the Moons north pole appeared to be hydrated during some portion of the lunar day.(NASA, NASA Instruments Reveal Water Molecules on Lunar Surface, news release 09-222, 24 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-222_Moon_Water_Molecules.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, Its Not Lunacy, Probes Find Water in Moon Dirt, 24 September 2009; Kenneth Chang, In Surprise, Moon Shows Signs of Water, New York Times, 24 September 2009.)
NASA announced that three teams out of a field of 19 had claimed a total of US$750,000 in prizes at the 2009 Regolith Excavation Challenge on 18 October, marking the first time that any team in the competitions three-year history had qualified for a cash prize. NASA required the competitors to use mobile, robotic digging machines to excavate a minimum of 330 pounds (149 kilograms) of regolith, or simulated Moon dirt, and to deposit the regolith into a container within 30 minutes. NASA had further stipulated that the vehicles must contain their own power source and weigh no more than 176 pounds (79.8 kilograms). Pauls Robotics of Worcester, Massachusetts, had earned first place and US$500,000, for excavating 1,103 pounds (500 kilograms) of regolith within the allotted time of 30 minutes. Three-time returning competitor Terra Engineering of Gardena, California, had won second place and US$150,000 for excavating 595 pounds (270 kilograms) of regolith, and first-time competitor Team Braundo of Rancho Palos Verde, California, had earned third place and US$100,000 for excavating 580 pounds (263 kilograms) of regolith.(NASA, Teams Win at NASA National Lunar Robotics Competition, news release 09-245, 19 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-245_Regolith_winners.html (accessed 30 September 2011).)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttles successor craft. The Shuttles successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Programs Ares I-X mission management office at NASAs JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASAs KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicles first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rockets booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, NASAs Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test, news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASAs New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight, 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break, New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, Ares I-X FliesBut Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
JAXAs first lunar probe Kaguya (Selene) successfully completed its approximately one-year- and-a-half mission when it made a controlled crash landing on the Moon. JAXA had launched Kaguya in September 2007. Kaguya had conducted nominal operations for approximately 10 months, performing an extended operational phase for an additional seven months. Before undergoing the controlled crash landing, Kaguya had orbited the Moon, to map the lunar surface and to study the Moons mineral distribution and gravity levels.(Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Kaguya (Selene) Slam Crashed to the Moon, JAXA press release 11 June 2009, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2009/06/20090611_kaguya_e.html (accessed 27 July 2011); Shino Yuasa, Japans First Lunar Probe Ends Mission, Associated Press, 11 June 2009.)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion projects preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicles capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martinled industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, NASAs Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones, news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, NASAs New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty, Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moons south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor, news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA announced that X-Prize Foundation and NASA would host the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander X-Prize Challenge (NGLLXPC) awards at a ceremony in Washington, DC. Masten Space Systems, led by David Masten, had won a first prize of US$1 million for its Xoie rocket prototype, which had competed in the Level-1 contest. Masten Space Systems had also won a second place award of US$150,000 in the Level-2 contest for its Xombie rocket. Texas-based Armadillo Aerospaces Scorpius rocket had qualified for the Level-1 prize in September but had lost to Xoie in its flight on 30 October in the accuracy category, receiving US $500,000 for second place. Modeled after the US$10 million Ansari X-Prize competition for private-sector spaceflight, NGLLXPC was one of NASAs Centennial Challenges, intended to encourage the development of new rocket technologies for use in future spacecraft. NASA required contestants to build and fly a rocket-powered vehicle simulating the flight of a vehicle to the Moon. The lander had to take off vertically, travel horizontally, and fly a mission profile designed to demonstrate both power and control, before landing accurately at another spot. Then the craft must take off again, travel horizontally back to its original launch point, and land successfully. The lander must complete the entire exercise within 2 hours and 15 minutes. NASA provided the prize money for the Level-1 and Level-2 contests, and the X-Prize Foundation managed the competition, with commercial sponsorship from Northrop Grumman.
NASA announced that it had concluded two weeks of technology-development tests on two prototype lunar rovers in the Arizona desert at Black Point Lava Point, as part of the decade-old program Desert RATS (Research and Technology Studies). The annual Desert RATS excursions allowed NASA to analyze and to refine technologies and procedures in extreme environments on Earth. For the lunar-rover test, two crew membersan astronaut and a geologisthad simulated a 14-day mission, living for more than 300 hours inside NASAs prototype Lunar Electric Rover and scouting the area for features of geological interest. They had worn spacesuits to conduct simulated moonwalks in which they collected samples; docked to a simulated habitat; driven the rover across difficult terrain; performed a rescue mission; and made a four-day trip across lava. Before the test, NASAs K10 scout robot had identified areas of interest for the crew to explore. NASAs All-Terrain Hex-Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (Tri-ATHLETE), a heavy-lift rover, had carried the simulated habitat to which the rover had docked.(NASA, NASA Concludes Robotics Tests for the Moon in Arizona, news release 09-214, 15 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-214_Desert_RATS_concludes.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
