The Los Angeles Times reported that a dispute was brewing within NASA regarding who was to be assigned to the management team overseeing work on the redesigned Space Station.  NASA
Onboard computers aborted the launch of Space Station Discovery just three seconds before liftoff. This was the fourth delay for Discovery, which was halted twice for technical problems in July  and rescheduled because of a meteor shower on August 11. NASA said the next try could come in three to six weeks.
By a one-vote margin, the House of Representatives voted to fund Space Station Freedom. As a result of a 216-215 vote, the program escaped an attempt by budget-cutting lawmakers to scrap the multibillion-dollar project. (WSJ, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93; LA Times, June 24/93; W Times, June 24/93; USA Today, June 24/93; AP, June 24/93; UPI, June 23/94; RTw, June 23/93; W Post, June 24/93)
Richard H. Kohrs, Director, Space Station Freedom, retired from NASA after 30 years of service. Kohrs was appointed Space Station Freedom Director on June 1, 1989. (NASA Release  93-160)
Writing in the Washington Times, Representative George E. Brown, California Democrat and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, argued that critics of the Space Station were themselves partially responsible for the delay, confusion, and high costs of the Station because of the annual sniping, redrafting and retrenchment to which they have subjected the  Space Station. Brown maintained that the United States needs the jobs provided by the Space Station, needs the scientific challenges of space-based design and engineering, and needs the emotional satisfaction of exploration and discovery.
An editorial in the Washington Post noted that in light of the budget deficit it was difficult to quarrel with Congress's decision to kill funding for the Superconducting Super Collider. By that same token, however, the Space Station deserved to be killed, especially because the Super Collider had the potential to contribute to human knowledge while the Space Station did not. (W Post, June 30/93)
The Washington Post reported that NASA's dream of building a permanent human outpost in space was generating much controversy. President Clinton's decision to shrink Space Station funding and his mandate that the station be redesigned added to the controversy. (W Post, May 17/93)
The Russians, eager to hawk their space wares to the West, were scheduled to hold a conference on the Mir Space Station July  27 to July  28 at the Dulles Hyatt in Herndon, Virginia.  Hosted by NPO Engergia, manufacturer of the Mir, the conference is scheduled to cover all aspects of the platform.  A large delegation was expected from the NASA Space Station redesign team. (Washington Technology, Jul 15/93)
NASA's $30 billion Space Station survived its third, and presumably final, vote in the House of Representatives, when members voted 248-184 to keep it from being grounded by budget-cutters (H Post, Nov 23/93; H Chron, Nov 22/93)
According to a report in Space News, NASA and White House officials agreed last week to consider partner concerns about the Space Station design effort. The U.S. Government would give their European, Japanese, and Canadian partners greater representation in the project and ensure that any alternative design did not exclude their hardware. The agreement was laid out in a March 19 document. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
Several life science researchers questioned whether a redesigned Space Station would accomplish enough life science objectives to be worth the investment. Researchers at a meeting of the NationaL Research Council's Space Studies Board said that they expected a redesign to either shrink or reduce the centrifuge, a set of spinning modules designed for precise gravity experiments on animals aboard the station. Harold Guy, a professor at the University of California's School of Medicine in LaJolla, California, said that without a large centrifuge, much of the station's experimental value for life scientists would be lost. "The life science community may bail out," said Fred Turek, a neurobiologist and chairman of the space biology and medicine committee on the National Research Council's Space Studies Board. (Space News, Mar 1/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, aerospace engineer James F. Glass advocated funding the Space Station, arguing that not only does NASA provide jobs and dreams, but it also keeps the country pulling together for America's future. He noted that when NASA, with all its faults, spends a dollar, the taxpayer usually receives a dollar's value.  Ultimately, in Glass's view, the country needs to focus on more than survival; it must reach for the stars. (LA Times, Jul 20/93)
A New York Times editorial suggested that if pain was to be spread fairly, the country's two biggest science projects, the $8.3 billion Superconducting Super Collider now being built in Texas and the $30 billion Space Station, had to be cut along with other vital programs.
Static firing tests of a propulsion development test article for Space Station Freedom began at NASA's White Sand's Test Facility (WSTF) in New Mexico in late December. The tests checked the preliminary design for the propulsion module that was to be used for Space Station attitude control, orientation, speed and altitude control, and avoidance of space debris. (NASA Release 93-7)
Writing in the Chicago Tribune, commentator Joan Beck called on Congress to kill the Space Station. She admitted that killing the project would cost jobs, but argued that doing so was necessary if progress were to be made in cutting back the deficit. (C Trib, June 24/93)
The media reported that Representative George E. Brown, chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, told a news conference that NASA's effort to save Space Station Freedom was doomed unless the project continued with a scaled-down version of the current design. Although the streamlined model of Freedom was the most expensive of the three options being analyzed, Brown noted that it was also the one with years of experience and $8 billion in development costs behind it. (WP, May 21/93; H Chron, May 21/93; LA Times, May 21/93; W Times, May 21/93; NY Times, May 21/93; W Post, May 21/93; AvWk, May 24/93)
Studies on the feasibility of using Soyuz TM spacecraft as crew return vehicles for the U.S./international Space Station were scheduled to enter a more detailed phase according to NASA Associate Administrator Arnold D. Aldrich. NPO ENERGIA was to study modifications, launch options, and costs for one year. The Soviet hardware could allow NASA to permanently staff the station by 1998 or 1998. (AvWk, Jan 4/1993)
Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported that the White House had begun to review the various options for redesign of the Space Station. There were reports that the President might be wavering in his support for the Station and perhaps would be willing to sacrifice it for his broader economic goals. (AvWk, June 14/93)
The magazine Science reviewed the three main redesigns of the Space Station, noting that the White House's mandate that NASA produce a less costly station design had upset the U.S.'s international partners. (Science, May 28/93)
According to NASA, President Clinton's plans for the Space Station could threaten some of the 125 Maryland jobs connected with the project. About $14 million was being spent in Maryland on station-related work. (B Sun, Feb 18/93)
Europe, Japan, and Canada--the United States's partners in the Space Station project--rejected NASA's move to redesign the project. They instead demanded that the team begin by considering revisions to the current plan. They warned that they might be forced to pull out of the program if the United States changed the plan significantly. (Space News, March 15-21/93)
In an article in the Washington Post Magazine, entitled "Has NASA Lost Its Way?," author Peter Carlson described his viewing of a Shuttle launch, which he called inspiring," and reviewed the history of Space Station Freedom. About the Space Station, he concluded, "So if they can cut the waste and trim the fat, if they can really do it cheaper, faster, better, then let them do it." (W Post, May 30/93)
NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the agency's new office of Space Science, effective immediately. During his career at NASA, Diaz served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, managed the Galileo and Ulysses programs in the Solar System Exploration Division, and developed space science programs for Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 93-53)
The President's 1994 budget request for NASA called for an increase over last year's budget and contained key provisions for the Space Station program and the development of important new technologies. The President was to propose a $14.7 billion budget for NASA for fiscal year 1994, up from $14.1 billion during the current year.
In a report delivered to the White House, a panel appointed by the President said it found the two cheaper options for a Space Station to be the "most deserving of further
The media announced that NASA had unveiled four designs for a scaled-down Space Station. None of the designs, however, could be built as cheaply as the White House had requested and still meet the orbital laboratory's main goals. The team presented cost figures ranging from a low of $11.9 billion to $13.3 billion to build the design that more completely resembled the Space Station Freedom. Three of thee options were similar to the original design of the Space Station but achieved savings through reduction in hardware, management, and capability.
The media reported that NASA administrators were seeking to quell the concerns of European space officials over the redesign of the planned U.S. Space Station. Clinton's decision to redesign the project could have "disastrous effects' if it results in an orbiting lab unsuitable to foreign partners, a German executive said. (WSJ, May 14/93; AP, May 13/93)
NASA settled a union grievance with Reston, Virginia Space Station employees and cleared the way toward opening a new office in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Sep 9/93)
NASA announced that it had cleared the instruments scheduled to be used for the Hubble Telescope repair mission.  It was feared that the instruments had been contaminated by sandy  grit that had seeped into the cargo room where the equipment was being stored. The grit problem forced NASA to move the Endeavour to a different launch pad. (B Sun, Nov 16/93; W Times, Nov 16/93; USA Today, Nov 16/93; RTw, Nov 15/93)
U.S. Senate candidate Richard Fisher called Space Station Freedom a "pork barrel" project in a speech on Friday. Fisher, a Texas investor, was running as a Democrat in a special May 1 election. Fisher had advised the independent presidential campaign of Ross Perot, who had criticized the lack of spending controls on the Space Station project. Fisher, who in the past had voiced support for the Superconducting Super Collider, said that he was still studying the project's worth. (H Chron, Apr 24/93)
A Washington Post editorial had generally favorable comments regarding President Clinton's economic stimulus-deficit plan, noting that he had taken on some formidable interest groups. It suggested, however, that he  could have killed the Space Station as "unaffordable in present circumstances." A Washington Times editorial argued that both the Space Station and the Superconducing Super Collider should be cut. A Philadelphia Inquirer editorial called for a delay in building the Space Station because of funding issues. (W Post, Feb 24/93; W Times, Feb 26/93; P Inq, Mar 7/93)
Scientists reported that NASA's Galileo spacecraft had detected changes in the interplanetary magnetic field as it passed the asteroid Ida on August 28. (NASA Release 93-193)
NASA announced that it had notified all its contractors to discontinue all overtime on Space Station work and said that it would "restrict new spending." (W Times, Feb 27/93)
In its annual report, NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel said that the Space Station had "progressed considerably in the past year." The report went on to say that the effort "exhibits a degree of stability and continuity that has previously been absent." (APn, Mar 18/93)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle criticized political opponents of a permanent U.S. Space Station, arguing that the Space Station's detractors risk costing this nation its scientific and technological preeminence for decades to come. (H Chron, June 2/93)
NASA announced that the Space Station redesign team would submit its final report on three design options to the White House Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station on Monday, June 7. The three options included a modular concept that would use existing flight-proven hardware, a derivative of the current Space Station Freedom design, and a Space Station that could be placed into orbit with a single launch of a Shuttle-driven vehicle. (NASA Release 93-104; UPI, June 6/1993; AP, June 7/93; NY Times, June 6/93; W Post, June 6/93; B Sun, June 6/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, commentator James Flanigan made the case for funding the Space Station, reminding readers of the Vest Commission report, ordered last March by the White House. The report listed three main goals of the Space Station program: to learn about space travel, specifically how human beings and materials react to prolonged weightless exposure; to gather technological and engineering knowledge; and to further international cooperation. (LA Times, June 28/93)
The newly released proposals to redesign Space Station Freedom drew mixed reviews on Capitol Hill, with supporters praising the effort and detractors citing the cost of the project as further evidence that it should be abandoned. (W Post, June 9/93; LA Times, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; P Inq, June 9/93; AP, June 9/93; APn, June 8/93; RTw, June 8/93; H Chron, June 9/93; H Post, June 10/93)
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved $1.9 billion for continued work on Space Station Freedom, but the project faced a fight in the full Senate, where opponents wanted to cut funding. (USA Today, Sep 10/93)
Writing in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Daniel S. Greenberg noted that "times are bad" for the so-called mega projects of our era: Star Wars, the Space Station, and the super atom smasher in Texas. He, warned, however that big-science mobilization should not automatically be suspect, suggesting, for example, that the country would benefit from an all-out effort on a project such as the electric car. (P Inq, May 21/93)
NASA described Space Station Freedom as a laboratory for industry as well as government and set aside a third of the Station's experiment space for commercial research. NASA planned to begin launching pieces of Space Station Freedom into orbit in 1996. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
In letters to the editor of the Baltimore Sun, two Johns Hopkins University physics professors defended the importance of the Super Collider. Both writers said that the project represented basic research of the highest caliber and noted that its fate should not be tied to that of the Space Station. (B Sun, Jul 1/93)
