Data from NASA’s HST revealed 16 objects, possibly the most distant planets ever observed by the HST. Scientists believed that the objects were extrasolar planets—planets located outside of Earth’s solar system—orbiting various stars in the Milky Way’s central region, 26,000 light- years away from Earth. Because of the distance and faintness of the objects’ star systems, scientists could acquire mass measurements for only two of the planets. Therefore, they designated the objects as “candidate” extrasolar planets. The HST data also revealed that five of the newly discovered planets were Ultra-Short-Period Planets (USPPs), a type of planet not found in searches of neighboring areas of the Milky Way. USPPs orbit their stars in less than one Earth day.(NASA, “Hubble Finds Extrasolar Planets Far Across Galaxy,” news release 06-326, 4 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06326_Extra_planets.html (accessed 31 March 2010).)
An international team of scientists led by Giacomo Giampieri of NASA’s JPL reported in Nature the results of their study measuring Saturn’s rotation period. Using magnetic field data collected by NASA’s Cassini spacecraft in 2003 and 2004, the researchers estimated that the rotation rate of Saturn is almost 8 minutes longer than the 10 hours, 39 minutes, and 22.4 seconds calculated in 1980. Scientists had based the 1980 measurement on the Voyager spacecraft’s observations of the radio waves generated when solar radiation hits Saturn’s atmosphere. Whereas scientists were able to measure the rotation period of other planets by comparing their magnetic and rotational axes, they could not use this procedure for Saturn, because its rotational axis is nearly identical to the axis of its magnetic field. Instead, scientists had measured distortions in the radio signals that Saturn emits—distortions that they believed were related to the planet’s magnetic field—to estimate the planet’s rotation rate. According to Giampieri, a planet’s rotation rate indicates the amount of centrifugal force acting on the interior of the planet, data that provides “a very important ingredient for planetary modeling.”(Giacomo Giampieri et al., “A Regular Period for Saturn’s Magnetic Field that May Track its Internal Rotation,” Nature 441, no. 7089 (4 May 2006): 62–64; Ker Than, “Length of Saturn’s Day Updated Based on Mystery Signal,” Space.com, 3 May 2006.)
