NASA officially declared Mars Pathfinder “dead” six months after its mission ended, after getting no response to one last set of commands. Pathfinder’s mission had ended on 27 September 1997, when NASA lost communication with the craft. Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner had landed on Mars on 4 July 1997, and NASA had expected the two craft to “live” on Mars for only 30 days. However, Pathfinder had exceeded its mission by eight weeks, and Sojourner had roamed the Martian terrain 10 weeks longer than the originally planned one-week operation.(Dan Whitcomb for Reuters, “Scientists Declare Pathfinder Officially ‘Dead’,” 10 March 1998.)
New data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor Mission provided insights into the planet’s deeply layered terrain, its strong, localized magnetic fields, and the genesis and evolution of a Martian dust storm. Scientists analyzed data collected in October and November 1997, publishing the first set of formal results in the 13 March 1998 issue of Science. Mars Global Surveyor had used a variety of instruments to collect data. The thermal emission spectrometer had mapped the temperature and opacity of the Martian atmosphere during the sandstorm, and a camera had returned visual images of the storm’s effects. The spectrometer had also obtained some infrared emission spectra of Mars’s surface, indicating “the presence of pyroxene and plagioclase, minerals which are common in volcanic rocks, with a variable amount of dust component.” Surveyor’s magnetometer and electron reflectometer had measured strong localized magnetic fields on Mars. A laser altimeter had collected data from Mars’s northern hemisphere, revealing a flat surface, becoming increasingly rough toward the equator. Scientists had interpreted a variety of landforms in the Mars images, including the northern polar cap and gigantic canyons, ridges, craters, and shield volcanoes.
NASA announced the selection of nine researchers to form the Science Team for the Mars Microprobes, “a technology validation mission that will hitchhike to the [R]ed [P]lanet aboard NASA’s 1998 Mars Polar Lander mission.” NASA intended the probes to collect data measuring thermal and physical properties of the soil while searching for the presence of water ice. The nine selected scientists were David C. Catling, Julio A. Magalhaes, Jeffrey E. Moersch, James R. Murphy, and Aaron Zent of NASA’s Ames Research Center; Ralph D. Lorenz of the University of Arizona; Paul Morgan of Northern Arizona University; Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology; and Marsha Presley of Arizona State University.(NASA, “Science Team Chosen for Technology Validation Mission To Explore the Subsurface of Mars,” news release 98-59, 8 April 1998.)
