NASA’s JPL released a series of images that Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) had captured on 20 and 21 April, which showed, for the first time, NASA’s Mars Odyssey and ESA’s Mars Express spacecraft orbiting Mars. MGS had orbited the planet since 1997, Mars Odyssey had arrived in 2001, and Mars Express had arrived in late 2003. MGS and Mars Odyssey followed similar near- polar orbits, sometimes passing within 9 miles (15 kilometers) of each other, but Odyssey orbited higher than MGS to prevent collision. MGS had captured two images of Odyssey 7.5 seconds apartthe first from a distance of 56 miles (90 kilometers) and the second from 84 miles (135 kilometers). The following day, MGS had captured an image of Mars Express from a distance of 155 miles (249 kilometers).(Tariq Malik, “New Photos Are First of Spacecraft Orbiting Mars,” Space.com, 20 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050519_mgs_orbiters.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
After a delay of more than one year, ESA’s Mars Express deployed the first of three booms that form the craft’s Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere Sounding (MARSIS). The MARSIS booms would search for evidence of water under the surface of Mars. The deployment marked the beginning of a 10-day sequence, originally scheduled for April 2004. NASA’s JPL had conducted an investigation that had warned of the possibility that one or more of the antenna components could swing back and hit the spacecraft, a risk that had caused ESA to delay the deployment. Although an ESA review board had concluded that, even if such an event were to occur, the risk of damaging Mars Express remained low, scientists had voiced concerns that a strike from any of the booms could damage delicate instruments on board the orbiter. According to Mars Express Mission Manager Fred Jansen, engineers had analyzed the problem over the past year to assure themselves that any existing risks would not affect the spacecraft. As deployment commenced, telemetry data indicated that the first boom, which formed half of MARSIS’s primary antenna, had deployed successfully. ESA had scheduled the second half of the antenna to deploy four days later.
ESA announced that its Mars Express spacecraft had discovered ancient geological structures and ice reservoirs―but not liquid water―below Mars’s surface. Mars Express, equipped with radar capable of conducting subsurface analyses of the planet, had detected a crater approximately 250 kilometers wide (155 miles wide) below the planet’s surface, as well as 1.8 kilometers (1.1 miles) of subsurface water ice near its north pole. However, the spacecraft had not detected the liquid water necessary to support life. Even deep below the surface of Mars, the planet’s polar temperatures decline to -129oC (-200oF), preventing its ice from melting. Scientists regarded the discovery of subsurface ice as evidence that Mars’s environment was unable to harbor life.(John Johnson, “European Mars Express Show[s] That the Red Planet Was Not as Warm or Wet as Previously Thought,” Los Angeles Times, 1 December 2005; “Radar Provides Deeper View of Ice on Mars,” Nature 438, no. 7068 (1 December 2005): 545.)
ESA and the government of the United Kingdom (UK) officially published the report of the investigation into the circumstances and possible reasons for the failure of the Beagle 2 mission. Beagle 2, the Mars lander that had “piggybacked” aboard ESA’s Mars Express Orbiter, had failed to communicate after its landing date of 25 December 2005. The UK government and ESA had commissioned the report in February 2004, and the commission had completed the report in April 2004. Initially, ESA and the UK government had refused to publish the report, citing details of confidential intergovernmental agreements, as well as commercially sensitive information. Instead, they had issued a set of recommendations for future missions. However, the New Scientist had requested the report’s publication under the UK’s new Freedom of Information Act, in force since the beginning of 2005. Colin Pillinger, the planetary scientist who had first proposed the Beagle 2 project, and Mark Sims, the mission’s project managerboth at the Open University in the UKagreed that the report contained little, if any, commercially sensitive information. However, the report concluded that ESA and the UK government should never have approved the project. ESA committee investigating the loss of the probe had found several fundamental errors, such as classifying the lander as an instrument aboard Mars Express, instead of as a separate spacecraft, and making inaccurate estimates about the characteristics of the Martian atmosphere. The committee also determined that ESA and the UK had underfunded the mission from the start. Moreover, the committee found that the mission’s logistics were too complex for Pillinger’s team.(British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2”; Justin Mullins, “Beagle 2 ‘Should Never Have Been Built’,” New Scientist, 4 February 2005; BBC News, “Report Scorns Beagle 2 Decision,” 4 February 2005.)
