At a news conference, NASA scientists announced the preliminary findings of Deep Space 1’s 22 September flyby of Comet Borrelly, a type of comet that originates in a region near Pluto. NASA’s Deep Space 1 spacecraft, operating two years past its planned mission duration, had passed within 1,400 miles (2,250 kilometers) of Borrelly, returning the best images and data of a comet ever captured. The encounter was only the second time that a spacecraft had come within such a distance of a comet’s nucleus, as well as the first close flyby of a comet of Borrelly’s type. In 1986 ESA’s Giotto spacecraft had flown within 373 miles (600 kilometers) of Halley’s comet, which belongs to a category of comets that originate from outside Earth’s solar system. In addition, NASA scientists reported that the data captured by Deep Space 1 had substantially enhanced existing scientific knowledge of comets. Scientists found a number of Deep Space 1’s observations surprising, including the discoveries that the comet’s icy jets discharge in tall columns rather than in a diffuse spray, that a cloud of charged particles emanates from off the comet’s center, and that solar wind flows asymmetrically around the particle cloud.(Warren E. Leary, “Probe Sends Postcards from Comet’s Core,” New York Times, 26 September 2001; NASA, “Deep Space 1,” http://nmp.nasa.gov/ds1/ (accessed 17 November 2008).)
A team of astronomers released images taken by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, revealing that black holes are present throughout the universe, across space and time, more pervasively than previously estimated. The researchers had found that black holes were even more common millions of years ago than they are today. The scientists had used new x-ray technology to examine galaxies several billion years old. The research had focused on a small sliver of the skya deep fieldthat the Chandra X-ray Observatory had probed looking for black holes and other bodies. Based on the findings in the relatively small sampling, the researchers had estimated that the universe might contain as many as 300 million black holes. Chandra had captured images using exposure times of up to 10 days and focusing on the same region of the sky for more than one year. The astronomers believed that their new images had exposed the early history of the universe, perhaps traveling as far back in time as 90 percent of the way to the Big Bang. In examining this distant patch of sky, the researchers had discovered black holes of all types and masses.
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
Using data from the European Space Agency’s (ESA’s) Infrared Space Observatory, a team of NASA and university researchers identified three stars that they believed contain enough hydrogen to create a Jupiter-like gas planet. The scientists, from Italy, the Netherlands, and the United States, indicated that the stars Beta Pictoris, 49 Ceti, and HD1235344 have particularly fertile environments, which might eventually form planets. Perhaps most significant, the researchers found a “thousand times more hydrogen” in several stars than scientists had discovered in earlier studies.(W. F. Thi et al., “Substantial Reservoirs of Molecular Hydrogen in the Debris Disks Around Young Stars,” Nature 409, no. 6816 (4 January 2001): 60–63; Associated Press, “Study Finds Nearby Star Systems Capable of Making Big Planets,” 3 January 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a crewless logistics and resupply mission to the ISS. The Progress automatic cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 9:32 a.m., Universal Time (UT),108 on a Soyuz-U rocket. The mission, officially designated as M-45, carried to the ISS 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms, 2.8 tons, or 5,512 pounds) of fuel, oxygen, equipment, and other supplies.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574; Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001: The Year in Review,” http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2001/yearinrev/01YearReview.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, NASA scientists Patricia T. Boyd and Alan P. Smale, both working at NASA’s GSFC, announced that they had uncovered a predictable mathematical pattern governing the release of x-ray light from binary star systems. Boyd and Smale had tracked the emission of x-rays from three binary star systems over a period of several years, determining that the number of days between the low points of emission in each binary system was always based on multiples of a single constant number. The discovery countered the common perception among scientists that flares and bursts happen completely at random, suggesting that a repeatable process occurs when swirling matter pours into a black hole, thereby creating an emission. According to Smale, the ongoing challenge would be to combine this knowledge of a pattern, while still considering the many random factors. “The interplay between periodic and random components in these systems is a puzzle,” Smale concluded.(NASA, “Method Uncovered in Madness of Black Hole and Neutron Star Eruptions,” news release 01-111, 5 June 2001.)
NASA announced several new findings made possible by the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Farhad Zadeh of Northwestern University had used Chandra to locate “a cauldron of 60 million degree gas enveloping a cluster of young stars.” The discovery marked the first time that scientists had located such high-energy x-rays surrounding young stars. Zadeh also noted that the newly discovered cluster, located some 25,000 light-years from Earth and estimated at 1 to 2 million years old, had provided evidence in support of the theory that stellar winds generated by stars can produce very hot gas. In addition to Zadeh’s find, Andreas Zezas of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics announced that his team of scientists had found new midmass black holes in several starburst galaxiesregions where stars form and explode frequently. Researchers had long hypothesized that such an environment might exist but had previously been able to locate only a few midmass black holes. Zezas credited the powerful Chandra X-ray Observatory with allowing astronomers to examine far-flung galaxies more closely than before. Kimberly A. Weaver of NASA’s GSFC, who had contributed to Zezas’s project, hypothesized that the concentration of midsize black holes could possibly lead eventually to the formation of a single, massive black hole.(NASA, “Star Factory near Galactic Center Bathed in High-Energy X-rays,” news release 01-113, 6 June 2001; John Noble Wilford, “Hot Stellar Winds Captured by X-ray Orbiter,” New York Times, 12 June 2001; NASA, “Chandra Sees Wealth of Black Holes in Star-Forming Galaxies,” news release 01-110, 6 June 2001.)
Lieutenant Governor of Florida Frank T. Brogan and Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, broke ground on a new research facility located just south of KSC. The new project, officially named the Space Experiment Research and Processing Laboratory (SERPL), joined researchers from the state of Florida, NASA, the Florida Space Research Institute, and the University of Florida. The research center would devote significant resources to ISS research and to examining the commercial potential of space-related research. Bridges described the venture as widely beneficial, saying, “SERPL and the unprecedented opportunities for collaboration that it represents are key to Kennedy’s evolution to a recognized center for technology development. We expect this partnership to pay dividends to NASA, the State of Florida, and the space industry well into the future.(M2 Presswire, “NASA and Florida Join Forces To Develop Space Science Facility,” 9 February 2001.)
Arthur F. Davidsen, an astrophysicist who had helped found the Space Telescope Science Institute at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, died at age 57. Davidsen had served for many years as a professor of physics and astronomy at Johns Hopkins, focusing much of his research on the missing mass or dark matter of the universe. His findings had led to the development of the theory that, because of the reflecting light of other bodies, we are able to observe only about 1 percent of the universe’s matter. Davidsen’s work indicated that, although the remaining matter exists, it remains hidden from us. Not only had Davidsen led his colleagues in establishing the Space Telescope Science Institute, but he had also encouraged the Institute to participate in operating the HST. In his later years, Davidsen had even begun planning for the instrument that would eventually supplant the HST as the world’s foremost astronomical tool. Davidsen had trained at Princeton University and at the University of California at Berkeley. In 1979 he had won the American Astronomical Society’s Helen B. Warner Prize for his work using a rocket to obtain the first ultraviolet spectrum of a quasar.(Martin Weil, “Hopkins Astrophysicist Arthur Davidsen Dies,” Washington Post, 22 July 2001; Los Angeles Times, “Obituaries: Arthur Davidsen; Astrophysicist Led Work To Build Knowledge of Universe,” 23 July 2001. 88 NASA, “NASA Celebrates 25th Anniversary of Mars Landing,” news release 01-143, 17 July 2001.)
NASA announced that astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had discovered a supernova blast located farther away from Earth than any previously observed object. The discovery provided support for the theory that the universe might be expanding more rapidly than in the past. The supernova, approximately 10 billion light-years away from Earth, was relatively bright. According to Adam Riess of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the researcher who made the find, the discovery was significant because scientists would now be able, not only to observe the activities of the universe, but also to understand why it behaves as it does. “This supernova shows us the universe is behaving like a driver who slows down approaching a red stoplight and then hits the accelerator when the light turns green,” Riess explained.(NASA, “Farthest Supernova Ever Seen Sheds Light on Dark Universe,” news release 01-58, 2 April 2001.)
Lockheed Martin confirmed that the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) had decided not to fund the company’s development of the X-33 space plane, a possible replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Since 1996, Lockheed Martin had been developing a pilotless prototype of the X- 33, a reusable spacecraft that would be able to launch without shedding fuel tanks or boosters and to land like an airplane. However, the development of lightweight fuel tanks had taken the project off schedule and over budget, and NASA had decided in March 2001 to forego continued funding for the X-33, although it was, reportedly, 75 percent complete. When Lockheed Martin had subsequently attempted to secure another government sponsor for the project, the U.S. Air Force had expressed interest in the project and submitted to the Pentagon a proposal to fund the space plane. However, the DOD had since determined that the project was too costly to undertake.(Michael Cabbage, “Air Force Decides Not To Revive Lockheed’s X-33 Space Plane,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
For the first time, astronomers detected a supermassive black hole consuming material in the Milky Way. Frederick K. Baganoff of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a team of scientists using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to observe a source of radio emissions called Sagittarius A* had noticed a rapid rise and decline in x-ray emissions in its vicinity. The scientists, who believed that Sagittarius A* is connected to a black hole in the center of the galaxy, speculated that the emissions emanate from matter falling into the black hole. The Chandra observations had provided the best view yet of the area just outside of the black hole’s event horizon―the point of no return for all matter falling into a black hole. The discovery added significantly to previous research indicating that the Milky Way Galaxy contains a black hole or some other large, dark object.(NASA, “Chandra Catches Milky Way Monster Snacking,” news release 01-179, 5 September 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of Lockheed Martin to construct Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), scheduled to launch in August 2005. Under the US$145 million contract, Lockheed Martin would be responsible for building the orbiter and for integrating and testing six scientific instruments and two engineering payloads. In addition, Lockheed Martin would provide operations support for spacecraft during its five and one-half year mission. Odyssey, designed for low-altitude remote sensing of Mars, would include an atmospheric sounder; a context imager; a high-resolution camera; a shallow, subsurface, sounding radar; a visible, near-infrared imaging spectrometer; and a wide-angle color imager. NASA engineers planned to use Odyssey’s images to help determine landing sites for future Mars missions. NASA also planned for the spacecraft to provide telecommunications and navigation relay capability for future missions to the planet.(NASA, “NASA Selects Spacecraft Contractor for 2005 Mars Mission,” news release c01-w, 3 October 2001; Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Chosen by NASA and JPL to Build the 2005 Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter,” 3 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinChosenByNASAJPL Build2.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASA’s global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASA’s JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deere’s NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm,” news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a module of the ISS designed to expand the space station’s size and provide other capabilities. The module, called Docking Compartment One (DC-1) or Pirs (Russian for pier), launched at 11:44 p.m. (UT), on a Soyuz-U rocket, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. A cargo craft called Progress M-SO1 would transport the module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency intended the DC-1 to provide additional stowage space for the ISS, an airlock for spacewalks, and an additional docking port for future Soyuz and Progress vehicles. The 8,000-pound (3,600-kilogram), 16-foot-long (4.9-meter-long) module would increase the total mass of the space station to 303,500 pounds (138,000 kilograms).(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001”; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575, 1 October 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx575.html (accessed 14 November 2008).)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Lander’s safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, “Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration,” at the National Geographic Society’s Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Mars’s Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Mars’s surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Mars’s hostile but fascinating landscape.
NASA opened a new command and control center that would allow researchers on Earth to participate in scientific research conducted aboard the ISS. The new facility, located at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, featured state-of-the-art communication and research technologies. Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson described the new center as a significant part of NASA’s ongoing plan to make space research more efficient and useful: “From this facility we will manage fundamental scientific research that can only be done in spaceresearch that will lead to knowledge to benefit all humanity here on Earth.” NASA planned to staff the 13,000-square-foot (1,200-square-meter) facility 24 hours per day to support research aboard ISS. In addition to its link to the ISS, the new facility was equipped to monitor payload resources, facilitate data transfer, and communicate with universities and research centers throughout the world. The new command post opened only days before Space Shuttle Atlantis’s scheduled trip into space to carry the Destiny research laboratory module to the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Opens Space Station Command Post,” news release 01-15, 2 February 2001; Shelby G. Spires, “MSFC Opens Science ‘Mission Control’ Today,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 February 2001.)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russia’s second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
NASA’s Helios aircraft set a world record for the highest altitude ever attained by an aircraft without rocket power. The solar-powered, propeller-driven aircraft reached an altitude of 96,500 feet (30,000 meters), eclipsing the previous record by more than 10,000 feet (3,000 meters). The remotely piloted aircraft took off from the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) in Hawaii at 8:48 a.m. local time on 13 August, staying aloft for nearly 17 hours before landing at 1:43 a.m. on 14 August. Fuel cells on the aircraft’s wings provided electrical power during the daylight hours, when the aircraft achieved the record altitude; at night, the plane’s propellers acted as generators, providing electrical power to control the aircraft. According to NASA, an aircraft operating at such an altitude would be able to monitor the environment, improve communications on Earth, and simulate the conditions of flight within the atmosphere of Mars.(NASA, “NASA Solar Aircraft Sets Altitude Record; Communications, Environmental Breakthroughs Expected,” news release 01-165, 14 August 2001.)
At 4:51 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time (EDT), the Sun released one of the most powerful flares of the past 25 years. The flare originated from a region of the Sun known as active region 9393 and, almost immediately after its generation, began orbiting with the Sun. The flare, equal to the well- known X-20 flare of 16 August 1989, resulted from an explosion within the Sun’s atmosphere. Both the 1989 and 2001 solar flares disrupted radio communications. The flare of 3 April 2001 caused an R4 radio blackout on the sunlit side of Earth and released energy equal to 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT. Had it occurred on the side of the Sun facing Earth, it would probably have caused major power failures on Earth. ESA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spotted the record-setting sun flare and several smaller X-class flares, which occurred during the following days.(NASA, “Sun Unleashes Record Superflare, Earth Dodges Solar Bullet,” news release 01-66, 3 April 2001; NASA, “Sun Takes Another Solar Shot, This Time at Earth,” news release 01-71, 11 April 2001.)
NASA researchers with the Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of California at San Diego published research indicating that particles from human-produced pollution might significantly contribute to weakening the planet’s hydrological cycle. The hydrological cycle is the circulation of water between Earth’s atmosphere and its surface water and soils. Specifically, water precipitates from the atmosphere into surface water or soils and later evaporates from surface water, soils, and plants back into the atmosphere. The researchers had examined satellite data indicating aerosol distribution in the Indian Ocean region and had found that the aerosols, primarily composed of black carbon, could weaken the hydrological cycle in two ways. The aerosols could reduce the amount of sunlight reaching the ocean, thereby decreasing the amount of water evaporating into the atmosphere. In addition, when particulates enter clouds, they reduce the size of cloud droplets, thereby reducing the amount of rain over polluted regions. The particulates in aerosols comprise a mixture of substances formed by the burning of fossil fuels and rural biomass. The new research was significant because it suggested that aerosols might be more environmentally harmful than scientists had previously understood and that air pollution is both an urban and a rural phenomenon.(NASA, “Tiny Pollution Particles May Carry Large Consequences for Earth’s Water Supply,” news release 01- 239, 6 December 2001; V. Ramanathan, “Aerosols, Climate, and the Hydrological Cycle,” Science n.s. 294, no. 5549 (7 December 2001): 2119–2124.)
Scientists led by Ken Ebisawa of NASA’s GSFC published research that helped resolve a long- standing question about whether the emission of x-rays from the plane of the Milky Way Galaxy was truly diffuse or derived from numerous discrete sources. The scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to carry out an unprecedented survey of a region of the galactic plane that had no known x-ray point sources, in the deepest examination ever made of hard x-rays in the region referred to as the zone of avoidance. Chandra had revealed 36 new x-ray point sources and an area of diffuse emission. Properties of the new point sources had indicated that they were probably located outside the Milky Way. In addition, Chandra’s survey had indicated that the diffuse x-ray emission revealed the galactic omnipresence of hot plasma with a higher energy density than any other substance in interstellar space.(NASA, “Astronomers Go Behind the Milky Way To Solve X-ray Mystery,” news release 01-161, 9 August 2001; Ken Ebisawa et al., “Origin of the Hard X-ray Emission from the Galactic Plane,” Science 293, no. 5535 (31 August 2001): 1633–1635.)
Responding to the ongoing reductions in the budget for NASA and for the ISS, the Boeing Company announced that it would lay off 400 workers who had been working on the development of ISS modules, including those workers who would have built the living quarters for the space station’s researchers. At the time of Boeing’s cuts, NASA had trimmed nearly US$1 billion from its ISS funding.(Associated Press, “Boeing Laying Off 400 on NASA’s International Space Station,” 17 March 2001.)
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. MAP carried two Gregorian telescopes, designed to record temperatures in selected locations throughout the sky. MAP’s broad mission was to provide further insight into how the universe formed. The spacecraft cost US$95 million to build.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Delta II Helps Unlock Secrets of the Universe,” news release, 30 June 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010630h.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Peter N. Spotts, “Latest NASA Launch Aims To Take Cosmic Baby Picture,” Christian Science Monitor, 29 June 2001;)
NASA astronomers linked the world’s two largest telescopes, both located at the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii. Using a process known as interferometry, the scientists used the two telescopes to capture images of a faint star in the constellation Lynx. According to Anne L. Kinney, Director of NASA’s Astronomical Search for Origins program, “combining the light from the two largest telescopes on Earth is a fabulous technical advancement.” Using a tunnel that collects light waves that the telescopes have captured, to combine the images, the two telescopes worked together to allow astronomers to peer farther and more clearly into space than ever before. Scientists hailed the achievement as a significant step toward creating a new class of astronomical telescopes.(NASA, “An Astronomy First: Telescopes Double-Team Hawaiian Night Sky,” news release 01-42, 14 March 2001; Associated Press, “World’s Strongest Telescope Link Created,” 15 March 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98/ISS-5A lifted off from NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the most expensive and crucial component of the ISSthe United States–built Destiny science laboratory. Mark Stephenson of the Boeing Company, which had built the US$1.4 billion research module, called the vessel “the crown jewel” of the ISS. NASA had set high stakes on the Destiny laboratory, which was so expensive and complicated to build, that NASA could not afford to assemble a backup module. Therefore, any problem in the transport and connection of the Destiny module would set back the ISS several years. NASA had delayed Atlantis’s mission for three weeks when engineers discovered evidence that faulty wiring might compromise the Shuttle’s safety. The vital mission brought the ISS closer to becoming the permanent and highly functional research station that NASA and the international space community had long awaited. The Destiny laboratory measured 28 feet (9 meters) long, weighed more than 30,000 pounds (13,600 kilograms), and held 13 computers. NASA expected to control the ISS using the computers and communications equipment built into Destiny. Because of the Space Shuttle’s cargo, some officials speculated that Atlantis’s mission was the most important for NASA’s research agenda ever undertaken. One NASA spokesperson called the Destiny module “the cornerstone for space-based research aboard the orbiting platform.” The STS-98 crew consisted of Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell; Pilot Mark L. Polansky; and Mission Specialists Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Thomas D. Jones, and Marsha S. Ivins.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-98,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-98.html (accessed 2 February 2009); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Shuttle Flight No. 102 Will Transport $1.4 Billion Lab Module,” Washington Post, 8 February 2001; Kelly Young, “Atlantis To Deliver Destiny,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 2001; Associated Press, “Shuttle Totes Space Station’s ‘Crown Jewel’,” 8 February 2001; Associated Press, “Countdown Begins for Launch of NASA Lab,” 5 February 2001; NASA, “Atlantis Set To Deliver International Space Station’s Destiny,” news release 01-16, 5 February 2001.)
The NEAR Shoemaker spacecraft landed on the 433 Eros asteroid, becoming the first probe ever to accomplish such a feat. The landing was a bonus. NEAR had already successfully completed a 1 billion-mile mission, which had provided pictures of Earth, comet Hoylake, and the asteroid 253 Mathilde. After a carefully scripted 5-hour descent, NEAR touched down safely, traveling at about 4 miles (6 kilometers) per hour. The spacecraft, which engineers had not designed for the impromptu landing mission, did not have a parachute to lessen its impact on the asteroid’s unknown surface. By firing the spacecraft’s engines five times during descent, NASA controllers were able to slow the craft to a safe landing speed. As NASA’s Chief Scientist Edward J. Weiler explained, “If you were an Erosian watching this thing come in, it should have a velocity about that of a walking individual.” Scientists landed the craft to demonstrate that the landing was possible, as well as to gather additional information. NASA engineers reported detecting a faint signal from the probe even after it had landed. The environment is harsh on the asteroid, which measures 21 miles (34 kilometers) long and 8 miles (13 kilometers) wide. Moving through space at more than 40,000 miles (64,300 kilometers) per hour, Eros reaches a temperature of 400°F (204°C) daily and has only weak gravity. Researchers believed that the asteroid is composed of material older than Earth and might have been part of another planet at one time.(Mike Toner, “Discover: Rendezvous with Eros Matchup Planned Monday for Asteroid, Spacecraft,” Atlanta Journal-Constitution (GA), 11 February 2001; Reuters, “Space Probe Set To Land on Asteroid Eros,” Washington Post, 12 February 2001; Dan Vergano, “Probe Lands on Gigantic Near-Earth Asteroid,” USA Today, 13 February 2001; Regina Holtman, “Signals from Surface,” Washington Times, 13 February 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft Lands on Asteroid; NASA Probe’s Historic First May Yield Wealth of Data,” Washington Post, 13 February 2001. 21 Associated Press, “Atlantis Astronauts To Conduct 100th Spacewalk in U.S. History,” 14 February 2001; Los Angeles Times, “Spacewalk Improves View from Space Station Lab,” 13 February 2001; Dow Jones International News, “Window Shutter Gives US Spacewalkers Views of Earth,” 12 February 2001.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that Charles Elachi would become Director of its 5,000-employee, US$1.3 billion research facility in Pasadena, California. Elachi, an expert in the field of remote sensing best known for developing radar systems, had assumed JPL’s top post after 30 years of service with NASA. JPL had interviewed more than 70 candidates over eight months before selecting Elachi. Concerning JPL’s challenge to encourage further exploration while meeting tight budgets, Elachi remarked, “It’s basically striking a balance between faster implementation and cheaper implementation and making sure we have success.” Having lost two separate spacecraft headed for Mars in 1999, JPL stood at a critical juncture as Elachi assumed control.(Associated Press, “New Director Named for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” 31 January 2001; Usha Lee McFarling, “30-Year Veteran of JPL Is Chosen as Its Leader,” Los Angeles Times, 31 January 2001.)
In the midst of increased concerns over the long-term effects of the depletion of Earth’s ozone layer and concerns over global warming, scientists learned that Mars’s average global temperature had increased 50°F (10°C) in one month. A research team at Arizona State University analyzed and made public data that Mars Global Surveyor had collected, indicating the planet’s drastic change in climate. Scientists concluded that a massive dust storm, originating in Mars’s lower latitudes, had caused the increase in temperature. The researchers believed that the dust had trapped sunlight, eventually causing a heat wave to envelope the Red Planet; they predicted, however, that the planet’s temperature would cool when the dust particles began reflecting sunlight.(Los Angeles Times, “Science File in Brief; Global Warming Strikes Another Planet: Mars,” 23 July 2001.)
Shang-Ping Xie of the University of Hawaii’s International Pacific Research Center and Meteorology Department and W. Timothy Liu of NASA’s JPL published in the journal Science the results of their study of Hawaii’s so-called tail, demonstrating that a strong ocean current connects Hawaii with Asia. The researchers had concluded that the current was the result of the wind whipping around the small Pacific Islands and creating wakes eastward toward Asia. Scientists had long recognized that the Hawaiian Islands cause an eastward current, but common knowledge had suggested that the current’ reaches less than 200 miles (322 kilometers). However, using data from NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite, the European Sensing Satellites, and the United States-Japan Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission, Xie and Lie had traced the eastward- flowing current farther, discovering that it actually extends nearly 5,000 miles (8,000 kilometers). From an historical perspective, the discovery provided evidence in support of the tradition that early Hawaiian settlers had sailed to the islands from the Far East.(Shang-Ping Xie et al., “Far-Reaching Effects of the Hawaiian Islands on the Pacific Ocean-Atmosphere System,” Science 292, no. 5524 (15 June 2001): 20572060; NASA, “Satellites Reveal Hawaii’s Long Tail of Wind and Water,” news release 01-121, 14 June 2001.)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASA’s JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Center’s goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSC’s Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director,” news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
Researchers published findings from an unprecedented analysis of NASA-produced satellite data of carbon absorption by northern hemisphere forests. The researchers had used the satellite data to study the extent to which forests had absorbed carbon released into Earth’s atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide from fossil-fuel combustion. Many scientists consider atmospheric accumulation of carbon dioxide to be a primary cause of global climate change, because forests act as “sinks,” absorbing carbon dioxide, thereby reducing its atmospheric accumulation. The researchers had found that forests in Europe, Russia, and the United States annually absorbed almost 700 million tonnes (771 million tons or 1.5 trillion pounds) of carbon from 1981 to 1999. They had also found geographic variations in carbon absorption, with Russian forests accounting for nearly 40 percent of the carbon sink and Canadian forests losing carbon. The findings were significant, because they indicated which forests had lost carbon and which had stored it. The findings also validated relationships between satellite measurements and ground-based measurements of carbon absorption, demonstrating the crucial importance of satellites in monitoring forests. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, dedicated to understanding human- induced and natural changes in Earth’s environment, had funded the research.
The first changing of the guard took place aboard the ISS Discovery when the crew of Expedition 2, which included astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, replaced the first ISS research team, Expedition 1. The new crew planned to spend four and one-half months aboard the space station, with Usachev serving as the outpost’s Commander. With the official beginning of her mission on the ISS, Helms became the first long- term female occupant of the space station. The new crew anticipated working well together, having trained as a unit for nearly four years. Because the first crew had completed many of the ISS’s final construction tasks, crew of Expedition 2 looked forward to having more research time than their predecessors had enjoyed.(Todd Halvorson, “Space Crews Ceremoniously Switch Places,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 March 2001; NASA, “Space Station ShiftChange Set with Next Shuttle Launch,” news release, 01-30, 28 February 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Alpha About To Get Its First Female Resident,” 5 March 2001; Juan A. Lozano for Associated Press, “New Space Station Crew Moves into Orbiting Outpost,” 14 March 2001.)
Daniel Wang, a University of Massachusetts professor and leader of a study team of astronomers, announced that his team had discovered a giant halo of hot gas spiraling a galaxy similar to the Milky Way and relatively near Earth. The researchers had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST to observe galaxy NGC 4631, some 25 million light-years from Earth. The discovery not only revealed the increasing power of the astronomical tools at the disposal of scientists, but also contributed to astronomers’ knowledge about the structure and evolution of galaxies. Wang explained the significance of the discovery: “Scientists have debated for over 40 years whether the Milky Way has an extended corona, or halo, of hot gas . . . by studying similar galaxies like NGC 4631, we can get an idea of what’s going on within our own galaxy.” The study’s results also provided new information about how energy and mass spin around galaxies, as well as about the possible effects of rapid star formation.(NASA, “Chandra Detects Halo of Hot Gas Around Milky Way–Like Galaxy,” news release 01-146, 19 July 2001.)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the world’s most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASA’s decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASA’s MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding “a very tough decision.”(NASA, “NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34,” news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle,” New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project,” Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, “NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs,” 2 March 2001.)
NASA named Nelson H. Keeler Director of its Independent Verification and Validation Facility (IVVF) in Fairmont, West Virginia, giving Keeler the responsibility for safeguarding the facility’s mission-critical software. Keeler also assumed the task of evaluating the cost- effectiveness of NASA’s technology and software. Before joining NASA, Keeler had served in the U.S. Coast Guard, amassing more than 6,000 flight hours in search-and-rescue and law- enforcement missions. During a stint at the U.S. Coast Guard’s Research and Development Center, he had won the Legion of Merit medal. Keeler had served in NASA’s Space Station Freedom program, in the NASA Office of Space Flight’s Advanced Launch Technology and Advanced Flight Systems programs, as well is in private industry, before becoming Director of the IVVF.(NASA, “NASA Names Nelson Keeler Independent Verification and Validation Facility Director,” news release 01-117, 7 June 2001.)
An international team of astronomers presented compelling new evidence that comet impacts had played a significant role in the formation of life on Earth. The researchers, led by Michael J. Mumma of NASA’s GSFC and Hermann Boehnhardt, working at the European South Observatory in Chile, presented their findings in an issue of Science devoted to the burgeoning field of comet research. The astronomers had used orbiting space telescopes, as well as telescopes throughout the world, to provide unprecedented coverage of comets passing Earth. In the course of their observations, the team had witnessed the breakup of the Comet LINEAR, thereby gaining new knowledge about the organic materials contained in comets. This new understanding of the composition of comets led to new information about the impact of comets on Earthespecially during the collisions between comets and planets that occurred long ago. Mumma explained the significance of the new discoveries about the composition of comets: “The idea that comets seeded life on Earth with water and essential molecular building blocks is dramatic, and for the first time, we have seen a comet with the right composition to do the job.” The researchers concluded that comets had formed from dust, ice, and glass, and that, in colliding with other celestial bodies, comets had transferred fundamental building blocks to them.(Hermann Boehnhardt, “The Death of a Comet and the Birth of Our Solar System,” Science 292, no. 5520 (18 May 2001): 13071308; NASA, “In Coming Apart, Comet Linear Exposes Its Deepest Secrets,” news release 01-94, 17 May 2001; Peter N. Spotts, “Comets Give Clues to Solar System’s Infancy: New Studies Chronicle the Break Up of a Comet That Sheds Light on Early Planet Information,” Christian Science Monitor, 18 May 2001.)
John F. Yardley, who had worked at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, serving as the Launch Operation Manager for the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft and the Technical Director for the Gemini program before joining NASA in 1974, died at the age of 76. NASA had awarded Yardley its Public Service Medal in 1963 and in 1966 for his work on the Mercury and the Gemini. From 1981 to 1989, Yardley had been President of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Yardley “as responsible as any individual for getting the Space Shuttle Program off the ground.(NASA, “John F. Yardley, Human Space Flight Pioneer, Dies,” news release 01-130, 27 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “John Yardley, 76, Dies; Had Central Role in Space Flight,” New York Times, 28 June 2001.)
A research team announced the results of a NASA-funded study using microgravity to investigate the properties of everyday materials. Led by Jennifer A. Lewis, the team of researchers had pioneered a new approach to stabilizing particles in fluids, a process they termed nanoparticle haloing. By suspending movement of fine particles in fluids such as paint, Lewis and her colleagues had succeeded in manipulating the complexion of the liquid. Perhaps of greater significance, they had been able to ensure that the fluid did not break down as quickly as it would have done otherwise. The researchers believed that nanoparticle haloing would have wide application, such as in making the fluids more useful and long lasting. As Lewis said, “This designer capability will assist us in developing improved materials.” NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) made the project possible, offering grants for studies that might benefit from the use of a microgravity or low-gravity environment to examine the fundamental states and characteristics of materials.(NASA, “Suspended in Space: Researchers Make Important Discovery About Materials,” news release 01-154, 31 July 2001.)
Russian President Vladimir Putin appointed a new director of Russia’s largest manufacturer of spacecraft and rockets, the Khrunichev State Research and Production Company. Putin selected Alexander I. Medvedev to succeed Anatoly Kiselyov, who had headed the company for 26 years. At the time of the change in leadership, Kiselyov had reported failing health. Companies with interests in Russian space exploration continued to adjust to postcommunist operations. The Khrunichev State Research and Production Company, providing much of the revenue to keep Russia’s space projects alive, manufactured Proton booster rockets used to launch commercial and communication satellites.(Associated Press, “New Chief for Russia Space Company,” 7 February 2001.)
A group of scientists from Stanford University and NASA’s GSFC published research providing the first clear evidence of the causes of sunspots. Sunspots are large dark areas on the surface of the Sun that can last for weeks or longer. The scientists had used the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO)―a project of NASA and ESA―to conduct an acoustic tomography of a large sunspot on 18 June 1998. This technique, much like medical ultrasound diagnostics, had enabled the scientists to conduct subsurface observations of the sunspot, whereas previous research had relied only on surface observations. Researchers had already known that material flows out of sunspots and that the magnetic field below sunspots obstructs the upward flow of energy from the solar interior, thus making the sunspot cooler than its surroundings. However, the SOHO data revealed that material also flows into sunspots, because the cooler material at the sunspot’s top condenses and flows downward, pulling the surrounding plasma and magnetic field inward with it. This concentration of material leads to further cooling of plasma, which, in turn, flows downward and draws in more plasma in a self-perpetuating cycle. These findings also clarified the previously unexplained attraction of magnetic fields with like polarities in sunspots. This characteristic had puzzled scientists because such magnetic fields generally repel rather than draw towards each other.(Junwei Zhao, Alexander G. Kosovichev, and Thomas L. Duvall Jr., “Investigation of Mass Inflows Beneath a Sunspot by Time-Distance Helioseismology,” Astrophysical Journal 557, no. 1 (10 August 2001): 384–388; NASA, “The Sun’s Dark Secret: How Sunspots Pull Themselves Together,” news release 01-216, 6 November 2001.)
At the American Astronomical Society convention, astronomers Victoria M. Kaspi and Mallory S. E. Roberts of McGill University presented evidence dating a known pulsar to 386 AD. Because scientists consider it quite difficult to determine the age of particular pulsars or of any astronomical body, the scientific community regarded the find as especially significant. The researchers had used NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to locate the pulsar exactly at the center of a supernova remnant known as G11.2-0.3, which astronomers had already definitively dated. Scientists believed that both the pulsar and the supernova had formed during an explosion in 386 ADan event that early Chinese astronomers had recorded. Astronomers have experienced difficulty tracking and interpreting the patterns of pulsars, because the formations spin and move rapidly. In light of the successful dating, many scientists hoped that the discovery might help them understand how pulsars develop.(NASA, “Chandra Links Pulsar to Historic Supernova,” news release 01-02, 10 January 2001.)
The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASA’s JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Mars’s surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planet’s seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASA’s chief Mars program scientist celebrated: “We’ve got a program! This is the next step . . . It’s kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. We’re bound for a new frontier.”(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, “Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars,” news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, “Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASA’s Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission,” Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists,” 8 April 2001.)
NASA commemorated the 75th anniversary of the first successful launch of a liquid-fueled rocket. On 26 March 1926, Robert H. Goddard had launched a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long) rocket fueled by gasoline and liquid oxygen. The rocket flew just over 40 feet (12 meters) high using the same technology that would one day launch massive rockets carrying Space Shuttles and other research craft into space. NASA had named Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) after Robert H. Goddard. At the anniversary celebration, NASA’s Chief Historian Roger D. Launius called Goddard the forefather of American space exploration: “Dr. Goddard was a true visionary, having already visualized flight in outer space by the time he was 21.” Goddard had turned 21 in 1903, some 50 years before space exploration began in earnest. Even 75 years after Goddard’s successful test, NASA continued to use liquid-propulsion systems to launch most of its spacecraft and satellites.(NASA, “March 16 Marks 75th Anniversary of First Liquid-Fueled Rocket Launch,” news release 01-35, 12 March 2001.)
An international team of astronomers led by Kailash C. Sahu of the Space Telescope Science Institute reported the discovery of what appeared to be planet-like celestial bodies clustered around a group of 10 million stars some 8,500 light-years from Earth. The team had used the HST to make their discovery, which formed the basis of their hypothesis that the strong gravitational force of the dense star cluster might have pulled the quasi-planets away from their parent stars. The researchers’ article in Nature prompted both skepticism and praise. Stephen P. Maran, an American Astronomical Society spokesperson, summarized the reason for the excitement surrounding the find: “If it is confirmed, the finding suggests there is something big here that we don’t understand.” In addition, Sahu’s research team reported that they had observed six microlensing events during their study, thereby focusing the attention of the scientific community on Albert Einstein’s theory of microlensing that the gravity of a celestial body can bend the light of a more distant object, thereby acting as a magnifying glass for space exploration.(Kailash C. Sahu et al., “Gravitational Microlensing by Low-Mass Objects in the Globular Cluster M22,” Nature 411, no. 6841 (28 June 2001): 10221024; Kathy Sawyer, “A Dim Discovery in a Bend of Light; Celestial Orbs Detected Through Microlensing May Hold Clues to Stars’ Birth,” Washington Post, 28 June 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASA’s Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silverstein’s work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States’ first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for “technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASA’s “true founding members,” who had made possible NASA’s robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, “Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies,” news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program,” New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA,” 4 June 2001.)
NASA announced that its X-40A aircraft, built by the Boeing Company and on loan from the U.S. Air Force, had successfully passed a test flight, giving the X-37 program a major boost. NASA had designed the X-37, a reusable craft that could launch into space and return safely, for use in testing NASA technologies. To test the flight-control system planned for the X-37, an Army Chinook helicopter lifted the X-40A aircraft to 15,000 feet (4,570 meters) and then released it to a safe landing. NASA’s director of the X-37 program called the successful test, “a cause for celebration,” saying that incremental tests on prototype airplanes would ultimately make the X-37 program both cost-efficient and successful. Scientists hailed the safe landing of the X-40A as a triumph of cooperation among the U.S. military, NASA, and the Boeing Company, with each of the three playing a vital role in the development of the successful craft.(NASA, “Successful X-40A Test Flight Gives Major Boost to NASA’s X-37 Program,” news release 01-51, 21 March 2001; M2 Presswire, “X-40A Flight Test Successful; Major Milestone in X037 Space Plane Project,” 15 March 2001.)
Konrad Dennerl, of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany, and his team of astronomers announced that they had performed the first x-ray observations of the planet Venus. The team had used NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to conduct the observations, which revealed new information about the planet’s atmosphere. The x-ray observations of Venus were different from views of the planet made in visible light, because fluorescence, rather than reflection, produced the x-rays from the planet. Most of the fluorescent x-rays come from oxygen and carbon atoms located 120 to 140 kilometers (74 to 87 miles) above the surface of Venus, whereas clouds that are 50 to 70 kilometers (31 to 43 miles) above the surface reflect optical light. The observations represented a technological breakthrough. Other x-ray astronomy satellites had been unable to point steadily in the direction of Venus, because the planet’s relative proximity to the Sun had prevented them from locking onto guide stars that were visually distinct from the Sun.(NASA, “Chandra Captures Venus in a Whole New Light,” news release 01-236, 27 November 2001.)
The Pentagon selected an international team of contractors, led by Lockheed Martin, to build the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), a multi-role fighter plane that the United States, the United Kingdom, and other countries planned to use. The Pentagon planned for the JSF to function as a single, fungible, low-maintenance replacement for the various aircraft that different military branches in the United States and elsewhere had been using. The program, valued at approximately US$200 billion, included three versions of the JSF, to fulfill the different requirements of the various military branches in the United States and Europe. All of the versions would have stealth and supersonic capabilities. BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman would initially produce 22 aircraft during the system design and development phase; the companies expected to construct nearly 3,000 aircraft under the program.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Team Wins Joint Strike Fighter Competition, Pledges Full Commitment to This Cornerstone of Future Defense Capability,” news release, 26 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinTeamWinsJointStrikeFi.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
A research team led by John Bally of the University of Colorado and Henry Throop of the Southwest Research Institute announced that the team had used the HST to observe the first direct evidence of the snowballing theory of planet birth. According to the scholars’ findings, later released in Science, dust grains in the midst of a cloud of dust and gas located in the Orion Nebula, which is approximately 1,500 light-years from Earth, had accreted into a single nucleus of gas and dust, thereby forming an embryonic planet. The researchers observing the occurrence speculated that a similar process might have formed the known planets of the universe. In describing the volatile environment in which the snowballing process occurs, Throop used the analogy of “trying to build a skyscraper in the middle of a tornado.” The researchers surmised that, although snowballing may have caused many embryo planets to begin forming, the complete process of forming a full-fledged planet might have occurred more rarely than scientists previously had speculated.(Kathy Sawyer, “Astronomers Observe Forming of Infant Planet for First Time,” Houston Chronicle, 6 May 2001; Henry B. Throop et al., “Evidence for Dust Grain Growth in Young Circumstellar Disks,” Science 292, no. 5522 (1 June 2001): 16861689.)
tdrs_jmedia.htm (accessed 25 November 2008). by Richard S. Ellis of the California Institute of Technology, had combined the natural magnifying power of galaxy cluster Abell 2218 with observations from the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to execute the technique successfully. As a result, the team had been able to detect faint light emitted by a small cluster of stars located nearly 13.4 billion light- years from Earth. Based on detectable characteristics of the stars, the scientists believed that a star cluster in its early formation stages had produced the detected light, and that, during the early formation of the universe, the infant star cluster may have combined with other star groups to create galaxies.(Richard Ellis et al., “A Faint Star-Forming System Viewed Through the Lensing Cluster Abell 2218: First Light at z ~ 5.6?” Astrophysical Journal Letters 560, no. 2 (20 October 2001): L119–L122; William Harwood, “Pre- Galactic Star Cloud Is Discovered,” Washington Post, 6 October 2001.)
Astronauts Thomas D. Jones and Robert L. Curbeam Jr. made their third and final spacewalk from Space Shuttle Atlantis, finishing the installation of the ISS’s science laboratory Destiny. The spacewalk was the 100th in the history of U.S. space exploration. Two days earlier, Jones and Curbeam had conducted a spacewalk to install a window shutter for Destiny, allowing the astronauts residing inside the ISS an unparalleled view of Earth. Overall, the mission to install the vital and expensive Destiny module went smoothly. Atlantis’s crew worked quickly to connect the necessary cables, hatches, and wires to equip the new research center. The successful installation also allowed NASA to accept a transfer of leadership from the Russian Space Agency. Using the newly installed computers in the Destiny module, U.S. flight controllers took control of the ISS on 13 February 2001.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin received the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy presented by the National Space Club, one of the United States’ most prestigious space awards. Leaders from the aerospace industry, governmental space programs, and academics had selected Goldin for the award. “I am both honored and humbled by the award which validates and supports NASA’s continuing mission to pioneer the frontiers of space,” Goldin remarked upon receiving the honor.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Receives Premier Space Honor,” news release 01-61, 30 March 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASA’s rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russia’s agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Tito’s crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, “Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff,” Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains,” 20 March 2001.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) launched the first of its HII-A vehicles at 4:00 p.m., Japan Standard Time (JST), from Tanegashima Space Center. The HII-A carried two payloads, the Doppler Ranging Equipment and the Laser Ranging Equipment, both instruments designed to monitor the rocket during and after launch. Observers regarded the launch as a major success for the Japanese space program, which had designed the rocket as the country’s primary large-scale launch vehicle.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001”; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), “H-IIA Launch Vehicle,” http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/rockets/h2a/index_e.html (accessed 10 November 2008); JAXA, “LRE (Laser Ranging Equipment),” http://god.tksc.jaxa.jp/lr/lre.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
