As part of its first efforts to meet the objectives of President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, NASA awarded contracts to 11 companies to provide research on human lunar exploration and the development of a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. The Vision for Space Exploration called for NASA to engage in human and robotic exploration of the solar system and regions beyond. NASA awarded three contracts of approximately US$1 million each to Raytheon, Science Applications International Corporation, and the SPACEHAB Corporation for preliminary studies of human lunar exploration. An additional eight companies―Andrews Space, The Boeing Company, Draper Labs, Lockheed Martin, Northrup Grumman, Orbital Sciences Corporation, Schafer, and Transformational Space Corporation―received contracts of approximately US$3 million to conduct preliminary research on human lunar exploration and on the development of a new crewed exploration vehicle.
NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), launched on 25 August 2003, had made several new discoveries. The SSTformerly called the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, or SIRTFwas the largest infrared telescope ever launched. Among the SST’s specific findings was the discovery of nearly 300 new stars in RCW 49, a region in the constellation Centaurus, 13,700 light-years from Earth. In addition, the SST had revealed high quantities of icy organic materials in planets forming around young stars in the constellation Taurus, located 420 light- years from Earth. The presence of organic materials in the newly forming planets could explain the origins of similarly icy bodies, such as comets. Scientists theorized that comets might have provided the water and other organic materials that enabled life to form on Earth.(NASA, “Raw Ingredients for Life Detected in Planetary Construction Zones,” news release 04-167, 27 May 2004; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Spots New Youngest Planet, Just a Million Years Old,” New York Times, 28 May 2004; NASA JPL, “About Spitzer,” http://www.spitzer.caltech.edu/about/index.shtml (accessed 31 March 2009).)
NASA researchers discovered a previously unknown property of Arctic sea ice, challenging conventional models of climate change that had incorporated data on Arctic sea ice. A group of scientists led by Ronald Kwok of NASA’s JPL had used satellite data from Canada’s RADARSAT and NASA’s ICESat to examine changes in Arctic sea ice. In the past, scientists had tended to examine data from ocean buoys to determine changes in Arctic sea ice, rather than using satellite data. The NASA researchers had discovered that, during 12-hour intervals, Arctic sea ice makes subtle, back-and-forth motions, which result in approximately 20 percent of ice growth during the Arctic winter. Although conventional models of the dynamics of Arctic sea ice had incorporated data regarding the ice’s motion, those models had not incorporated ice motion occurring during such brief periods and, thus, may have inaccurately simulated large-scale changes in the ice and underestimated the production of Arctic sea ice.(NASA, “NASA Arctic Sea Ice Study May Stir Up Climate Models,” news release 04-132, 22 April 2004; Ronald Kwok, H. Jay Zwally, and Donghui Yi, “ICESat Observations of Arctic Sea Ice: A First Look,” Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 16 (18 August 2004): L16401–L16405.)
NASA scientists published research showing that the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the single most important factor in interannual rainfall variability throughout the world. The scientists had used data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite to identify geographic areas with the greatest variations in rainfall between 1998 and 2002. After comparing the TRMM data with rainfall patterns over the previous 50 years, they had found that changes in the ENSO directly correlated with local changes in rainfall patterns around the world. The TRMM satellite, a joint project of NASA and JAXA, used microwaves to measure precipitation over the tropics.(NASA, “TRMM Satellite El Niño Holds the Reins on Global Rains,” news release 04-369, 8 November 2004; Z. S. Haddad et al., “Global Variability of Precipitation According to the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission,” Journal of Geophysical Research―Atmospheres 109, no. D17 (16 September 2004): D17103.)
A piloted rocket called SpaceShipOne reached the highest altitude ever attained by a privately funded vehicle. After its release from a plane flying over the Mojave Desert in California, the winged rocket flew to an altitude of 211,400 feet (40 miles or 64 kilometers). The vehicle’s pilot Michael W. Melvill landed SpaceShipOne at Mojave Airport. The event was a test flight in preparation for the planned official launch of SpaceShipOne on 2 June 2004. Scaled Composites, the company that had built the rocket, intended SpaceShipOne to become the first privately funded, piloted vehicle to achieve suborbital flight. Scaled Composites had built SpaceShipOne for use in commercial spaceflightsspaceflights in which customers pay a fee for a brief trip to outer space.(Peter Pae, “In Capital Venture, Rocket Reaches the Edge of Space,” Los Angeles Times, 14 May 2004; Scaled Composites, “Historic Space Launch Attempt Scheduled for June 21,” news release, 2 June 2004, http://www.scaled.com/projects/tierone/062104.htm (accessed 27 March 2009).)
Jerome F. Lederer, NASA’s first Director of Manned Space Flight Safety, died at the age of 101. Lederer, an aviation-safety expert, had introduced notable aviation-safety technologies, such as blinking anticollision lights and flight-data recorders. Lederer had started his career in aviation safety in 1926 as an aeronautical engineer for the U.S. Air Mail Service, where he had redesigned the service’s airplanes to prevent them from igniting after crashes, a frequent cause of death of the pilots. In the 1950s, he had helped establish the agency that later became the FAA. In 1967, after a fire on Apollo 1 had killed three astronauts during a launchpad test, NASA had asked Lederer to establish an Office of Manned Space Flight Safety. In 1970 NASA had appointed Lederer as the safety director for all NASA activities. Lederer had retired two years later. Later, Lederer had taught at the University of Southern California and had served two three-year terms on the Advisory Council for the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations.(Stuart Lavietes, “J. F. Lederer, 101, Dies; Took Risk Management to the Sky,” New York Times, 9 February 2004.)
The airline company Virgin Atlantic conducted the first successful test flight of its Globalflyer airplane. The company had designed the Globalflyer to conduct a flight around the world in 3.3 days without refueling, which, if achieved, would create a world’s record for the length of an unrefueled flight. During a test flight lasting 11⁄2 hours, the Globalflyer aircraftalso known as the Model 311 Capricornexhibited no significant mechanical problems. However, the experimental aircraft had required several modifications, such as the development of a cabinpressurization system, to reach its final design parameters. Previously, the longest duration for an unrefueled flight around the world had been nine days, a record set by Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager in 1986.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Globalflyer Airborne,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 38.)
NASA announced that the Mars Exploration Rover Spirit was malfunctioning because of problems related to its flash memory that could take several weeks to repair. Flash memory, a type of memory commonly installed in electronic devices, such as digital cameras, retains data when the device’s power is off. The mobile robotic geological laboratory Spirit had landed on Mars on 3 January 2004 and had performed satisfactorily until it had abruptly terminated communications with NASA on 21 January 2004. On 23 January 2004, Spirit had reestablished contact with NASA, but, according to major newspapers, NASA scientists doubted that the robotic spacecraft would regain full functionality.(Mark Carreau, “NASA Declares Spirit Rover Broken,” Houston Chronicle, 24 January 2004; NASA, “Spirit Condition Upgraded as Twin Rover Nears Mars,” news release 04-036, 24 January 2004.)
Sirpa Häkkinen of NASA’s GSFC announced that a research team had discovered changes in the North Atlantic Ocean indicating significant changes in the ocean’s climate. Using data from several NASA and European satellites, the researchers had found a dramatic weakening in a particular current in the ocean, which circulates water between Ireland and Canada. The change in the current indicated substantial climate variability in high-latitude areas, but the research remained uncertain of whether or not the change related to global warming. However, the scientists emphasized that the North Atlantic Ocean region is key for analyzing climate and that changes in the ocean’s current could influence the circulation of the entire Atlantic Ocean system.(NASA, “Satellites Record Weakening North Atlantic Current,” news release 04-130, 15 April 2004; Sirpa Häkkinen and Peter B. Rhines, “Decline of Subpolar North Atlantic Circulation During the 1990s,” Science 304, no. 5670 (23 April 2004): 555–559.)
ESA’s Mars Express orbiter relayed information between ground-based NASA engineers and NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Spirit, the first in-orbit communication between ESA and NASA spacecraft and the first successful international communications network outside of Earth. As part of their general efforts to cooperate in space exploration, the two space agencies had planned the information relay to enable future cooperative use of their communications technologies during Mars missions. In this particular communication sequence, Spirit’s operation personnel at NASA’s JPL transferred commands for the rover to ESA’s Space Operations Centre in Germany, which then transmitted the instructions to the Mars Express. The Express successfully commanded Spirit and, subsequently, relayed telemetry information from the rover to JPL via the Space Operations Centre.(NASA, “International Interplanetary Networking Succeeds,” news release 04-060, 12 February 2004.)
The GAO released its assessment of NASA’s efforts to upgrade the Space Shuttle fleet in the wake of the Columbia tragedy. NASA planned to implement the recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, as well as those of its own Space Shuttle Service Life Extension Program (SLEP). The GAO report stated that before NASA determined the upgrade requirements and priorities for the Shuttles, it should first determine the Shuttles’ operational life and the requirements for meeting the objectives of the Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP). Before the announcement of the new Vision for Space Exploration, the ISTP had encompassed the space policy of the United States. However, GAO noted that the establishment of President Bush’s new Vision for Space Exploration, which formally changed the duration of operations for both the Space Shuttles and the ISS, had largely invalidated the recommendations offered in GAO’s assessment.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Further Improvements Needed in NASA’s Modernization Efforts” (report no. GAO-04-203, Washington DC, 15 January 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04203.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
A NASA-funded study provided the first direct evidence that aerosols affect the absorption and release of carbon by ecosystems. Because carbon, in the form of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, acts as a heat-trapping greenhouse gas, the research team sought to identify the factors that influence carbon transfer between the atmosphere and soils. Led by Dev S. Niyogi of North Carolina State University, the scientists had used NASA satellite data to examine atmospheric aerosol content and carbon absorption in different ecosystems. They had discovered that high aerosol levels increase carbon absorption in croplands and forests but decrease carbon absorption in grasslands. The researchers suggested that this variation occurs because of the way that aerosols interact with different types of vegetation canopies to affect the dispersion of radiation from sunlight. In the dense vegetation canopies of croplands and forests, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that enables more radiation to reach a greater quantity of plant leaves and increases carbon absorption through plant photosynthesis. However, in the less dense vegetation canopy of grasslands, aerosols scatter sunlight in a manner that raises ground temperatures, causing the soil to release more carbon dioxide.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Tiny Particles in Air May Influence Carbon Sinks,” news release 04-394, 16 December 2004; D. Niyogi et al., “Direct Observations of the Effects of Aerosol Loading on Net Ecosystem CO2 Exchanges over Different Landscapes,” Geophysical Research Letters 31, no. 20 (29 October 2004): L20506.)
NASA’s X-43A research vehicle established an unofficial world speed record for aircraft of nearly 7,000 miles per hour (11,265 kilometers per hour) or Mach 10―10 times the speed of sound. The X-43A contained an experimental engine―called a supersonic combustion ramjet or scramjet. The scramjet engine had no moving parts and did not use fuel from an on-board tank, as is the case with rockets. Instead, the engine used oxygen from the atmosphere, passing through the vehicle, to ignite fuel. NASA had explored the use of scramjets as an alternative to rocket power for space-access vehicles, with the hope that scramjet vehicles would operate more like an airplane than a rocket. The mission lifted off from NASA’s DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:30 p.m. (PST). A NASA B-52 carried the unpiloted X-43A to an altitude of 40,000 feet (7.6 miles or 12.2 kilometers). Before the X-43A had attained at an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers), a Pegasus rocket booster launched from the B-52, providing an initial acceleration that enabled the X-43A to attain an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers). The experimental aircraft flew for nearly 10 seconds at that altitude before descending into the Pacific Ocean as planned, nearly 800 miles (1,287 kilometers) off the coast of California.(John Johnson, “X-43A Aircraft Sets Speed Record at 6,500 MPH,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2004; NASA, “NASA’s X-43A Scramjet Breaks Speed Record,” news release 04-373, 16 November 2004.)
NASA hosted representatives from 30 countries―including China―in talks about how to accomplish President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration. Experts and participants described Chinese participation in the talks as a small but significant advance toward the goals of global security and space exploration―China’s presence at the talks indicated its interest in collaborating with other countries, particularly the United States. According to analysts, Chinese contributions to space exploration could include expendable rockets, piloted spacecraft, and space robotics.(Mark Carreau and Patty Reinert, “NASA Makes First Overture to China,” Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2004.)
NASA’s Stardust spacecraft performed a flyby of comet Wild 2, obtaining particle samples, as well as the most detailed, high-resolution images ever taken of a comet. Stardust was the first robotic mission created to collect material from outside the Moon’s orbit. Scientists planned to analyze the particle samples of the comet in January 2006, once the spacecraft had returned to Earth. During the flyby, Stardust flew within 240 kilometers (149 miles) of Wild 2, capturing images of the comet’s nucleus at resolutions ranging from 6.5 to 32 kilometers (4 to 20 miles) per pixel. NASA scientists hoped that the images would help them better understand conditions on comets and that the particle samplescomposed of materials identical to those that had formed planetswould reveal information about how comets and Earth’s solar system formed.(NASA JPL, “NASA Spacecraft Makes Great Catch . . . Heads for Touchdown,” news release 2004-001, 2 January 2004; NASA JPL, “Stardust: NASA’s Comet Sample Return MissionEncounter with Comet Wild 2,” http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/details2.html (accessed 9 January 2009).)
Kevin L. Petersen, Director of NASA’s DFRC, appointed Steven G. Schmidt as DFRC’s Deputy Director. Schmidt had served as Special Assistant to NASA’s Administrator since January 2002. In addition, Schmidt had previously worked in numerous programs at DFRC, such as the X-33, X-43A, and the F-15 programs. Schmidt, who had begun working for NASA in 1994, had also served as Executive Director of the President’s Space Commission and as Executive Secretary for Management on the Columbia Accident Investigation Board.(NASA, “NASA Names Dryden Flight Research Center Deputy Director,” news release 04-188, 10 June 2004. 199)
A prototype of the Phoenix reusable launch vehicle (RLV), a joint project of European public and private funders, successfully completed its first atmospheric test flight. According to major media sources, European space agencies hoped eventually to use the Phoenix to launch payloads. The vehicle prototype was approximately 23 feet (7 meters) long and weighed 2,640 pounds (1,200 kilograms). During the test flight, a helicopter released the vehicle prototype from an altitude of 8,000 feet (2,400 meters). The Phoenix landed 90 seconds later at an airport in Vidsel, Sweden. EADS Space Transportation, along with German aerospace company OHB-System AG, the German Aerospace Center, and the government of Bremen, Germany, had funded the Phoenix.(Frank Morring Jr., “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 20 (17 May 2004): 17; Frank Morring Jr., “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 11 (15 March 2004): 17; Mattias Karen for Associated Press, “Europeans Test Space-Shuttle Prototype,” 9 May 2004.)
Maxime A. Faget, who had contributed to the designs of every U.S. spacecraft built to transport humans from Mercury to the Space Shuttle, passed away at age 83 in Houston, Texas. Born on 26 August 1921 in British Honduras, Faget had graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering from Louisiana State University in 1943. He had begun his career with NASA in 1946 as a research scientist at the NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia. In 1958 he had joined the Space Task Group―later, NASA’s JSC―where he had helped to design the spacecraft for the Mercury project and had led a team studying the feasibility of a lunar mission. Faget had also worked on the original feasibility study for the Space Shuttle, later contributing to the development of the Shuttles. After retiring from NASA in 1981, Faget had helped found Space Industries Incorporated, a private space company that had developed a Shuttle project for processing material in a near-perfect vacuum.(NASA, “Legendary Spacecraft Designer Dr. Maxime A. Faget Dies at 83,” news release 04-350, 10 October 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
President George W. Bush formally established the President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, to provide recommendations on implementing elements of his recently announced Vision for Space Exploration. The Commission would make recommendations regarding the type of scientific research U.S. scientists would conduct on the Moon, the development of technologies to enable human and robotic exploration of the Moon and the planets, and the criteria for selecting future destinations for human space explorers. The appointed members of the Commission were Edward C. Aldridge Jr., Carleton S. Fiorina, Michael P. Jackson, Laurie A. Leshin, Lester L. Lyles, Paul D. Spudis, Neil deGrasse Tyson, Robert S. Walker, and Maria T. Zuber.(The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Executive Order Creating the Presidential Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy,” news release, 30 January 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/aldridge_executive_order.html (accessed 30 January 2009); The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, “Members of the Presidential Space Exploration Commission,” news release, 30 January, 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/missions/solarsystem/ aldridge_members.html (accessed 30 January 2009). 591 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 603, 1 February 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx603.html (accessed 31 January 2009).)
A NASA-funded study revealed evidence of newly discovered relationships between climate change, ice sheets, and sea-level rise. Researchers led by Ian R. Joughin of NASA’s JPL found that, between 1992 and 2003, the speed of the ice movements of Greenland’s Jakobshavn Isbræ glacier―which has the fastest flow of ice from land to ocean of any glacier―had doubled. The increased ice flow from this single glacier had led to nearly a 4 percent increase in the rate of global sea-level rise during the 20th century. Furthermore, remote-sensing data from Canadian, European, and NASA satellites indicated that the glacier’s accelerated ice flow was largely the result of the warming of Earth’s climate.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Glacier Doing Double Time,” news release M04-192, 1 December 2004; Ian Joughin, Waleed Abdalati, and Mark Fahnestock, “Large Fluctuations in Speed on Greenland’s Jakobshavn Isbræ Glacier,” Nature 432, no. 7017 (2 December 2004): 608–610.)
NASA and ESA jointly announced that scientists had obtained evidence of a black hole consuming a star, an event known as stellar tidal disruption. Previously, scientists had only theorized the existence of such an event. Using observations from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton orbiting observatory, an international team of scientists had discovered a star that had been thrown from its orbit after a close encounter with another star and, subsequently, had moved into the gravitational field of a black hole. The black hole, with a mass estimated at 100 million times greater than the Sun, had exerted a gravitational pull on the star that led to its eventual disintegration. Stefanie Komossa of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany led the group of scientists that had made the discovery.(John Noble Wilford, “Black Holes’ Vast Power Is Documented,” New York Times, 19 February 2004; Stefanie Komossa, Jules P. Halpern, and Suvi Gezari, “Follow-up Chandra Observations of Three Candidate Tidal Disruption Events,” Astrophysical Journal 604, no. 2 (1 April 2004): 572–578.)
Scientists revealed the first observations of the merger of two galaxy clusters, providing crucial support for a theory of the universe’s formation. The scientists, led by J. Patrick Henry of the University of Hawaii, used ESA’s XMM-Newton orbiting observatory to obtain data showing that the galaxy cluster Abell 754 formed from the collision of two distinct clusters. Galaxy clusters such as Abell 754 contain hundreds of galaxies and are the universe’s largest gravitationally bound structures. Measurements of Abell 754’s density, pressure, and temperature indicated that it is still in formation. Moreover, the evidence showed that Abell 754 had emerged from the collision of galaxy clusters, supporting the theory that the universe’s hierarchical structure had resulted from small galaxies and galaxy clusters merging into relatively larger ones.(NASA, “Massive Merger of Galaxies is the Most Powerful on Record,” news release, 23 September 2004.)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, “New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond,” New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe provided testimony concerning NASA’s FY 2005 budget request to the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies. In his testimony, O’Keefe highlighted NASA’s planned efforts to achieve the goals that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration. According to major media, although several House subcommittee members were supportive of NASA’s goals, they also expressed doubts about whether Congress would give NASA its requested FY 2005 budget, which included an increase of 5.6 percent over its FY 2004 budget.(NASA, “Administrator O’Keefe’s House Testimony,” 21 April 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/ speeches/okeefe_house_testimony_042104.html (accessed 23 march 2009); Patty Reinert, “Lawmakers Warn NASA Fund Boost May Be Modest,” Houston Chronicle, 22 April 2004.)
NASA announced the selection of six proposals to provide research and payload instruments for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), the first spacecraft that NASA would build under the new Vision for Space Exploration. NASA planned the LRO as a robotic mission, which would orbit near the Moon, obtaining measurements to use in planning future human and robotic landing sites. The selected proposals included remote-sensing instruments, such as the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter, which would conduct high-resolution measurements of landing-site slopes, and the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector, which would measure the Moon’s radiation.(NASA, “NASA Selects Investigations for Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter,” news release 04-407, 22 December 2004.)
Scientists announced research demonstrating that planets form according to a different process than scientists had previously thought. Comparing recent observations from NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) with data obtained earlier from other satellites, George H. Rieke of the University of Arizona at Tucson had led a team of scientists examining images of the dust clouds surrounding 266 stars of similar size. The prevailing theory of planetary formation held that small rocky planets collide to form larger planets, and the collisions produce a substantial quantity of dust, which steadily fades away over time. However, the team’s SST observations had significantly challenged that theory, revealing that some relatively younger stars have no surrounding dust clouds and that older stars tend to have large, bright discs of orbiting dust. The presence of dust clouds around the older stars indicated that planetary collisions continue far after initial planetary formation. The team concluded that planetary formation is a longer and more chaotic process than scientists had previously assumed.(NASA, “Astronomers Discover Planet Building Is Big Mess,” news release 04-347, 18 October 2004; John Noble Wilford, “A New Look at How Planets Are Formed,” New York Times, 19 October 2004.)
NASA scientists reported that many of the samples from the Genesis space capsule had survived the spacecraft’s crash on 8 September 2004. NASA had launched Genesis in 2001 to obtain particle samples from solar winds, planning to use the particles in a study of the chemical composition of the solar system during its creation billions of years ago. However, Genesis’s sample-return capsule had failed to land on Earth as planned. Instead, it had crashed into the Utah desert, risking the destruction of the particle samples. However, although the crash had complicated the extraction and processing of the capsule’s fragile, wafer-like, sample-collection plates, NASA scientists had found many of the samples intact and usable for subsequent analyses.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Specimens Saved from Wrecked Capsule,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
Japan’s Mobile Broadcast Corporation and South Korea’s Sun Kyung Telecom launched the Loral Mobile Broadcasting Satellite (MBSAT), which the two companies had designed to provide the world’s first digital multimedia broadband broadcasting system. The MBSAT, launched on a Lockheed Martin Atlas 3 rocket, carried a 40-foot-diameter (12.2-meter-diameter) antenna designed to provide audio, video, and data services to users of portable audio and visual devices in Japan and South Korea. International Launch Services (ILS), a U.S.-Russian private company, provided the launch services for the Japanese-South Korean joint venture.(Craig Covault, “Mobile Milestone,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 12 (22 March 2004): 35; International Launch Services, “About Us,” http://www.ilslaunch.com/about-us/ (accessed 18 March 2009).)
Scientists from NASA’s ARC and Yale University announced that they had designed a complete map of gene activities in human tissue. The researchers had affixed pieces of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences from the human genetic blueprint―known as the genome―to specially patterned glass slides. Using these slides, they had measured levels of ribonucleic acid―biochemical copies of DNA, which activating genes produce to make proteins. Among their findings, the scientists had discovered that certain DNA sequences, which they had previously believed are nonfunctioning, are actually functioning―they are encoding active genes. The NASA scientists hoped their results would enable other researchers to analyze genes for human diseases and to develop new treatments for them. In addition, their research had a specific benefit for NASA: the NASA scientists hoped it would help them understand how human genes respond to spaceflight, so that they would be better able to protect the health of astronauts.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Help Create Complete Human Genome Activity,” news release 04-376, 15 November 2004; Viktor Stolc et al., “A Gene Expression Map for the Euchromatic Genome of Drosophila Melanogaster,” Science 360, no. 5696 (22 October 2004): 655–660.)
Astronomer Fred Lawrence Whipple, a pioneering comet researcher, died at the age of 97. Whipple, born on 5 November 1906 in Red Oak, Iowa, had begun his research at Harvard University in 1931, studying meteors and Earth’s atmosphere. During his career, Whipple had contributed to many significant scientific achievements, including a meteor bumper known as the Whipple shield―a device that protects spacecraft from meteor collisions. However, Whipple was best known for research defying conventional scientific theories about comets: whereas many scientists had suspected that comets were composed of sand and rock bound by gravity, Whipple had theorized that comets are discrete bodies with a frozen nucleus that heats up and emits propulsive jets of gas and dust. Later spacecraft missions to comets had proven his theory correct.(Adam Bernstein, “Fred L. Whipple, 97, Dies; Comet Research Pioneer,” Washington Post, 1 September 2004. 679 NASA, “NASA Selects Contractors for Vision for Space Exploration Studies,” news release C04-s, 1 September 2004.)
NASA launched an Earth-observation satellite called Aura from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 3:01 a.m. (PDT). The spacecraft was one of three satellites in NASA’s Earth Observing System (EOS)―the two others were Terra, which monitored land, and Aqua, which monitored the planet’s water cycle. NASA had created Aura to collect scientific data on global air quality, ozone recovery, and climate change, equipping the satellite with four instruments: the High Resolution Dynamics Limb Sounder, the Microwave Limb Sounder, the Ozone Monitoring Instrument, and the Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer. Project engineers hoped that the instruments would enable the spacecraft to collect the most detailed measurements to date of atmospheric pollution, climate change, and the ozone layer.(NASA, “Aura Launched, To Better Understand the Air We Breathe,” news release 04-217, 15 July 2004; Eric D. Tytell, “Satellite To Study Atmospheric Pollutants,” Los Angeles Times, 16 July 2004.)
NASA succeeded in landing the first of two robotic laboratories on the planet Mars. The robotic rover Spirit was one of two mobile laboratoriesMars Exploration Roversthat NASA had designed to collect and analyze geological samples on Mars. Analysis of the samples would help scientists determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to support life. The twin rovers, part of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program, would land at sites on opposite sides of the planet, where scientists believed that liquid water might have existed in the past. To conduct geological research on the planet, NASA scientists had equipped each rover with a microscopic imager, a panoramic camera, and a variety of spectrometers. NASA had scheduled Opportunity, the second rover, to land on Mars later in January.(NASA, “Spirit Lands on Mars and Sends Postcards,” news release 2004-003, 4 January 2004; NASA, “Mars Exploration Rover Mission: Summary,” http://marsrover.nasa.gov/overview/ (accessed 11 January 2009).)
Researchers announced that they had found a new type of celestial object, which they suspected was a new class of black holes. A group of scientists led by Rosanne Di Stefano of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics had examined data collected by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory. The team had studied x-rays emitted by enigmatic objects located in nearby galaxies, finding that the volume of x-rays emanating from these objects was comparable to or greater than the volume emitted by relatively warmer, larger hard x-ray sources, such as neutron stars and supermassive black holes. The findings indicated that the newly discovered objects could be a type of black hole that the researchers termed “quasi-soft” x-ray sources.(NASA, “Enigmatic X-ray Sources May Point To New Class of Black Holes,” news release 04-067, 1 March 2004; Frank Morring Jr., “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 10 (8 March 2004): 19.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concluded a hearing on the final report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of the U.S. Space Exploration Policy. The report, which the commission had released the previous day, addressed ways in which the federal government and private companies could implement the Vision for Space Exploration. Individuals testifying before the committee included Edward C. Aldridge Jr., who had led the President’s Commission; Paul D. Spudis of the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory; Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Earth Atmospherics and Planetary Sciences; Laurie A. Leshin of Arizona State University; and retired U.S. Air Force General Lester L. Lyles, formerly Commander of the Air Force Materiel Command at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Final Report on the President’s Commission on Implementation of U.S. Space Exploration Policy, 108th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 June 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
NASA’s Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which was overseeing NASA’s efforts to resume Shuttle flights, announced that NASA would not launch another Space Shuttle before March 2005. NASA had delayed a Shuttle launch because of a new requirement that launches occur during daylight hours, to enable photographing the liftoff from multiple angles. Because of the limited number of days available in which a launch could take place in daylight, the next Shuttle launch could occur no earlier than March 2005. In addition, NASA announced that, when Shuttle launches recommenced, one Shuttle would function as a standby rescue vehicle in case the Shuttle carrying the crew sustained damage during flight. NASA announced that, although rescue vehicles would not necessarily be positioned on the launchpad, they would be ready for launch within 45 to 90 days, the maximum length of time that seven astronauts could survive on the ISS before their supplies ran out.(NASA, “NASA Updates Space Shuttle Return to Flight Plans,” news release n04-065, 19 February 2004; Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Won’t Fly Before March Next Year,” New York Times, 20 February 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced that, effective 1 August 2004, NASA would restructure its organization to render it better able to implement President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration. Among many other announced changes, NASA planned to restructure its Earth Science, Space Science, and other Strategic Enterprises into four Mission Directorates―Aeronautics Research, Exploration Systems, Science, and Space Operations―with clearer organizational roles and responsibilities. In addition, to improve communication and clarify responsibilities, functional offices of NASA Headquarters and its field offices―including the office of the Chief Financial Officer―would become mission support offices.(Warren E. Leary, “New Look for NASA for the Next Space Age,” New York Times, 25 June 2004; NASA, “Administrator Unveils Next Steps of NASA Transformation,” news release 04-205, 24 June 2004.)
NASA’s X-43A Hyper X plane set a new record for flight speed, traveling at Mach 7, which is nearly 5,000 miles (8,050 kilometers) per hour and seven times the speed of sound. The flight was also the first free flight of an aircraft powered by a supersonic combustion ramjet enginea scramjeta type of engine that provides thrust by funneling air and fuel into a hollow chamber at extremely high speed. The 12-foot-long (3.7-meter-long) unpiloted, experimental aircraft flew for approximately 11 seconds over the Pacific Ocean, at an altitude of 95,000 feet (approximately 29,000 meters), before NASA deliberately landed the aircraft in the ocean. NASA used a modified B-52 aircraft to carry the X-43A into the sky, launching the X-43A into flight using a Pegasus rocket mounted to the B-52. The test flight, which took place near San Nicolas Island off the California coast, originated from NASA’s DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California.(Peter Pae, “Fast Times at 12 O’Clock High: 5,000 MPH,” Los Angeles Times, 28 March 2004; NASA, “X-43A Soars on Scramjet Power,” 27 March 2004.)
A group of astronomers reported new findings concerning two prominent enigmas of physicsdark energy and the expansion of the universe. Steve Allen of Cambridge University led a group of scientists who had used NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to examine 26 clusters of galaxies, located 1 to 8 billion light-years from Eartha span of time covering the universe’s initial explosion and subsequent expansion. Previously, many scientists had theorized that a force called dark energy might have counteracted gravity, causing the expansion. Chandra’s observations of the distances between the galaxy clusters indicated that the universe’s expansion had accelerated, and Chandra’s data on the ratio of hot gas to dark matter within the galaxy clusters indicated that the density of dark energy had not changed. Both findings were contrary to many previous hypotheses. The astronomers stated that, although their findings were inconclusive, the data suggested that the constant density of dark energy causes the universe to expand eternally. This finding is consistent with Albert Einstein’s concept of cosmological constant, which states that the universe expands constantly and gradually.(NASA, “Chandra Opens New Line of Investigation on Dark Energy,” news release 04-163, 18 May 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Astronomers Find More Evidence of ‘Dark Energy’,” Washington Post, 19 May 2004.)
The U.S. Air Force awarded the Boeing Company a US$472 million contract to develop a military satellite system capable of secure, high-capacity global communications for NASA, the U.S. intelligence community, and the DOD. Under the terms of the contract, Boeing would lead a team of companies that would conduct risk-reduction and system-definition studies for the Transformational Communications MILSATCOM (Military Satellite Communications) Space Segment, which uses laser communications, advanced processors, and other advanced technologies to provide communications for airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The companies selected to conduct research on the project included Ball Aerospace, Cisco Systems, and Raytheon.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Awarded $472 Million for Next-Generation Military Satellite System,” news release, 23 January 2004, http//www.boeing.com/news/releases/2004/q1/nr_040123s.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Former astronaut Robert D. Cabana became Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Brock R. Stone, who had retired after a 36-year career with NASA. Cabana had previously served on four Space Shuttle missions and in many management positions supporting the Astronaut Office and the ISS Program. Before becoming Deputy Director of JSC, Cabana had served as Director of Flight Crew Operations. NASA had appointed former astronaut Kenneth D. Bowersox to fill that position.(NASA JSC, “NASA Fills Key Space Flight Positions,” news release I-I04-080, 3 March 2004.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bush’s exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASA’s possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, “NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort,” Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space concerning NASA’s budget request for FY 2005. NASA had requested US$16.2 billion for FY 2005, an increase of 5.6 percent over its budget for FY 2004. Much of O’Keefe’s testimony and the Senate subcommittee members’ questions were concerned with the likelihood of NASA’s achieving the objectives that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration, announced in January 2004. Those objectives included human flights to the Moon and replacing the Space Shuttles with a new space-exploration vehicle.(NASA, “Administrator O’Keefe’s Senate Testimony,” news release, 1 April 2004; Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Chief Faces Lawmakers’ Queries,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 April 2004.)
A commission created by President George W. Bush released its report outlining how NASA and other organizations might implement President Bush’s new policy: the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration. The President’s Commission, led by Edward C. Aldridge Jr., endorsed the Vision for Space Exploration’s goals―to explore Mars and the Moon. In addition, the commission recommended that, to meet those goals, NASA needed to make numerous changes; the federal government needed to establish a permanent council to develop and coordinate space exploration policies; and the private sector needed to become more involved in space operations. Specific changes that the commission recommended were that NASA should focus on the research and development of space technology, and that private industry should conduct operational activities, such as launching payloads to low Earth orbit. The report also recommended that NASA pursue partnerships with the scientific community and with foreign space agencies.(President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, A Journey To Inspire, Innovate, and Discover: Report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (Washington, DC, June 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/news/reports/index.html (accessed 6 April 2009); Warren E. Leary and John Schwartz, “NASA Is Urged To Widen Role for Business,” New York Times, 15 June 2004.)
