2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA marked the 10-year anniversary of the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory with the release of the first of three new versions of classic Chandra images. NASA planned to release the other two versions over the following three months. The newly released image showed the remnants of the supernova E0102, located 190,000 light-years away from Earth, in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Chandra had made its first observation of E0102 shortly after its 1999 launch. The observatory had created the new image from recent x-ray data showing the supernova’s outer blast wave and its inner ring of cooler material. This x-ray data had provided astronomers with new information about the geometry of the remnant and the nature of the explosion. Chandra had launched in 1999 from aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, deploying on a five-year mission that had ushered in an unprecedented decade of discovery. Among its achievements, Chandra had provided the strongest evidence to date for the existence of dark matter. Chandra had independently confirmed the existence of dark energy, producing spectacular images of the titanic explosions created when matter swirled toward supermassive black holes.(NASA, “NASA Celebrates Chandra X-Ray Observatory’s 10th Anniversary,” news release 09-171, 23 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09-171_Chandra_anniversary.html (accessed 10 August 2011); Space.com, “On 10th Birthday, Chandra Spies Stellar Explosion,” 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7039-10th- birthday-chandra-spies-stellar-explosion.html (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later—7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairing—the nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmosphere—failed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japan’s GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, “NASA’s Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful,” news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, “NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
NASA announced the one-year extension of the Space Station Cargo Integration Contract that Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems had held since January 2004. The extension’s start date was 1 October 2009. As the second of two such options provided for in the original contract, the extension brought the total value of the contract to US$381 million. Under the terms of the contract, Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems provided sustained engineering for NASA carriers and cargo packing for delivery to and from the ISS. The company also determined the most efficient way to pack cargo; verified the adequacy of the integrated carriers; packed the pressurized cargo into subcarriers; and returned the cargo to providers, once it had returned to Earth.(NASA, “NASA Extends Space Station Cargo Integration Contract,” news release C09-038, 26 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/C09-038_ISS_cargo.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA’s GSFC announced that NASA’s STEREO mission had confirmed the existence of the so-called solar tsunami, a controversial phenomenon that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission had first observed in 1997. In May of that year, the SOHO craft had recorded a tsunami-type wave rippling away from a CME blast site on an active region of the solar surface. At that time, scientists wondered whether the phenomenon had been an actual wave or a shadow of the CME. SOHO’s single point of view was insufficient to provide an answer to that question. However, in February 2009, the twin craft of the STEREO mission had recorded a wave from two positions, separated by 90 degrees, when sunspot 11012 suddenly erupted, giving researchers an unprecedented view of the event. The technical name for a solar-tsunami wave is “fast-mode magnetohydrodynamical (MHD) wave.” STEREO had captured a solar-tsunami wave climbing 100,000 kilometers high (62,137 miles high), racing outward at 250 kilometers per second (155.34 miles per second)—560,000 miles per hour (901,233 kilometers per hour) — and generating energy equivalent to 2.4 million megatons of TNT. Joseph B. Gurman of the Solar Physics Laboratory at NASA’s GSFC explained that, although solar tsunamis pose no direct threat to Earth, they help scientists diagnose conditions on the Sun and forecast of space weather more accurately.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Mystery of the Solar Tsunami—Solved,” GSFC news release, 19 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/stereo/news/solar_tsunami.html (accessed 21 December 2011); Space.com, “Solar Tsunamis Are Real, NASA Says,” 25 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7602-solar- tsunamis-real-nasa.html (accessed 21 December 2011).)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), an independent group of experts that had evaluated NASA’s safety performance since 1968, released its 2008 annual report. ASAP agreed that continuing to operate the Shuttle fleet would minimize the gap between Shuttle retirement and the first Orion flights, but the panel did not favor that approach because of NASA’s diminished Shuttle manufacturing and support capabilities. NASA had been closing out contracts with Shuttle component manufacturers and supporting vendors since 2004. According to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), operating the fleet beyond 2010 would require NASA to recertify the entire Shuttle system and to draw funds from the Constellation Program, thereby impeding its effort to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. ASAP saw little likelihood that NASA could field Ares-I rockets and Orion spacecraft before March 2015, even if Congress provided additional funding. ASAP had concluded that no evidence indicated that the commercial sector could develop cargo and crew transport services in time, or that commercial spacecraft were appropriate to transport NASA personnel, or that commercial spacecraft could safely dock with the ISS. In addition to ASAP’s annual report, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) had released a report analyzing budget scenarios for fulfilling President George W. Bush’s 2004 space exploration plan. Each scenario predicted schedule slips requiring additional congressional funding. The CBO had found that, at current funding levels, NASA must delay development of Ares I’s and Orion’s initial operating capabilities until late 2016, delay the return of humans to the Moon for three years, and delay 15 out of 79 science missions beyond 2025.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel Releases Annual Report,” media advisory M09-061, 16 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_M09-061_ASAP_Annual_Report.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Todd Halvorson, “Independent Safety Experts Call for Shuttle Shutdown,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009; Eun Kyung Kim, “Report: NASA Needs Extra Billons To Maintain Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2009. See also U.S. Congress, Congressional Budget Office, “The Budgetary Implications of NASA’s Current Plans for Space Exploration” (report, Washington, DC, April 2009), http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/ doc10051/04 -15-NASA.pdf.)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiment’s purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASA’s LaRC.(Diane Tennant, “NASA Opens Suitcase from Space,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, “MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening,” LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA announced its selection of the seven research teams that would become the first members of NASA’s Lunar Science Institute, headquartered at Ames Research Center (ARC). NASA had established the Institute to support scientific research related to NASA’s existing lunar science programs, in coordination with U.S. space exploration policy. NASA had selected the members using a competitive evaluation process that had begun in June 2008. The seven teams were from Brown University in Rhode Island; Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland; the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston, Texas; NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland; Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado; the Lunar University Node for Astrophysics Research at the University of Colorado in Boulder; and NASA’s Lunar Science Institute of the Colorado Center for Lunar Dust and Atmospheric Studies at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Proposals for lunar research included the study of the history of lunar impacts and how such impacts have affected the Moon’s evolution; the study of the Moon’s formative years; the study of the dynamic response of the lunar environment; and the use of the Moon as a base from which to study the cosmos. NASA had modeled the Lunar Science Institute after its Astrobiology Institute, also housed at ARC.(NASA, “NASA Selects Research Teams for Lunar Science Institute,” news release 09-004, 9 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-004_Lunar_Institute_members.html (accessed 1 February 2011).)
NASA announced that NASA and the National Snow and Ice Data Center had captured new data indicating that the decade-long trend of diminishing sea-ice cover had continued. In addition, new evidence from satellite observations showed that the ice cap was thinning, as well. Scientists using satellite data to track Arctic sea-ice cover stated that, during the winter of 2008−2009, they had noted the fifth lowest maximum ice extent recorded since the beginning of satellite monitoring in 1979. All six of the lowest maximum ice events had occurred since 2004. Studying ICESat data, NASA researchers had discovered that, in addition to the diminishing ice extent, ice thickness had been declining. The new, thinner ice is more vulnerable to summer melt than the older, thicker ice it replaces. Researchers explained that more than 90 percent of the sea ice in the Arctic was only one or two years old at the beginning of the spring of 2009—an indication that the Arctic sea ice was thinner and more vulnerable than at any time in the past three decades.(NASA, “Satellites Show Arctic Literally on Thin Ice,” news release 09-079, 6 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-079_Sea_ice_thins.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Arctic Sea Ice Thinnest Ever Going Into Spring,” 7 April 2009.)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Charles F. Bolden Jr. and JAXA President Keiji Tachikawa had signed an agreement defining the terms of the two space agencies’ cooperation on the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) mission. NASA intended the GPM mission to build on the success of the NASA-JAXA TRMM. GPM would begin to measure global precipitation, a key factor in climate. NASA described GPM as a cornerstone of the multinational Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Precipitation Constellation. The GPM mission’s spaceborne core observatory would provide the reference standard, unifying the measurements of a constellation of multinational research and operational satellites carrying microwave sensors. Using a Dual-Frequency Precipitation Radar (DPR), operating at Ku- and Ka-band frequencies, and a multichannel Global Precipitation Measurement Microwave Imager (GMI), operating at from 10 to 183 GHz, the GPM mission would provide uniformly calibrated precipitation measurements globally, every 2 to 4 hours, contributing to scientific research and societal applications. Additionally, for the first time, the observatory’s sensor measurements would make detailed observations of precipitation-particle-size distribution. The agreement made NASA responsible for the GPM core-observatory spacecraft bus, the GMI that it would carry, and a second GMI. A Low-Inclination Observatory provided by a partner agency would carry the second GMI. JAXA would supply the DPR for the core observatory, an H-2A rocket for the core observatory’s launch, and data from a conical-scanning microwave imager that would deploy on the upcoming Global Change Observation Mission satellite.(NASA, “NASA and Jaxa Sign Agreement for Future Earth Science Cooperation,” news release 09-177, 30 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ_09_177_NASA_JAXA_Agreement.html (accessed 10 August 2011).)
Eilene Marie Galloway, a pioneer in space law and policy, died of cancer at the age of 102. As a national defense analyst at the Library of Congress, Galloway had helped organize hearings on U.S. space preparedness following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik in 1957, which had led to the creation of the Senate Special Committee on Space and Aeronautics. Galloway had also served as an advisor during the formation of the House Select Committee on Astronautics and Space Exploration. When the House Select Committee recommended the creation of a national space agency, Galloway had suggested that Congress constitute the new entity as an administration responsible for coordinating space-related activities across the federal government. In addition to advising Congress on space policy, Galloway had helped establish the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNCOPUOS). She had frequently served on UNCOPUOS as a representative of the United States. Galloway had also been a founding member of the International Institute of Space Law (IISL) and had frequently voiced her support for Article II of the Outer Space Treaty, which states, “celestial bodies are not subject to national appropriations by claims of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means.” In 2006 Galloway had become the first woman elected Honorary Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. She had also been a fellow of the AAS, an Honorary Director of the IISL, a Trustee Emeritus of the International Academy of Astronautics, the first recipient of a Lifetime Achievement Award from Women in Aerospace, and the recipient of the NASA Public Service Award and Gold Medal.(Frank Morring Jr., “Space-Law Pioneer Eilene Galloway Dead at 102,” Aviation Week, 5 May 2009.)
University of California at Irvine announced the publication of a NASA-funded study about bone strength among astronauts. Although previous studies had examined bone-mineral density, this study was the first to evaluate bone strength. Joyce Keyak, a professor of orthopedic surgery and biomedical engineering at University of California at Irvine, led the study. She and her research team used a novel computer program that Keyak had developed to identify hipbone fracture risk in people with osteoporosis. They analyzed hipbone CT (computed tomography) scans of one female and 12 male astronauts who had spent four to six months aboard the International Space Station (ISS). The researchers found that, on average, the astronauts’ hipbone strength decreased 14 percent. However, three astronauts experienced losses of 20 to 30 percent—comparable to those seen in older women with osteoporosis. The research team published its findings in the online version of Bone, the journal of the International Bone and Mineral Society.(University of California at Irvine, “Astronauts on International Space Station Lose Alarming Amounts of Hipbone Strength,” news release, 26 January 2009, http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/article/ 19371 (accessed 2 February 2011); Kristen Schott, “UCI Study Finds Astronauts at Risk for Bone Loss,” OC Metro (Newport Beach, CA), 27 January 2009.)
NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) announced the successful flight test of a newly designed super-pressure balloon prototype intended to carry large scientific experiments to the edge of space on missions lasting a minimum of 100 days. The project’s goal was to design a 22-million-cubic-foot (67-million-cubic-meter) balloon that would carry an instrument weighing up to 1 ton (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonne) to an altitude of more than 110,000 feet (33,528 meters). The test flight launched a 7-million-cubic-foot (2.13-million-cubic-meter) balloon, the largest single-cell, super-pressure, fully sealed balloon flown to date. The launch took place on 28 December 2008 from McMurdo Station, NSF’s logistics hub in Antarctica. Successfully demonstrating the durability and functionality of its unique pumpkin shape and novel material—a lightweight polyethylene film approximately the thickness of plastic food wrap. The balloon reached a float altitude of more than 111,000 feet (33,833 meters), which it was still maintaining on 8 January, its eleventh day of flight.(NASA, “New NASA Balloon Successfully Flight-Tested Over Antarctica,” news release 09-003, 8 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-003_Antarctic_Balloons.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
Richard E. Halpern, a senior NASA official who had served as Science Manager on Spacelab, the ISS, and other human spaceflight and robotic NASA projects, died of heart ailments at the age of 78. Halpern had served in the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s and had held a fellowship at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University in 1968 and 1969. Before joining NASA in 1963, he had worked at the Naval Ordnance Laboratory. After joining NASA, Halpern had become Director of its High Energy Astrophysics Program during the early planning stages for the ISS. In the late 1970s, he had served as Program Manager for three launches of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory. He had served as Director of the ISS utilities and operations division from 1986 until his retirement in 1989. NASA had awarded Halpern its Exceptional Service Medal in 1978 and its highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, in 1980.(Matt Schudel, “Obituaries: Richard E. Halpern NASA Official,” Washington Post, 7 December 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that NASA had continued to experience cost overruns and delays in implementing large-scale projects or those budgeted at US$250 million or more. GAO had audited 18 NASA projects, with a combined life-cycle cost of more than US$50 billion. Of those 18 projects, 13 had entered the implementation phase. Ten of the 13 had experienced significant cost growth or schedule growth or both. Development costs had increased by an average of 13 percent from baseline cost estimates, and projects had an average launch delay of 11 months. GAO reported that many projects had faced challenges in developing new technologies or retrofitting older technologies, as well as difficulty managing contractors. However, GAO found that, despite these problems, NASA had improved its ability to manage and to estimate the cost of major projects. Nevertheless, GAO suggested that NASA needed to make additional improvements. The report noted that, although NASA’s budget represented less than 2 percent of the federal government’s discretionary budget, NASA was increasingly receiving requests to expand its portfolio to support important scientific missions, such as the study of climate change. GAO found that, to meet these increased demands, NASA would need to work even harder to manage its resources as effectively and efficiently as possible.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA: Assessments of Selected Large-Scale Projects” (report no. GAO-09-306SP, Washington, DC, 2 March 2009), http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-306SP (accessed 11 May 2011); Mark Matthews, “GAO: NASA’s Big Projects Take Too Long, Cost Too Much,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 March 2009.)
Human Space Flight Review Committee Chair Norman R. Augustine held a press conference to present the committee’s findings and final report. The committee had formed in June 2009 at the request of John P. Holdren, Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. Its purpose was to examine independently
NASA announced that its Kepler space telescope had detected the atmosphere of HAT-P-7, a known gas-giant planet, within a 10-day period of test-data collection, thereby demonstrating Kepler’s extraordinary scientific capabilities. NASA analysis showed that Kepler’s onboard telescope and light-detecting instruments were at least 100 times more precise than the ground- based instruments that had originally discovered HAT-P-7. The unprecedented precision of Kepler’s measurements of the planet yielded new information about HAT-P-7’s atmosphere, demonstrating Kepler’s accuracy in locating Earth-sized planets. Kepler had launched on 6 March 2009, on a mission to locate Earth-sized, potentially habitable exoplanets.(NASA, “NASA’s Kepler Mission Spies Changing Phases in a Distant World,” news release 09-180, 6 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_180_Kepler_First_light.html (accessed 31 August 2011); John Johnson Jr., “NASA Says Kepler Spacecraft Proves It Can Find Earth-Sized Planets,” Los Angeles Times, 7 August 2009.)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttle’s successor craft. The Shuttle’s successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Program’s Ares I-X mission management office at NASA’s JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASA’s KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicle’s first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rocket’s booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, “NASA’s Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test,” news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA’s New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight,” 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break,” New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, “Ares I-X Flies—But Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
NASA’s GSFC announced the findings of a study that had investigated diminishing groundwater levels in India. Using data provided by the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), the research team, led by NASA hydrologist Matthew Rodell of GSFC, had found that, despite no shortage of rainfall, Indians were consuming groundwater in northern India faster than it could be replenished—primarily using rain to irrigate agricultural crops. The twin GRACE satellites, which NASA and the German Aerospace Center had launched in 2002, orbited
After the SST entered standby mode at 3:11 p.m. (PDT), NASA announced the end of its primary mission and the start of its “warm” mission. NASA had designed SST to conduct a two- and-a-half-year mission to detect infrared light from cool cosmic objects, a mission that required maintaining the telescope’s three instruments at -456°F (-271°C), the coldest temperature theoretically attainable. SST’s liquid helium, used as cryogen, had lasted twice as long as projected—more than five-and-a-half years—but Spitzer’s supply of the coolant had finally depleted. The telescope would remain cold, at -404°F (-242°C), but that temperature would be too warm to allow Spitzer’s infrared spectrograph and its longer wavelength, multiband imaging photometer to detect cool objects in space. SST Project Manager Robert K. Wilson at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that, with its coolant depleted, Spitzer would be “reborn,” with a mission to tackle new scientific pursuits. During its so-called warm mission, Spitzer would continue to see through the dust that permeates our galaxy, blocking visible-light views, and two channels of one of its instruments would continue to operate at full capacity. Spitzer’s two infrared-array camera detectors with short wavelengths would continue to function as designed, picking up the glow from a range of objects, such as asteroids, dusty stars, planet- forming discs, gas-giant planets, and distant galaxies. Spitzer’s new projects would include refining estimates of Hubble’s constant; searching for galaxies at the edge of the universe; assessing how often potentially hazardous asteroids might impact Earth; and characterizing the atmospheres of gas-giant planets that astronomers expected NASA’s Kepler mission would discover.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Telescope Warms Up to New Career,” news release 09-099, 6 May 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-099_Spitzer_Warms_Up.html (accessed 20 June 2011); NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Spitzer Space Telescope Mission Status,” JPL news release 15 May 2009, http://www.jpl. nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-086 (accessed 30 June 2011).)
NASA named Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain, Deputy Director of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) for the 24 February OCO launch failure. As Chair of the MIB, Obenschain would lead four yet-to-be-named members, tasked with gathering information, analyzing the facts, identifying the launch failure’s causes and contributing factors, and making recommendations for actions to prevent a similar incident. As Deputy Director of GSFC, Obenschain shared responsibility for executive leadership and overall direction and management of the Center, in addition to providing executive oversight and technical evaluation for development and delivery for Goddard space systems launches and operations. Previously, Obenschain had headed the Flight Projects Directorate, where he had 25 been responsible for the daily management of more than 40 space and Earth science missions.
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract modification to L-3 Communications Integrated Systems LP of Waco, Texas, to extend through 31 December 2009 the period of performance for further developmental engineering in support of the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) mission. The joint program of NASA and the German Aerospace Center, SOFIA included a high-altitude, airborne, German-built 2.5-meter (100-inch) infrared telescope. Mounted in a cavity in the rear fuselage of a highly modified Boeing-747SP jetliner, the telescope had scientific instruments capable of celestial observations ranging from visible light through the submillimeter, far-infrared spectrum. L-3 Communications was responsible for completing development and testing of the SOFIA Airborne System, including modification, fabrication, installation, integration, and verification of various systems to meet mission requirements. The contract modification covered completion of the SOFIA subsystems, such as the mission-control and communications system; engineering and flight-test support for the telescope-cavity-door-open flight tests and the science programs; and support for reviews leading to NASA’s public aircraft certification. The option modification brought the total value of the contract to approximately US$37.7 million. NASA had not yet exercised the two additional one- year-option periods allowed under the initial cost-plus-award-fee contract with L-3 134 Communications Integrated Systems. The initial contract had taken effect in February 2007.
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, “Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia,” Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earth’s atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1’s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Korea’s launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (North Korea’s) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Korea’s launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Korea’s complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, “South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space,” 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, “South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch,” Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of two scientific proposals to study the Sun and other exotic objects in the universe, such as neutron stars and black holes. NASA would develop the proposals into full missions, as part of its Small Explorer (SMEX) program. The winning proposals were the Interface Region Imaging Spectrography (IRIS) and the Gravity and Extreme Magnetism (GEMS). With Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center in Palo Alto, California, as Principal Investigator, the IRIS mission would use a solar telescope and spectrograph to explore the solar chromosphere, a region crucial in the quest to understand energy transport into the solar wind. NASA expected the mission greatly to extend the scientific output of existing heliophysics spacecraft. Jean H. Swank of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, would serve as Principal Investigator of the GEMS mission, designed to study the bending of space and curving of light in regions of extreme gravity—near objects such as ultra- dense neutron stars and stellar-mass black holes—and to detect and measure the polarization of the x rays that such objects emit. NASA planned for to launch both projects by 2015, with mission costs capped at US$105 million each, excluding the launch vehicles.(NASA, “NASA Awards Two Small Explorer Development Contracts,” news release 09-141, 19 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-141_SMEX_Selections.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA announced the first successful full-scale, full-duration stationary test fire of the first-stage motor for the Ares-I rocket, the CLV in development for NASA’s Constellation Program. NASA and its industry partner ATK Space Systems had successfully conducted the test, which consisted of shooting a giant flame through the 154-foot (46.94-meter) rocket as it stood on a horizontal test stand, to ignite the 1.5 million pounds (0.68 million kilograms) of solid propellant coating the booster’s interior. The ignition shot flame at three times the speed of sound. The plume’s temperature reached 4,500°F, and the flame generated 3.6 million pounds (1.6 million kilograms) of thrust. During the firing of the five-segment solid development motor (DM 1), engineers gathered measurements from 650 sensors to evaluate acoustics, thrust, roll control, and motor vibrations. The event marked the second attempt to conduct the 2-minute test at ATK Space Systems’ test stand in Promontory, Utah. NASA had canceled the first test on 27 August, when it was already in progress, with 20 seconds remaining in the countdown. NASA’s engineering team had made this decision when the ground controller unit had a problem with a 30-year-old component that helped to move nozzle controls. Nozzle controls steer a rocket in flight. The engineering team had conducted a detailed investigation and had replaced a faulty part.(NASA, “NASA and ATK Successfully Test Ares First Stage Motor,” news release 09-198, 10 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-198_Ares_DM-1_test.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Mark Stark for Associated Press, “Rocket Test in Northern Utah Goes Off Problem-Free,” 11 September 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Ares I Scores a Victory: A Debut in Flame and Smoke,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 September 2009.)
Orbital Sciences Corporation announced that NASA’s GSFC had selected Orbital Sciences to design, manufacture, integrate, and test a new low-Earth-orbit space-science satellite for GSFC’s GEMS mission. The purpose of the GEMS mission was to help answer fundamental questions about the universe. The mission aimed to find energy released near black holes, locate the origin of x-ray emissions from pulsars, and identify the magnetic field structure in high-energy nebulae. Under the US$40 million contract, which GSFC had awarded through NASA’s SMEX Program, Orbital Sciences would provide the spacecraft bus and conduct mission operations. Orbital’s proven spacecraft bus, LEOStar 2TM, would provide the design for the GEMS bus. GEMS would be the eighth satellite modeled after LEOStar 2 and the fifth SMEX satellite to use that platform. Previous space-based x-ray observatories had been insensitive to polarization but, for the GEMS mission, Orbital planned to design the first observatory able to measure x-ray polarization systematically. This capability would enable scientists to use the GEMS observatory to study scattering, magnetic fields, and strong gravitational fields. The GEMS team planned to make the mission data accessible to the astrophysics community and to the public via NASA’s High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center Web site.(Orbital Sciences Corporation, “Orbital Selected by NASA To Build New Space Science Satellite To Study X-ray Polarization,” news release, 8 July 2009, http://www.orbital.com/NewsInfo/release.asp?prid=700 (accessed 16 August 2011).)
NASA’s MFSC and the Chandra X-ray Observatory announced that a long observation from Chandra, the SST, and ground-based observatories had identified for the first time the source of energy producing so-called cosmic blobs. The Chandra observations had helped reveal that the so-called blobs are not infant galaxies, as astronomers had previously thought, but more likely “adolescent” galaxies about to stabilize. The telescopes had observed a collection of 29 blobs in one large field in the sky called SSA22. The blobs had become visible from Earth when the universe was approximately 2 billion years old, or 15 percent of its current age. Chandra data had revealed a signature in five blobs indicating the growth of supermassive black holes—a point- like source with luminous x-ray emission. An additional three blobs provided possible evidence for such black holes. Further observations, including Spitzer data, had determined that remarkable levels of star formation dominated several of these galaxies. Calculations had revealed that the radiation and outflows from the black holes, and from the bursts of star formation, were powerful enough to light up the hydrogen gas in the blobs. Scientists stated that, although the gas in the blobs would not likely cool down to form stars, it would add to the hot gas found between galaxies, indicating that SSA22 could evolve into a massive galaxy cluster. James E. Geach of Durham University in the United Kingdom, lead author of the study, which the Astrophysical Journal would publish in its 10 July 2009 issue, remarked that scientists would need to look further back in time to capture data indicating that the blobs were forming galaxies and black holes.(Chandra X-Ray Center, “Galaxies Coming of Age in Cosmic Blobs,” news release, 24 June 2009, http://chandra. si.edu/press/09_releases/press_062409.html (accessed 5 August 2011); Clara Moskowitz, “Secrets of Space Blobs Revisited,” Space.com, 24 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6885-secrets-space-blobs-revealed.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Seth Borenstein, “Telescope Finds Space Blobs Are Pubescent Galaxies,” Associated Press, 25 June 2009.)
NASA and Cisco announced a partnership, under the terms of a Space Act Agreement, to develop an online, collaborative global-monitoring platform called Planetary Skin. Planetary Skin would capture and analyze data from satellite-, airborne-, sea-, and land-based sensors. Governments, businesses, and the general public would have access to the data, enabling them to measure, report, and verify environmental data in near real time and thereby assisting them in detecting and adapting to global climate change. Cisco and NASA planned to start Planetary Skin with a series of pilot projects, such as Rainforest Skin. Cisco and NASA planned to develop the prototype of Rainforest Skin during the following year. Focusing on deforestation, Rainforest Skin would explore methods of integrating a comprehensive sensor network and determining how to capture, analyze, and present information about changes in rainforests’ carbon levels in a transparent and usable way. S. Peter Worden, Director of NASA’s ARC, explained that NASA had collected a lot of data, which was awaiting conversion. He remarked further that the partnership sought to combine NASA’s data and Cisco’s expertise in data handling to explain what was currently happening in the rainforests of the world.(NASA, “NASA, Cisco Partnering for Climate Change Monitoring Platform,” news release 09-20AR, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/news/releases/2009/09-20AR.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Michael Burnham for Greenwire, “NASA-Cisco Climate Project To Flash ‘Planetary Skin’,” New York Times, 4 March 2009. 32 NASA, “NASA Announces Mishap Board Members for OCO Investigation,” news release 09-047, 3 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-047_OCO_MIB.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
In coordination with NASA’s Office of the Chief Engineer and Office of Human Capital Management, NASA’s Innovative Partnerships Program announced the selection of its inaugural group of Innovation Ambassadors. NASA had established the program to target opportunities for creating NASA partnerships and for identifying new sources of innovation outside the traditional aerospace field. NASA anticipated selecting a group of Innovation Ambassadors annually, assigning the selected ambassadors to positions at several leading innovative external research and development organizations in the United States. During these assignments, which would last as long as a year, the selected individuals would share their expertise with their assigned research and development organization while learning about the organization’s innovative products, processes, and business models. Upon returning to NASA, the ambassadors would share new ideas with their NASA colleagues and would implement innovations within their respective NASA divisions. NASA had selected ARC’s Robert S. McCann, who would work with the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in Palo Alto, California, studying the application of artificial intelligence to health systems management and human-machine teams; JSC’s Eric C. Darcy, who would work with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado, to develop mathematical models for lithium-ion battery performance; GSFC’s Lawrence M. Hilliard, who would work with Primary Simulation, of Silver Spring, Maryland, to apply “laser ball” technology to interactive educational tools; and Kelly J. Snook, also from GSFC, who would work at Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s (MIT’s) Media Laboratory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to study the use of sound as a means of visualizing and analyzing scientific data.(NASA, “NASA Selects First Innovation Ambassadors,” news release 09-182, 4 August 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_182_Innovation_Ambassadors.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA announced that, together with industry engineers, it had successfully tested the three main parachutes of the Ares-I rocket, which NASA was designing to serve as the booster rocket for the Orion CEV. Engineers had designed the parachutes as the primary element of the rocket’s deceleration system, which included a pilot parachute and a drogue parachute. The main parachutes would deploy in a cluster, open simultaneously, and provide the necessary drag to slow the descent of the solid-rocket first-stage motor to a soft landing in the ocean, allowing their recovery for use on future flights. NASA’s MSFC engineers had conducted the first cluster test at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The flight test was the eighth in an ongoing series supporting the development of the Ares-I recovery system. The research team had dropped the 41,500-pound (18,824-kilogram, or 18.8-tonne) load from a U.S. Air Force C- 17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,058-meters). All parachutes and test hardware had functioned properly and landed safely. The parachutes measured 150 feet (45.72 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonnes), making them the largest rocket parachutes manufactured to date.(NASA, “NASA Tests Largest Rocket Parachutes Ever for Ares I,” news release 09-113, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-113_AresI_Parachutes_Test.html (accessed 20 June 2011);)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting, members of NASA’s MESSENGER mission team and cartographic experts from the U.S. Geological Survey released the first global map of Mercury. The team had built the map from 917 images that NASA’s MESSENGER spacecraft had collected as recently as 29 September 2009 and from earlier images that Mariner 10 had captured in the 1970s. Scientists planned to use the map as a critical tool to help identify Mercury’s craters, faults, and other features. MESSENGER would use this information in its observations, when the craft entered Mercury’s orbit in 2011. MESSENGER Principal Investigator Sean C. Solomon remarked that, beyond its use as a planning tool, the global map signified that MESSENGER was no longer a flyby mission. Instead, MESSENGER would soon become an in-depth, nonstop global observatory of the solar system’s innermost planet.(Alexis Madrigal, “First Global Map of Mercury,” Wired, 16 December 2009; Nancy Atkinson, “MESSENGER Team Releases First Global Map of Mercury,” Universe Today, 16 December 2009.)
Astronauts aboard the ISS operated the Japanese robotic arm for the first time, moving two experiments. One of the two experiments would study the effect of the station’s space environment on electronics and devices; the other was an x-ray observatory that would scan the night sky, using an inter-orbit communications system to send images, data, and voice communications to Japan’s Kibo mission control center at Tsukuba Space Center. The ISS’s robotic arm moved the three payloads from JEL to JEF, the porch attached to Japan’s Kibo laboratory. After some initial problems with its grappling device, the 33-foot (10-meter) robotic arm continued its day-long operation as planned. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata helped to drive the robotic arm. Wakata, Japan’s first long-duration ISS resident, had lived aboard the station since March 2009.(Tariq Malik, “Japanese Experiments Moved to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7043-japanese-experiments-moved-space-station.html (accessed 29 August 2011).)
NASA announced its partnership with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), to collaborate in lunar and asteroid science research. The Saudi Lunar and Near-Earth Object Science Center would become an affiliate partner with the NASA Lunar Science Institute at NASA’s ARC. The partnership fell within the scope of a MOU on Science and Technology, which the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States had signed in 2008. U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia James B. Smith recognized the partnership as an important advance in the growing U.S.-Saudi program of bilateral science and technology cooperation.(NASA, “NASA Partners with Saudi Arabia on Moon and Asteroid Research,” news release 09-284, 15 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-284_NASA-Saudi_statement.html (accessed 16 December 2011).)
NASA announced that, using NASA’s Aqua satellite, researchers had conducted the first global analysis of the health and productivity of ocean plants. Ocean scientists had used Aqua’s Moderate Resolution Imagine Spectroradiometer (MODIS) to measure remotely the amount of fluorescent redlight emitted by phytoplankton. This research marked the first time that scientists had observed redlight fluorescence over the open ocean on a global scale. The measurements enabled the researchers to assess how efficiently the microscopic plants had been conducting photosynthesis. The data could also enable researchers to study the effect of global environmental changes on phytoplankton. Scientists consider phytoplankton to be the center of the ocean food web, accounting for half of all photosynthetic activity on Earth and playing a critical role in the balance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Michael J. Behrenfeld, a biologist at Oregon State University, explained that the amount of fluorescent light emitted is not constant but, rather, changes with the health of the plant life in the ocean. Scott C. Doney, a marine chemist from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, added that fluorescence provides insight into how well phytoplankton are functioning within the ecosystem. The new measurement revealed that large areas of the Indian Ocean contain phytoplankton that are experiencing stress from iron deficiency. Scientists observed that phytoplankton fluorescence increases as the amount of iron decreases. Therefore, large portions of the ocean “light up” seasonally, as phytoplankton respond to the lack of iron in their diet.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Detects Red Glow To Map Global Ocean Plant Health,” news release 09-124, 28 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-124_Ocean_health.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
NASA released the first comprehensive map of Earth’s solar system, including a map of its location in the Milky Way galaxy. NASA had produced the map using data collected over six months by two detectors on NASA’s Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) spacecraft. The map revealed the local interstellar medium, the region that separates the nearest reaches of the galaxy from the heliosphere. This region acts as a “protective bubble,” shielding Earth’s solar system from the most dangerous cosmic radiation traveling through space. According to IBEX Principal Investigator David J. McComas, of the Space Science and Engineering Division at Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, the IBEX sky map marked the first time that scientists could leave the Sun’s atmosphere and begin to understand Earth’s place in the galaxy. The map also enabled astronomers to place in context the observations from NASA’s Voyager spacecraft. Since their launch in 1977, the twin Voyager spacecraft had each traveled into the interstellar boundary. However, the IBEX data showed a ribbon of bright emissions that neither Voyager craft had detected. Launched in October 2008, NASA’s IBEX had a mission to map the heliosphere. The journal Science had published a series of papers outlining the results of the mission.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Provides First View of Our Place in the Galaxy,” news release 09-241, 15 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-241_IBEX.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, “NASA Probe Helps To Map Solar System,” 16 October 2009.)
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martin−built NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary “afternoon” spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecraft’s orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. France’s national space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, “ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASA’s NOAA- N Prime,” 6 February 2009.)
NASA’s GSFC selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation to build a second GMI for the GPM mission. Ball had designed the identical instruments—GMI 1 and GMI 2—as multichannel, conical-scanning, microwave radiometers, which would serve an essential role in the near-global coverage of GPM. Ball planned to conduct full instrument testing on GMI 1 in mid-2010, with launch aboard the spaceborne GPM core observatory scheduled for 2013. The GMI-2 launch would follow in 2014. Ball had designed the 8-foot-high (2.4-meter-high) GMI instruments to rotate at 32 revolutions per minute, to perform temporal sampling of rainfall accumulations and more frequent and higher quality data collection, using two stable calibration points.(Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation, “Ball Aerospace Selected for Second NASA GMI Microwave Imager,” news release, 30 November 2009, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=363 (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA announced a partnership with the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory to develop a “technology roadmap” study for the commercial reusable launch vehicle (RLV) industry. Led by NASA’s Innovative Partnerships Program, the study would identify technologies and assess their potential use, in an effort to accelerate the development of commercial RLVs. The study would also recommend to the U.S. government technology tasks and milestones for various vehicle categories. NASA had defined the categories as 1) reusable, suborbital vehicles; 2) expendable and partially reusable, orbital vehicles; 3) reusable, two-stage orbital vehicles; and 4) advanced vehicle concepts, such as single-stage-to-orbit, air-breathing systems, in-flight refueling, and tethered upper-stage vehicles. NASA and the U.S. Air Force planned to evaluate all types of flight systems—from space entry, descent, and recovery systems, to avionics, communications, and flight control. The study would commence in 2009, at the Commercial and Government Responsive Access to Space Technology Exchange in Dayton, Ohio (26−29 October 2009). Representatives from NASA, the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, and the FAA’s Office of Commercial Space Transportation would meet with representatives from the commercial RLV industry, soliciting feedback about long-range growth plans and the necessary technology to implement those plans successfully.(NASA, “NASA Announces Commercial RLV Technology Roadmap Project,” news release 09-238, 13 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-238_RLV_Study.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Michael Cooney, “NASA Partners with US Air Force To Develop Commercial Space Roadmap,” Network World, 14 October 2009.)
NASA announced that it had selected six universities to receive research grants totaling nearly US$30 million. The selected universities served large numbers of underrepresented and minority students. The grants would help the universities establish multidisciplinary scientific, engineering, and commercial research centers, capable of making significant contributions to NASA’s programs. Through the NASA Group 5 University Research Center awards program, each university would receive up to US$1 million per year for up to five years, based on their performance and on availability of funds. The awards continued NASA’s commitment to supporting new aerospace science and technology concepts and expanding the nation’s base for aerospace research development. Through these efforts, NASA hoped to achieve a broad-based, competitive capability for aerospace research and technology development. NASA also hoped the awards would help underrepresented minorities obtain advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Selected from among 35 institutions that had submitted proposals, the six universities to receive awards were California State University in Long Beach, for the Center for Human Factors in Advanced Aeronautics Technologies; Delaware State University in Dover, for the establishment of a NASA Optical Sciences Center for Applied Research; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University in Greensboro, for the Center for Aviation Safety; North Carolina Central University in Durham, for the NASA Center for Aerospace Device Research and Education; University of Texas in Brownsville, for the Center for Gravitational Wave Astronomy; and University of Texas in El Paso, for the Center for Space Exploration Technology Research.(NASA, “NASA Awards Grants for Research Centers at 6 Minority Universities,” news release 09-213, 16 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-213_Minority_University_Grants.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced the selection of the members of the mishap board tasked with investigating the unsuccessful launch of the OCO, which had failed to reach orbit after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on 24 February 2009. NASA charged the board to identify the causes and contributing factors of the launch failure and to recommend measures that NASA should take to prevent a similar incident in future missions. NASA had named Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain, Deputy Director at NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the investigation, and now named four other voting members: Jose A. Caraballo, Safety Manager at NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia; Patricia M. Jones, Acting Chief of the Human Systems Integration Division in the Exploration Technology Directorate at NASA’s ARC in Moffett Field, California; Richard J. Lynch of Aerospace Systems Engineering at NASA’s GSFC; and David R. Sollberger, Deputy Chief Engineer of the NASA Launch Services Program at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. NASA named Ruth D. Jones, the Safety and Mission Assurance Manager at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), as the board’s ex officio member, charged with assuring that board activity conformed to NASA procedural requirements.
NASA announced that it had designated 2009 as the International Year of Astronomy, to commemorate the anniversary of the beginning of modern astronomy in 1609, when Galileo first used a telescope to view the heavens. As part of the yearlong celebration, NASA planned to release images from its Great Observatories—Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), and Chandra X-ray Observatory—to museums, nature centers, planetariums, and schools across the country. NASA would make the images public between 14 and 28 February 2009, in conjunction with Galileo’s 15 February birthday. Selected sites would also unveil a large 9-square-foot (2.7-square-meter) print of the spiral galaxy Messier 101. NASA had created the print by combining images of Messier 101—HST’s optical view, SST’s infrared view, and Chandra’s x-ray view. Describing the image created from the three views, Hashima Hasan, Lead Scientist for the International Year of Astronomy at NASA Headquarters, said that one might see such an image if one could use one’s eyes, night-vision goggles, and x-ray vision simultaneously. The selected sites would also display individual images from each observatory. HST’s visible-light view of Messier 101, known as the Pinwheel Galaxy, revealed the swirls of bright stars and glowing gas that had earned the galaxy its nickname. Spitzer’s infrared-light image peered into those spiral arms, showing where dense clouds collapse to form stars. Chandra’s x-ray image uncovered high-energy features of Messier 101, such as remnants of exploded stars or matter moving around black holes.(NASA, “NASA’s Great Observatories Celebrate International Year of Astronomy,” news release 09-026, 10 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-026_IYOA.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to Computer Sciences Corporation of Fort Worth, Texas, to support NASA’s aircraft used for astronaut training and flight research. The follow-on, potentially valued at approximately US$163 million, continued services provided under a previous contract, which had been in effect from 1 March 2004 through 31 August 2009. The new contract would be in effect 1 September 2009 through 28 February 2010. Under the Aircraft Maintenance and Modification Program, Computer Sciences Corporation would continue to provide flight-line, intermediate, and depot-level maintenance, repairs, modifications, and engineering support for NASA aircraft.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Aircraft Maintenance,” news release C09-040, 25 August 2009.)
NASA announced that an international team of astronomers using data collected by NASA’s Swift satellite had found the most distant GRB to date—13.1 billion light-years from Earth. Designated GRB090423, the explosion originated from a star that had died when the universe was 630 million years old, or less than 5 percent of its present age. Swift had detected a 10- second-long GRB on 23 April and had quickly pivoted, to observe the burst location with its ultraviolet/optical and x-ray telescopes. Swift had observed a fading x-ray afterglow, but nothing in visible light. Derek B. Fox of Pennsylvania State University explained that the burst had most likely arisen from the explosion of a massive star, and that the scientists were not only seeing the demise of a star, but also—perhaps—the birth of a black hole in one of the universe’s earliest stellar generations. NASA had designed Swift to capture very distant bursts like GRB090423. Neil Gehrels of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Lead Scientist on NASA’s Swift team, remarked that the burst’s incredible distance from Earth had exceeded the team’s greatest expectations. According to Joshua S. Bloom of the University of California at Berkeley, who had observed the afterglow using the Gemini South telescope in Chili, the event marked a watershed moment in the field of astronomy. The immense distance of the burst from Earth signified that the dead star was the earliest object yet discovered from an era called “reionization,” which had occurred in the first billion years after the Big Bang. Bloom added that the observation of GRB090423 marked the beginning of the study of the universe as it was before most of the structure that scientists know about today came into being.(NASA, “New Gamma-Ray Burst Smashes Cosmic Distance Record,” news release 09-088, 28 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-088_Swift_Gamma-ray_Burst.html (added 17 May 2011); Rachel Courtland, “Most Distant Object in the Universe Spotted,” New Scientist, 28 April 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASA’s commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceX’s remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners’ vehicles—three Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities” (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, “Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASA’s Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads,” 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, “GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the system’s artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Division’s Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASA’s Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
NASA’s ARC announced that LCROSS’s observation of its 9 October 2009 impact on the lunar surface had succeeded. During LACROSS’s descent into the Centaur crater, nine instruments on board had captured each phase of the impact sequence. The ultraviolet/visible and near-infrared spectrometer and camera data had revealed a faint but distinct debris plume. LCROSS Principal Investigator and Project Scientist Anthony Colaprete remarked that the ejecta brightness of the plume was at the low end of NASA’s predictions. However, that description could provide a clue to help determine the properties of the material that Centaur had impacted. LCROSS had also captured Centaur’s impact flash in both of its mid-infrared thermal cameras over a couple of seconds. The temperature of that flash would provide valuable information about the composition of the material at the impact site. Although creating a plume had been the key to the mission’s success, LCROSS had not detected a debris plume, initially. The new images, captured by a different camera on board the spacecraft, confirmed that Centaur’s impact had, indeed, created a plume.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA’s LCROSS Captures All Phases of Centaur Impact,” ARC news release 16 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/LCROSS/main/LCROSS_impact.html (accessed 30 September)
ATK announced that, together with NASA and industry partners Lockheed Martin Corporation and Orbital Sciences Corporation, it had successfully performed a ground-test firing of the attitude-control motor-thruster system of the launch-abort system (LAS) for NASA’s Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV). The test, conducted at ATK’s facility in Elkton, Maryland, marked a milestone in the development of the Orion spacecraft. The fifth in a series of ground tests of the craft’s attitude-control motor system, the High Thrust-8 (HT-8) demonstration provided validation that several flight-weight subsystems were performing as designed. According to a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation, ATK was responsible for the design of the attitude- control motor, which would provide steering for the LAS in the event of a catastrophic failure on the launchpad or during Orion’s initial ascent. Orbital Sciences Corporation was responsible for delivering the LAS motors for Lockheed Martin, the prime contractor for NASA’s Orion Project.(ATK, “NASA and Orion Industry Team Successfully Test Orion Launch Abort System Attitude Control Motor Thruster System,” news release, 1 April 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=911 (accessed 3 June 2011); Guy Norris, “ATK Pad Abort Thruster Test,” Aviation Week, 2 April 2009.)
A team of astronomers published research in the journal Nature, revealing that temperatures on the gas giant exoplanet known as HD 80606b can rise from 980°F to 2,240°F (527°C to 1,227°C) within 6 hours. The researchers had studied infrared measurements collected by NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), to determine the amount of heat emanating from HD 80606b as its orbit neared its star. The planet travels around its star along an oblong orbit every 111.4 days—an orbit that scientists described as the most eccentric of any known planet. At its closest point to its star, HD 80606b receives 825 times more irradiation than at its farthest point. The eclipse that occurs in the moment before the planet’s closest approach to its star had enabled the astronomers to measure separately the amount of heat emanating from the planet, distinguishing it from the star’s heat. They had succeeded in measuring precisely how hot the planet becomes as it approaches its star. A computer model using Spitzer data had revealed global storms and shock waves in the planet’s atmosphere every 111 days, as it swings close to its star. The simulation showed that the increasing heat and expansion of the atmosphere produces very high winds—5 kilometers per second (3 miles per second), or more than 11,000 miles per hour (17,703 kilometers per hour)—moving from the day side of the planet to its night side.(Clara Moskowitz, “Extreme Exoplanet’s Wild Ride,” Wired, 29 January 2009; Jeanna Bryner, “Exoplanet Sees Extreme Heat Waves,” Space.com, 28 January 2009, http://www.space.com/6364-exoplanet-sees-extreme-heat- waves.html (accessed 27 April 2011); see also, Gregory Laughlin et al., “Rapid Heating of the Atmosphere of an Extrasolar Planet,” Nature 457, no. 7229 (29 January 2009): 562−564, http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2346/nature/ journal/v457/n7229/pdf/nature07649.pdf (DOI 10.1038/nature07649; accessed 27 April 2011).)
NASA honored four veteran aerospace journalists and a public affairs officer at a ceremony at KSC for their work chronicling the nation’s space program. NASA unveiled five new gold plates with the names of the late Milt Salamon, who had worked as a local columnist at Florida Today and its predecessor paper for three decades; Sue Butler of the Daytona Beach News Journal and the Associated Press; the late Jerry B. Hannifin of Time magazine; the late Rudy P. Abramson of the Los Angeles Times; and the late Frank J. Colella, the first Manager of Public Affairs at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California. The new plates joined 57 others that comprised the Roll of Honor, called the Chronicler’s Wall, at the NASA News Center at the Launch Complex 39 Press Site. The Chronicler’s Wall recognized career achievements of writers, journalists, broadcasters, and communicators who had covered NASA at KSC for at least 10 years. In an additional ceremony, NASA recognized Milt Salamon for his role in writing about the ordinary people who worked at KSC and lived on the Space Coast. Salamon, who had died in January 2002 at the age of 75, had worked as an engineer for Lockheed Martin in California and at Cape Canaveral before starting his writing career. He had worked at the National Enquirer before starting at Florida Today in 1974.(Todd Halvorson, “KSC Honors Columnist,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 2009. 23)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with American Tank and Vessel of Mobile, Alabama, for the installation of a test-cell diffuser and associated systems in the A-3 test stand at NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. NASA planned to test the J-2X engine for its Constellation Program at the A-3 test stand. Construction had begun in 2007, and NASA had scheduled the first test to take place in 2012. The contract with American Tank and Vessel had a maximum value of US$45 million.(NASA, “NASA Awards Construction Contract for Rocket Engine Testing,” news release C09-006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-006_SSC_A-3_Test_Stand.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA astronauts Randolph J. Bresnik and Robert L. Satcher Jr. undertook the third and final spacewalk of STS-129. The pair began their spacewalk an hour late because of difficulty with a valve on the drink bag of Satcher’s spacesuit. However, the team quickly worked to get ahead of schedule, finishing at 2:06 p.m. (EST), just after the originally scheduled ending time. With the assistance of a robotic arm, the pair installed a 1,200-pound (544-kilogram) oxygen tank at a NASA air lock on the ISS, the main objective of the spacewalk. They filled it with high-pressure oxygen for future spacewalks, connected the gas line, and conducted a check for leaks. The pair also installed science experiments on the outside of the station, including the MISSE, which would help NASA scientists understand how substances and coatings react to direct sunlight, radiation, atomic oxygen, and extreme temperatures. NASA intended to use the results of these experiments in the design of future spacecraft. Additionally, Bresnik and Satcher removed two orbital-debris shields from the air lock, making room for the oxygen tank; loosened a bolt on an ammonia tank; and worked on fluid jumper lines.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk No. 3 After Suit Snag,” 24 November 2009; Ryan Flinn, “Spacewalker’s Final Sortie Tests Materials for Future Craft,” Bloomberg News, 24 November 2009.)
NASA announced its selection of Einstein, Hubble, and Sagan Fellowships in three areas of astronomy and astrophysics. Each postdoctoral fellowship would provide support to the awardees for three years at any host university or research center in the United States. Jon Morse, Director of the Astrophysics Division in NASA’s Science Mission Directorate (SMD), described the recipients as among the best and brightest young astronomers in the world, who had already contributed significantly to studies of how the universe works, the origin of the cosmos, and whether life exists beyond Earth. Morse described the fellowships as a springboard for scientific leadership, as well as an inspiration for the next generation of students and researchers. NASA awarded 10 fellowships in the Einstein program, to conduct research related to NASA’s Physics of the Cosmos Program; 17 fellowships in the Hubble program, to pursue research associated with NASA’s Cosmic Origins Program; and five fellowships in the Sagan program, which 26 NASA had created in September 2008, in alignment with its Exoplanet Exploration Program.
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at 8:39 a.m. (PDT) at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending a successful 13-day mission to HST. Weather conditions had prevented Atlantis from landing at KSC. Astronauts had performed five spacewalks to repair, replace, and upgrade the instruments and computers on HST. These repairs and upgrades had not only restored the telescope, but had also expanded its capabilities. NASA considered the unprecedented mission historic, because of the complexity of the repairs and because the mission had been the last time human beings would go to space to repair an orbiting scientific instrument. NASA had placed HST in low Earth orbit at 600 kilometers (373 miles) to facilitate repair missions, but the location was suboptimal for space telescopes. NASA had planned to place HST’s successor, the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) away from Earth, at L2, and, therefore, had designed JWST to function without repairs or upgrades. In addition to making HST repairs, astronauts had performed a commercial drug experiment aimed at finding a vaccine against methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and other microbes.(NASA, “NASA’s Space Shuttle Returns to Earth After Hubble Mission,” news release 09-120, 24 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-120_STS-125_Landing_Edwards.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Houston Chronicle, “This Is Why We Fly: Hubble Repair Mission Showcases the Value of the Manned Space Program,” 26 May 2009; Daniel Holz, “The Last Fix,” Discover Magazine, 26 May 2009, http://blogs. discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2009/05/25/the-last-fix/ (accessed 21 July 2011); Frank Morring Jr., “Drug Experiment Performed on Atlantis,” Aviation Week, 20 May 2009.)
NASA announced that its Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had captured the first gamma-ray burst (GRB) ever seen in high resolution. The burst, designated GRB 080916C, was the most extreme yet recorded, in terms of its tremendous power and speed. The Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had detected the blast on 15 September 2008, and the Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor aboard the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had recorded the event. Thirty-two hours after the blast’s detection, a team at the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had searched for the explosion’s afterglow. The team at the Max Planck Institute had then captured the field in seven wavelengths, using the Gamma-Ray Burst Optical/Near-Infrared Detector (GROND) on the 2.2-meter (7.22-foot) telescope at the European Southern Observatory in La Silla, Chile. The capture had enabled the Max Planck Institute team to determine that the blast had occurred 12.2 billion light-years away, in the constellation Carina. Fermi team members had used this information to show that the blast had exceeded the power of 9,000 ordinary supernovas and to calculate that, within the jet, gas bullets had likely moved at 99.9999 percent of the speed of light.(NASA, “NASA’s Fermi Telescope Sees Most Extreme Gamma-Ray Blast Yet,” news release 09-033, 19 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-033_Fermi_Gamma-ray_Blast.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Press Association (United Kingdom), “Record Radiation Blast Detected,” 20 February 2009.)
Rodger E. Doxsey, head of the Space Telescope Science Institute’s (STScI’s) HST Mission Office in Baltimore, died of cancer at the age of 62. Recruited as an HST Mission Operations Scientist, Doxsey had worked at STScI since 1981, nine years before the launch of HST. Since HST’s launch, Doxsey had been involved in the daily operations of the telescope. He had been responsible for all work necessary to support HST’s scientific operations, planning and scheduling, and calibration of data, and for building scientific mission specifications and issuing all commands necessary to HST’s instruments. Doxsey had worked with GSFC to develop HST’s new scientific instruments. Despite his illness, he had remained involved in the preparations for the final servicing mission to the telescope in May 2009. In 1991 NASA had recognized Doxsey with the highest honor it could give to a nonfederal employee, awarding him its Distinguished Public Service Medal. With this award, NASA noted Doxsey’s “outstanding leadership in developing the concepts of the scientific operations” of HST and in implementing the systems needed to accomplish those ends. In 2004 AAS had awarded Doxsey the Van Biesbroeck Prize for his “outstanding, unselfish dedication” to making HST “one of the most scientifically productive telescopes of all time.” Director of STScI Charles Mattias “Matt” Mountain described Doxsey as the “heart and soul of Hubble” at the Institute, saying that Doxsey “knew everything about the space telescope, from the smallest anomaly to the breadth of the extraordinary science delivered by the telescope.” Doxsey had worked with HST for more than 28 years.(Frank D. Roylance, “Rodger Doxsey, One of Space Telescope Team’s First Leaders, Dies at 62,” Baltimore Sun, 15 October 2009.)
ESA launched its far-infrared space telescope Herschel and its cosmic background mapper Planck on an Ariane-5 rocket from Europe’s Spaceport in French Guiana at 13:12 (UT). With a payload weighing 5.3 tons (4.8 tonnes, or 4,808 kilograms), the Ariane-5 rocket carried the largest telescope ever launched into space. The two spacecraft would carry out their scientific observations from separate orbits at approximately Lagrange point 2 (L2), a virtual point in space approximately 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) from Earth, in the opposite direction from the Sun, where the combined pull of Earth and Sun creates a gravitational stability point. Herschel would make infrared observations of stars, galaxies, and star-forming regions, using a 3.5-meter-diameter mirror, the largest yet carried into space. Herschel, weighing 3,400 kilograms (3.75 tons), carried three instruments—the Photodetector Array Camera and Spectrometer (PACS), the Spectral and Photometric Imaging Receiver (SPIRE), and the Heterofyne Instrument for the Far Infrared (HIFI). In addition, it carried 2,300 liters (607.6 gallons) of liquid helium, to cool the instruments to a few 10ths of a degree above 0 K. ESA had scheduled Herschel’s mission to continue three years, but the mission could continue until Herschel had depleted its helium. The 1,900-kilogram (2.09-ton) Planck carried an aperture mirror with a diameter of 1.5 meters (4.92 feet) and two cryogenically cooled instruments—the High Frequency Instrument (HFI), which would detect emissions in six frequency bands between 100 and 857 GHz (3 millimeters to 350 microns), and the Low Frequency Instrument (LFI), which would operate between 30 and 70 GHz (10 millimeters to 4.3 millimeters). Scientists expected that Planck would use these instruments to measure minute variations in the cosmic microwave background radiation, gathering detailed information about the age, size, mass, and geometry of the early universe. Planck would also produce two all-sky maps before the end of the planned 15-month mission.(European Space Agency, “ESA En Route to the Origins of the Universe,” ESA news release 10-2009, 14 May 2009, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_10_2009_p_EN.html (accessed 5 July 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667, 1 June 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx667.html (accessed 5 July 2011).)
NASA announced the selection of the Avcoat ablator system for the Orion crew module’s thermal protection system at the base of the craft. During reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, the base of the spacecraft would endure more heat than any other area of Orion, but the Avcoat system would enable the base to erode, or “ablate,” in a controlled way, transporting heat away from the crew module during its descent. Over a period of three years, NASA’s Orion Thermal Protection System Advanced Development Project had considered eight different candidate materials before choosing the two final candidates—Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) and Avcoat, both of which had proven successful in space missions. NASA had used Avcoat for the Apollo capsule heat shield and on select regions of the Space Shuttle’s orbiter in its earliest flights and had resumed production of Avcoat for the study. Avcoat was made of silica fibers with an epoxy-novalic resin filled in a fiberglass-phenolic honeycomb. NASA engineers had manufactured it directly onto the heat-shield substructure. Unlike Avcoat, PICA was manufactured in blocks and attached to the vehicle after fabrication. NASA had used PICA on its first robotic space mission dedicated to exploring the comet Stardust, the first mission to return samples since Apollo. Project engineers had performed rigorous thermal, structural, and environmental testing on Avcoat and PICA, comparing the two materials’ mass, thermal and structural performance, life-cycle costs, ease of manufacturing, reliability, and certification challenges. NASA and Orion’s prime contractor Lockheed Martin ultimately chose Avcoat as the more robust, reliable, and mature system.(NASA, “NASA Selects Material for Orion Spacecraft Heat Shield,” news release 09-080, 7 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-080_Orion_Heat_Shield.html (accessed 17 May 2011). 53 NASA, “Space Station Crew Lands in Soyuz After Successful Mission,” news release 09-081, 8 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-081_Exp18_Landing.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Associated Press, “U.S. Space Tourist’s Return Put Off by a Day,” 3 April 2009.)
ESA’s Ariane-5 rocket launched from Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:09 (UT), carrying a telecommunications satellite for Japan—JCSAT 12—and a broadcasting satellite for Australia— Optus D3. Lockheed Martin had built the 8,900-pound (4,037-kilogram) JCSAT 12, equipping it with 30 active Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders, to provide communications services to Hawaii, Japan, and the Asia-Pacific region for 15 years. Orbital Sciences had built the Optus D3, a 5,400-pound (2,449-kilogram) craft that would use 24 Ku-band transponders to relay communications and direct-to-home television services across Australia and New Zealand. Orbital Sciences had designed the Optus D3 with a 15-year life span, like Lockheed Martin’s JCSAT 12.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 670, 1 September 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx670.html (accessed 8 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Ariane 5 Places Japan, Australia Satellites in Orbit,” 22 August 2009; Xinhua News Agency, “Ariane Rocket Launches Satellites for Japan, Australia,” 23 August 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space station’s final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the station’s truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
JAXA successfully launched its 16.5-ton (14.97-tonne, or 14,969-kilogram) H-2 Transfer Vehicle (HTV 1), loaded with 4.5 tonnes (4.96 tons) of cargo and supplies for delivery to the ISS. Liftoff occurred at 1:01 a.m. (EDT) from the Tanegashima Space Center, and JAXA confirmed separation from the rocket’s upper stage approximately 15 minutes later. HTV 1, which carried both pressurized and unpressurized cargo to the ISS, was the first craft capable of transporting both types of cargo. The pressurized cargo included food, computer equipment, and other supplies. Also aboard was cargo that NASA and JAXA intended to use on JAXA’s Kibo module: NASA’s Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) and Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) Experiment Payload (HREP), for studies of the ocean and atmosphere, and JAXA’s Superconducting Submillimeter-Wave Limb-Emission Sounder (SMILES) instrument, designed to study the ozone layer. Masazumi Miyake, Deputy Director of JAXA’s Houston office, said that the launch signaled a new era for JAXA, opening new horizons for Japan in its efforts to achieve human spaceflight. Miyake added that the HTV-1 mission was a demonstration flight to verify functionality and performance. However, after completing the mission, JAXA intended to launch an average of one operational HTV per year. HTV 1 represented Japan’s first attempt at a major orbital rendezvous and its first launch to a staffed space station. The HTV program, which Japan had been developing since 1997, had cost the United States US$700 million. The cost of the HTV spacecraft unit was US$200 million, not including the launch vehicle.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671, 1 October 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx671.html (accessed 16 September 2011); Robert Block, “Japan Enters New Era of Space Exploration,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA announced the successful completion of the second drop test of a drogue parachute for the Ares-I rocket. The drop test had taken place on 28 February 2009 at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The test was the seventh in a series of flight tests supporting the development of the Ares-I parachute-recovery system, which comprised a pilot chute, drogue, and three main parachutes. To test the 68-foot-diameter (20.7-meter-diameter) drogue parachute, researchers had dropped the parachute from a U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 25,000 feet (7.62 kilometers). The drogue had carried a 50,000-pound (22,680-kilogram, or 22.68-tonne) load, to simulate the rocket’s spent first-stage motor. The parachute and the test hardware had functioned as planned, landing the load safely. NASA engineers had designed the drogue to permit recovery of the rocket’s reusable first-stage motor. They planned to use the design in future Ares-I flights, including launches associated with NASA’s Constellation Program.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests Parachute for Ares Rocket,” news release 09-045, 2 March 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-045_Ares_Drogue_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Astronomer Arthur D. Code died in Madison, Wisconsin, at the age of 85. A designer of space observatories, Code had worked with a team of scientists from NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory in 1968, to send into orbit a bat-shaped satellite—the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 (OAO 2). Although the original OAO craft had failed in its 1966 mission, OAO 2 had succeeded, yielding information about the composition of stars, comets, and galactic gases. Intended to last a year, the OAO-2 mission had remained operational until 1973. OAO 2 had sent back data indicating that young stars in the constellations Scorpius and Orion are far hotter than previously thought and, therefore, are likely aging more quickly than astronomers had previously believed. OAO-2 successor craft included OAO 3 and NASA’s HST. Following the OAO-2 mission, Code had taught at the University of Wisconsin, where he had refined his designs and had analyzed data retrieved from subsequent satellites. In 1990 he and a team of students had sent an ultraviolet-detecting telescope to orbit aboard Space Shuttle Columbia; the team had used the device to study polarized ultraviolet light. Code had served as president of the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and had been a member of the NAS. NASA had awarded him its Distinguished Public Service Medal in 1992.(Jeremy Pearce, “Arthur Code, Astronomer and Professor, Dies at 85,” New York Times, 23 March 2009.)
NASA announced that its twin STEREO (Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory) spacecraft had provided scientists with their first view of the speed, trajectory, and three-dimensional shape of solar coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The spacecraft’s capabilities had dramatically improved scientists’ ability to predict the impact of CMEs on Earth, enabling them to determine when CMEs would occur. In addition, scientists could now predict whether a CME would merely cause an auroral display or would produce a type of cosmic ray that is potentially hazardous to astronauts, spacecraft, and Earth technologies such as GPS signals and power grids. NASA had launched the two spacecraft in 2006 on a mission to make simultaneous observations of CMEs from different vantage points. The successful production of three-dimensional observations had enabled solar physicists to determine when a CME would reach Earth and to predict how much energy the CME would deliver to Earth’s magnetosphere. Because of the two vantage points of the twin STEREO spacecraft, the craft were able to provide data that Earth-based observatories were unable to capture, regarding the direction and speed of solar storms. STEREO could also sample the contents of solar storms and gauge the magnetic properties of the eruptions. Before the STEREO mission, scientists could not make measurements or collect subsequent data about CMEs until the ejections had arrived at Earth—typically three to seven days after their occurrence.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Show Three Dimensional Anatomy of a Solar Storm,” news release 09-083, 14 April 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/apr/HQ_09-083_STEREO.html (accessed 17 May 2011); Anne Minard, “First 3-D Pictures of Solar Explosions Created,” National Geographic News, 15 April 2009.)
