dod announced that Perkin-Elmer Corp. was completing a new 36-inch airborne telescope with 3-5 times as much resolution as any telescope on the ground. New instrument should finally answer the speculation about the so-called canals on Mars, the mysterious red spot on Jupiter, and perhaps the hidden surface of Venus. “This historic enterprise is only one more step forward, leading to large telescopes orbiting the earth in satellites and eventually constructed on the moon.”
Soviet academician M. Sissakian, Presidium member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. hoped to bring mars i back to earth.
afsc announced invention of Bio-telescanner—compact and portable instrument to determine biological properties of other planetary soil—by Dr. William G. Glenn, sam research immunobiologist, and Wesley E. Prather, electronics expert. Designed to answer basic questions about extraterrestrial life, the instrument would analyze samples gathered by travelers to Mars or other planets and would telemeter its findings back to earth. It could be adapted to operate automatically, to gather and analyze soil samples before man set foot on the planet. Use of the Biotelescanner would preclude necessity to bring samples of other planetary crust back to earth—an operation which could be dangerous if alien micro-organisms were present in the sample.
National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board report on the atmospheres of Mars and Venus released. Prepared by William W. Kellogg of rand and Carl Sagen of the University of California, it reported that available evidence suggests the existence of life on Mars and that space flights during the next decade would probably resolve this question.
Difficulties in Centaur launch vehicle development were forcing nasa to program 1964 Mars probe for Atlas-Agena vehicle, New York Times reported. Use of Atlas-Agena would mean smaller payload, with about 60 lbs. of instruments instead of 200 lbs.	_
Soviet press agency Tass reported the planet Mars has “experienced the effects of meteorites to a much greater degree than the earth.” Emblen Sobotovich, senior scientist at Leningrad Radium Institute, said meteorites were preserved on Mars for long periods of time because Martian atmosphere contained almost no moisture, Tass reported.
Reported that the U.S. would send a Mariner B spacecraft to Mars in late 1964, to land on the red planet in early 1965. The launching of this heavily instrumented probe would mark the beginning of the scientific search for extraterrestrial life.
Representative John E. Moss (D-Calif.), Chairman of special House Subcommittee on Government Information, criticized “Government news management which is unique in peacetime.” He objected strongly to handling of news about military space launches: “All launches by military agencies, whether they are for a military purpose or to gather information of a scientific nature, are covered by a blanket of secrecy. . . . All information about the billions of dollars spent by the military in space research is channeled through the Pentagon’s single public information voice.” Moss recalled last September when nasa said that six Russian attempts to send space probes to Venus and Mars had failed. Since then, Moss said, “there has been a complete blackout of information about Russian satellite efforts. This is the kind of news management that causes grave concern. ... If we cover up Russian successes ... we can certainly cover up our failures. This . . . leads to a dangerous delusion of the American people.”
In Voice of America broadcast, Alan H. Shapley of the National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory, reviewed the “new dimension to research in ionospheric science” added by space vehicles. He pointed out that “scientific expeditions landing on the surface of Mars or Venus, whether manned or unmanned, will have to communicate by radio with terrestrial headquarters. We must know which frequencies wlli get through the planetary ionosphere, and which can be used with the radiomirror effect to talk from one part of the planet to another. So far we have had only [the earth’s] ionosphere to study, but this is like the doctor with only a single case. To understand a disease he needs many cases.”
Man’s conquest of space accelerated on a broad front. The U.S. achieved manned orbital flight three times, provided man with his first close-up of another planet with mariner ii’s fly-by of Venus, brought global communications a step closer with the orbiting of the first active repeater communications satellite telstar i, and saw the X-15 exceed its design speed and altitude (4,104 mph and 58.7 mi.). U.S.S.R. achieved first dual manned space flight in an effort that racked up an impressive total of 112 orbits, and launched a space probe toward Mars. During the year the U.S. successfully launched a total of 61 satellites, deep-space probes, and probes, the U.S.S.R. 17, accord-according to the U.N. Public Registry. Of the U.S. total, 20 were launched by nasa, 41 by dod.
In speech before the Woman’s National Press Club, Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, said that the U.S., U.S.S.R., and other qualified nations should pool their space efforts under the auspices of the United Nations. “Perhaps their children,” he said, “will sail to Mars together.”
Rocket-powered instruments wlli be traveling as far as Jupiter by 1975, Robert J. Parks, director of jpl Planetary Programs, said in interview. Parks said by 1975 the planets Mars and Venus probably would have been studied “quite closely” by instruments.
aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg told panel discussion of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna that a U.S. nuclear-powered spacecraft now in the initial-test phase could take two men on a round trip to Mars in the 1970’s. He said that the round trip, including one-month visit on Mars, would take about a year.
Soviet news agency Tass announced mars i interplanetary probe was now more than 7 million mi. from earth; all onboard equipment was working normally and the spacecraft was sending back radio reports to earth, mars i was expected to pass within 120,000	mi. of Mars in June 1963.
U.S.S.R. announced it had launched mars i, a 1,970-lb. space probe on seven-month flight to Mars. Launched with an “improved booster” into parking orbit around the earth, mars i was hurled into escape trajectory when vehicle engines re-ignited. Tass reported mars i was flying as planned on its course toward Mars. “All systems are functioning normally and orders sent to the station [i.e., probe] are well received and obeyed.” Main tasks of the probe were interplanetary exploration, establishment of interplanetary space radio communications, photographing the Martian surface and relaying the photographs back to earth by radio. “Telemetric, measuring, and scientific instrumentation will be automatically activated in conformity with the flight program by radio commands from the earth,” Tass said. The flight had been preceded by an unsuccessful launch attempt the previous week, unidentified dod sources said, (nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated in September that two Soviet attempts to launch Mars probes had failed in October 1960.)
U.S. News and World Report carried article on “Red Space Failures,” pointing to official U.S. policy with regard to Soviet launchings: “No Soviet feat [in space] has ever been publicly challenged in Washington and no failure publicly announced.” It reported that while Premier Khrushchev was at the United Nations in September 1960, “a Soviet cosmonaut was sent more than a hundred miles into space and killed”; that in a five-month period in 1960-61, four Soviet space probes were fired toward Mars and Venus, but failed; and that during the same period “a dozen other Soviet space shots went awry . . .”
Two tandem 600-ft.-tall research balloons launched from Palestine, Texas, with dummy payload of 6,300 lb., a development test for February 1963 launch of 36-in. telescope with germanium eye to obtain undistorted look at the Martian atmosphere. Scientists from Princeton University, Univ. of California, Vitro Corp., and Schjeldahl Corp. conducted test flight.
Search for two huge meteorites believed to have fallen in western Virginia near Covington and West Virginia near Clarksburg was conducted by Dr. Frank Drake, Director of National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va. Reports by witnesses indicated that the meteorites weighed^about one ton each and that they fell in sparsely populated, national forest areas. During September: Dr. Joshua Lederberg, of Stanford University, and Dr. Carl Sagan, former University of California professor, wrote in September Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that large amounts of moisture may be frozen into the subsoil of the planet Mars. From openings in the planet’s crust, steam and gas may escape and create hot spots that would be “favorable microenvironments for life.” They said that recurrent clouds detected by telescope “may be symptomatic of this local outgassing of water vapor.”
usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories announced that it wollid conduct a series of high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments during 1962 and early 1963. Primary objective wollid be to get more complete and accurate information about the moon, Venus, and Mars. Scientific director of the project wollid be Dr. John Strong of Johns Hopkins University.
Soviet news agency Tass distributed announcement by U.S.S.R. Academy of Science giving new details on mars i interplanetary probe. Announcement said scientists had held 37 radio communications with mars i during first month of the probe’s journey and that more than 600 orders had been transmitted to it. Command, measuring, and computing centers onboard the spacecraft were reported working properly. Announcement said mars i would pass planet Mars at distance of about 119,000 mi. (193,000 km) and added that its trajectory would have to be corrected sometime during the flight. Data from probe indicated space radiation had increased about 50 to 70% since 1959 Soviet lunar probes made measurements; other data indicated extremely low density of meteor matter at great distances from earth. Announcement said mars i onboard equipment included television to photograph Martian surface; spectrograph to study ozone absorptions in Martian atmosphere; equipment to measure magnetic fields and radiation in space and around Mars; and radiotelescope to register streams of low-energy protons and electrons.
Soviet space probe mars i was 1,677,704 mi. from earth and “continuing satisfactorily” on its flight to Mars, Prof. Vsevoldod Fedynsky of Moscow Univ. said in Tass interview.
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories announced series of three high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments—Star Gazer, Sky Top, and Balast—to be conducted later this year. The primary objective would be to obtain more and complete information about the space environment with emphasis on the moon, Mars, and Venus.
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was 2,725,337.592 mi. away from earth at 4 AM est, Tass reported.
President Kennedy, back in Washington after inspection of defense and nuclear-rocket facilities, said: “We are going to let these test go on of the [Project Rover] reactor. These tests should be completed by July. If they are successful, then we will put more money into the program, which would involve the Nerva and Rift, both the engine and the regular machine. We will wait until July, however, to see if these tests are successful. “It should be understood that the nuclear rocket will not come into play until 1970 or ’71. It would be useful for further trips to the moon or trips to Mars. But we have a good many areas competing for our available space dollars, and we have to try to channel it into those programs which will bring us a result, first, on our moon landing, and then to consider Mars.”
Dr. Andrie B. Severny, Director of U.S.S.R.’s Crimean Astrophysical Observatory, explained techniques used to photograph mars i on Nov. 3, when the interplanetary probe was 120,000	mi. from earth. Using 102-in. telescope, largest outside the U.S., astronomers fixed its aim at spot mars i was calculated to be; automatic controls shifted telescope’s aim slightly to sweep along the probe’s assumed trajectory. At same time, photographs were made, with each plate exposed twice at 30-sec. intervals. Resulting photographs showed mars i as well as its booster rocket traveling through space. This was believed to be greatest distance from which man-made objects had been photographed.
Soviet news agency Tass reported mars i probe was 606,000	mi. from earth (at 4:00 PM est) and was increasing that distance by 215,000 mi. a day. Soviet observatories photographed the Mars probe and its carrier rocket on Nov. 3; director of Crimean Astrophysical Observatory said this was the first time moving artificial interplanetary bodies had been photographed from earth.
Speaking on Radio Moscow, Prof. N. P. Arabashov said: “All the magnificent achievements of Soviet science convince us that flights by men to the moon and the planets are not only possible, but are also near. It is now clear that automatic interplanetary space ships, at first unmanned, will be sent to the moon and then to Venus and Mars.”
Tass reported interplanetary probe mars i began broadcasting scientific data on command from earth. The Mars probe, about two mlliion mi. away from earth, was reported functioning normally.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
Dr. Freeman H. Quimby, Chief of Exobiology Programs in nasa Office of Space Sciences, announed U.S. plans to land life-detecting devices on Mars in 1966. “Perhaps Mars is sterile. But we’re working on the postulate there may be some forms of life,” Dr. Quimby told the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Philadelphia.
