Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, director of President Kennedy’s Office of Science and Technology, was asked in Voice of America interview whether an attempt to land astronauts on Mars in 1971 or 1973 “could be considered.” Dr. Wiesner replied: “I think it could be considered, but I don’t think it would be done. I think it is a very major effort, even considerably larger than the moon effort. We have made estimates of a Mars program cost and a round number like one hundred billion dollars seems to be a reasonable figure. It is obviously technically possible, [but] I doubt whether one could do it in the time period between now and 1970 without just an unbelievable crash program. I think that before the century is out we will probably have done just that, and it would be interesting to do, but I don’t believe anyone can deny the vital reason for undertaking the program of the kind you are talking about.” (Transcript)
At aas meeting in Washington, S. Karrer and C. C. Kiess reported new evidence suggesting planet Mars has toxic clouds of oxygen and nitrogen compounds, probably nitrogen dioxide gas. Bv spectroscopic techniques splitting the light from the planet’s telescopic image, they found the pattern yielded by nitrogen dioxide gas. Kiess said that phenomena of the Martian appearance through earth telescopes can be explained by changes in the nature and color of nitrogen and oxygen compounds under changing Martian temperatures. (Barbour, Wash. Post, 12/28/63, B2)
Clarence A. Syvertson, nasa Ames Research Center scientist, said in paper presented at Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery Symposium at Edwards afb that future spacecraft based on M-2 lifting body design could satisfy requirements for maneuvering re-entry vehicles on missions from near-earth orbit and on return from manned Mars missions. With lift-drag ratio of over one, M-2 lifting body allows use of maneuvering technique to solve critical heating problems of re-entry. Choice of M-2 rather than spacecraft covered with heavy ablative material could save considerable spacecraft weight. (Ames Release 63-34)
At jpl briefing of nasa Hq. scientists, it was reported that Ranger 6 would be ready for flight to the moon by about Thanksgiving and Mariner 3 would be available for flight past Mars by fourth quarter of 1964. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/63)
Ford Motor Co.’s Aeronutromc Div. was selected by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center to investigate requirement for Mars excursion module (mem)—unit designed to ferry astronauts between orbiting spacecraft and surface of Mars, (msc Release 63-98)
In speech to American Psychological Association, Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory and editor of Science, repeated his view that there were no predictable economic advantages to the exploration of the moon or possible subsequent flights to Mars. Much of the justification for manned lunar program was national prestige, ne said, but “the half of the world that is undernourished could scarcely the expected to place a higher value on landing on the moon than on filling their stomachs.” (Barbour, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/2/63)
Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin of the President’s Office of Science and Technology told National Space Club in Washington that low reliability of Scout booster (50%) was because of difficulties in four-stage booster teclmology. A basic difficulty to be overcome in future space systems, he said, was development of long-lifetime components and subsystems. Today’s missile system technology requires operational lifetime of less than a half hour; but Apollo would require 400 times that long and Mars fly-by mission, up to 20,000 times that long. The other basic problem for future space systems, he said, was achieving greater reliability with less flight testing. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/18/63, 417)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contracts to naa Space and Information Div. and Space Technology Laboratories (stl) for studies of manned Mars landing-and-retum missions. Each contract called for nine-month studies to determine requirements for possible Mars missions and to decide what research would be required during next several years to implement such a flight program. Other studies of manned Mars missions were being managed by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, emphasizing use of Apollo-class booster and spacecraft; Ames-managed studies emphasized Mars-landing mission with no restrictions as to type of vehicle and spacecraft. (Ames Release 63-21)
Study of Soviet astronautics from 1957 through 1962 (RM-3595— PR) by F. J. Krieger of the rand Corp., under usaf contract, concluded that the Soviet space program is an integral part of the Soviet military program. Krieger listed four main categories of Soviet effort: (1) earth-orbiting man in space; (2) lunar scientific exploration; (3) interplanetary exploration; and (4) Cosmos earth satellites, paramilitary in nature. Cosmos satellites have come in two sizes—large ones similar to the Vostoks, launched from Tyuratam cosmodrome east of the Aral Sea, orbiting at around 65°, and brought back to earth; and smaller ones launched with smaller rockets from Kapustin Yar cosmodrome north of the Caspian Sea, orbiting at about 49°, and not recovered. Kreiger counted 10 Soviet attempts at interplanetary flight, of which 2 have been partially successful (one passing Venus, another Mars, but both with communications failure) and six have failed to get out of earth orbit. (M&R, 6/10/63,16)
jpl Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (dsif) at Gold-stone, Calif., succeeded in bouncing radar signals off planet Mercury 60,500,000 mi. from earth. Traveling at speed of light, signals took 11 min. to make trip from Goldstone to Mercury and back to Goldstone. Preliminary analysis of echo patterns indicated Mercury has rougher surface than Venus or Mars but same surface reflectivity as that of moon. Mercury experiment was to be conducted 12 hrs. per day May 6-29, at which time planet would move out of antenna’s range, (jpl twx, 5/29/63; Marshall Star, 6/5/63, 5)
Reporting under a nasa contract to study requirements for a manned mission to Mars in “the unfavorable (1975-1985) time period,” Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. proposed a nuclear-chemical four-stage vehicle carrying a seven-man crew on a 400-day trip. Mission would begin out of 300-mile earth orbit: first stage would boost vehicle into Mars trajectory; 140 days later, second stage would put vehicle into 300-mile orbit of Mars, where for 20 days the crew would study the planet; third stage would provide escape from Mars and 240-day trip back to earth; fourth stage would provide retrothrust for re-entry. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63,27) The most controversial point raised during the conference was statement on the large amount of faulty or careless manufacture and assembly of Mercury spacecraft. On the MA-9 backup spacecraft, for example, some 720 discrepancies were recorded, of which 526 were attributable to unsatisfactory workmanship and 444 of these required specially scheduled time to correct. (msc Releases 63-153-158; Project Mercury Summary)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D with unidentified satellite from pmr. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963) During July: nasa Marshall Space Flight Center selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth and Douglas Aircraft Co. to conduct parallel studies of manned Mars exploration flight “in the unfavorable time period” (1975-85). Under seven-month contracts, the companies would outline the mission and development program for the Mars flight, identifying spacecraft and booster systems and selecting mdst promising mission profile. (Space Bus. Daily, 7/5/63; LA. Times, 7/9/63; Marshall Star, 7/10/63,8)
According to Soviet press agency Tass, mars i spacecraft was 59,460,000 km. from Earth at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time, traveling at 12.7 km/sec as it moved away from Earth. Routine interrogations had been conducted during the past week and scientific information from mars i had been obtained, (eos Translation, 3/6/63, of Tass, Pravda, 2/13/63)
Results of nasa research project reported: 18 species of earth bacteria survived in “Mars jars” in which atmospheric conditions of Mars were simulated. One type enlarged itself by four or five times in the Martian environment. {M&R, 9/2/63)
Cathode of experimental ion engine set endurance record of 1660 hours operation. Electric propulsion engineers at lrc estimate they reached 16 per cent of the cathode life required for a round-trip Mars mission. (Lewis Chronology, 7)
Tass reported that a leading Soviet space scientist, Prof. Gleb Chebotarev, claimed U.S.S.R. would put satellites in orbit around the moon. Mars, and Venus “in the near future .... The regions of outer space around the moon, Venus, Mars and Mercury where stable movement of artificial satellites is possible have been determined by means of electric machines at the Theoretical Astronomy Institute.” (un, NTT, 11/21/63)
Izvestia reported about 400 spectrograms of Mars had been taken this year at observatoiy of Astrophysics Institute, Kazakhstan Academy of Sciences, in project to investigate properties of blue haze concealing details of Martian surface. (Izvestia, 5/12/63, 6, afss-t Trans.)
Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned lunar landing program: “There are three principal candidates for what might be called the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory; the further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplanetary travel. “One difficulty is the definition, mercury is a one-man orbital laboratory; gemini is a two-man orbital laboratory; apollo is a three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the duration of the trip to the moon. “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men ? “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We have agreed there should be only one project for the time being because this will be a 2 or 3 billion project. We have agreed we will not proceed unilaterally. A decision, of course, has to be made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this field or another .... “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and, figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few days. Or you might convert a whole lunar bug to a freight carrier to extend the length of stay. You can go from that to a lunar base where you try to build a station, as m the Antarctic, that man can occupy for some time .... “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and certainly Congress will be involved in it. “There are people who favor one or another of these projects. I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory as being the next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a trip to Mars or Venus and back. “As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say at this time when the hardware will be recommended by the administration. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has priority is the possible military application.” (Hearings . . . Independent Offices Appropriations for FT 1964, Part 3,242-243)
Bidders’ conference for Voyager design-study contracts held at nasa Headquarters. Unmanned Venus and Mars probe, Voyager “is predicated on the fact that this country is serious in exploring planets in detail for a manned flight to the planets,” nasa Deputy Director of Space Sciences Edgar Cortright was reported to have said. (Space Bus. Daily, 3/13/63,309)
Water vapor and carbon dioxide on Mars were detected by Stratoscope II, project scientists announced at Palestine, Tex., press conference. Results of data gathered by balloon-mounted telescope, which observed Mars from vantage point above 98 per cent of earth’s atmosphere March 1-2, were based on preliminary analysis of taped infrared-bolometer data; further analysis was expected to provide information on presence of other life-related compounds and on amount of the compounds present in Martian atmosphere. (AP, Chicago Trib., 3/5/63; Wall Street Journal, 3/5/63)	,	.
Stratoscope II tandem balloon system was launched from National Scientific Balloon Flight Station near Palestine, Tex., carrying 36-in. telescope to 15-mi. altitude to focus on planet Mars. Stratoscope II Project Manager, Dr. Martin Schwarzchild. called it “a beautiful launch.” First attempt to detect life-related substances on Mars from above earth’s atmosphere, project was conducted jointly by Princeton Univ. and Univ. of Calif, with Vitro Laboratories in charge of flight operations; it was sponsored by nasa, nsf, and onr. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/2/63)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that Goldstone Tracking Station nau uiaue nrst rauar contact o an. zL wnn pianet itiars in a Az-hour per day experiment which would end early in March. 25-billion watt signal made 125-million mi. round trip Jan. 21 (the return signal being only one-billionth of one-trillionth of a watt) and indicated Mars has both rough and smooth surfaces, (jpi. Release; Wash. Are. Star, 2/22/63, A2; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A10) February 21: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified to the House Armed Services Committee: “In recognition of the increased impact of space programs on our national resources and their direct effect on our future national security, Air Force space activities are closely coordinated with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. One example is the recent agreement between the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on the Gemini program. The intent is to insure that the scientific and operational experiments undertaken as a part of the Gemini program will be directed towards satisfying both military and nasa requirements and objectives .... “Our forward space development program integrates the rad work of many years into a cohesive space program. Funding for all facets of the program is not included m the FY 1964 budget, but the program will provide for Air Force space activities for the near future. “The Air Force has developed a solid foundation of space on which military capabilities can be built. These efforts have brought us to a point where significant military space possibilities are (dearly apparent. Utilizing the technological base so far established, the Air Force must translate these technical capabilities into actual defense systems. The time required to move from a development state to operational systems is measured in years. Yet, it is the ready military capability, not the technological base, that accomplishes deterrence. Accordingly, the Air Force proposes to begin some of these conversions at once. “The forward program aims at two basic objectives: “first, to enhance the general military posture of the United States by building a defense capability in space. Space is not only a new area of vulnerability to attack, but also affords important means of supporting the terrestrial forces of the U.S. in relation to a military threat posed by a hostile power. “second, to provide a capability within the space region for the purpose of denying to a hostile power the uninhibited military exploitation of space, and to provide a system of protection for U.S. scientific activities in space . . . .” (Text; A-N-AF J oumal and Regi ster, 3/2/63,17,37)
Flight of balloon carrying 36-in. telescope to 80,000-ft. altitude for study of planet Mars was postponed at Palestine, Tex., after balloon developed a leak while being inflated. This was 13th time the launching had been postponed. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/23/63)
U.S.S.R. has failed in at least 13 attempts to send probes to Mars, Venus, and the moon since October 1960j Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported, and these failures were chiefly caused by inability of fourth stage to send the payload out of parking orbit. A&AE concluded, “it seems clear that the Russians have need for an improved upper stage to launch deep-space vehicles, and that Polyot I fills the bill.” (A&AE, 12/63,90) During 1963: Man’s conquest of space moved from spectacular hazard toward routine accomplishment, from the exhilarating peaks and slumps of first-generation hardware and experiments to the steadily improving reliability and capability of second- and third-generation launch vehicles and satellites, nasa launched 13 major space shots, with mission results of 11 successes, 1 partial success and 1 unsuccessful, compared with the 1962 record of 19 successes, 4 partial successes, and 3 unsuccessful. Project Mercury ended with L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; Project Apollo began its flight tests with two unmanned capsule tests. Communications satellites demonstrated near-synchronous orbit and Saturn and Centaur boosters moved toward operational status with successful test flights. U.S.S.R. conducted a 129-orbit tandem flight and orbited an unmanned prototype of a new manned maneuverable space capsule, nasa Administrator James E. Webb cited as nasa’s greatest specific accomplishment of 1963 the fact that his key staff people in Headquarters and the Centers had “learned to supervise the efforts at hand,” that he now has “the men matched with the job and the job matched with the men.” (nasa hhr-8 ; hhr-10 ; Space Bus. Daily, 1/3/64,10) During 1963: During the year the bud delivered two Minuteman wings to the Strategic Air Command, making an average of one icbm delivered per day in 1963. (afsc Release 312-R-114,1/1/64, 1) .
Soviet Army newspaper Red Star reported an account of a rocket failure, the first public mention of a rocket launching failure in the U.S.S.R. No date or program was named, only a report of heroism of a Lt. Col. Serebreynnikov. He reportedly pulled out a starting plug by hand after mechanism had failed, and only six seconds before the rocket exploded. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A35) During November: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, writing in the 10011 ft A /?/> mo /to innn	tlio '■	*	'	OKf \y lllUgU/JUiA Ol VUV \JIV11VA il Plnofrin	OQirl • “Space is not a gambit. It is not a gimmick. “Our national activities in space research and exploration are no longer in the category of a gamble. We are able to talk seriously about explorations and journeys, 26 million miles away to the planet Venus—or 47 million miles away to the planet Mars. “We have come a long way. In the new Age of Space which brings us together, we are destined to go a Tong way further. Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler. I confidently believe that the developments of the Space Age will bring the beginning of the longest and greatest boom of abundance and prosperity in the history of man.” (Challenge, Fall 1963,24—5) The Marquardt Corp. of Van Nuys, Calif., has delivered 30 production units of its Roksonde 200-1 to West Germany. The sounding rockets would be used for meteorological testing at the Salto di Quirra Test Range in Sardinia. The meteorological data gathering is part of the overall European effort in support of the iqsy worldwide programs. As part of the program, the Mar?[uardt Corp. will assist the West German government in two aunching series. The first series was currently in progress, scheduled for completion by mid-December; the second would be completed in early 1964. (Marquardt Release, 11/21/63, sin, Jan., 1964) During November: jpl scientists Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and Roland L. Carpenter reported in Science magazine on recent radar experiments using an 85-ft. parabolic antenna at a tracking station in the Mohave Desert. The planet Mercury was found to be quite rugged, more so than Mars and twice as rugged as Venus. The experiments also corroborated Mercury’s rotation period as 88 days. (Science Service, NYT, 11/6/63, 33)
Report by three-man nasa advisory committee concluded that “shielding [against radiation] of the crew for Project Apollo is not possible within the time and weight limitations of the project.” The crew “will simply have to accept the relatively low probability of encountering a major solar flare during their relatively brief excursion to the moon.” Report estimated 10,000 lbs. of polyethylene shielding would be required to protect men in 10-ft.-diameter spacecraft for a week. For flights to Mars or Venus, more than 20,000 lbs. of polyethylene would be required. “The accomplishment of manned flights to the vicinity of Mars and Venus may have to be delayed until some means are found for reducing these shielding weights,” report stated. (AP, NYT, 12/10/63,24; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/63)
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
A Mars Excursion Module (mem) would be the best means of landing men on Mars, according to Temple Neuman of Philco Corp.’s Aeronutronic Div., which had just completed a study of the subject under nasa contract. The mem would carry two men, house and feed them for 40 days, and enable them to bring back 800 lbs. of equipment and samples, for a gross vehicle weight of about 55,000 lbs. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/2/63, 12)
U.S.S.R. mars i probe lost contact with tracking stations when 65 million miles out because of malfunction in the spacecraft attitude control system, according to Alexandre A. Mironov, Soviet Embassy scientific adviser in Washington. (Av. Wk., 10/21/63, 28) During October: H. H. Koelle, Director of Future Projects Office, msfc, in “Trends in Earth-to-Orbit Transportation Systems,” in Aeronautics and Aerospace Engineering, noted that the next year would be interesting in that both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were expected to come up with big increase in payload in orbit. The U.S. Saturn I was expected to put 10 tons in orbit. “Also, I would not be a bit surprised if the U.S.S.R. launched a payload in the 40- to 50-ton class before this [next] year is over. The next step increase will be provided by the Saturn V in about 1967, when a 100-ton capability will be reached by the U.S. Many people hope that at least by that time the U.S.S.R. single-flight capabilities will have been equalled or exceeded.” Space transportation was developing fast, Koelle concluded: “While air transportation needed two generations to improve the efficiency of passenger transport by three orders of magnitude, we expect to improve the economy of Earth-to-orbit cargo transportation by four orders of magnitude in one generation.” {A&AE, Nov. 63,25-30)
National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced National Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1962 would be awarded to Dr. Merlyn McLaughlin, president of College of Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery of Des Moines, Iowa, (naa Release) Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Air Force, speaking at Symposium on the Exploration of Mars of the American Astronautical Society, discussed the two-fold task of the Air Force: “. . . . first, to protect the Nation’s exploration and research in space as effectively as the Air Force contributes to protection of our national activities on the Earth’s surface, and second, to act as the Department of Defense agency which helps insure the National Space Program’s success through provision of Air Force facilities and services to the overall effort. “The question of whether there is a need of an operational capability for United States military forces beyond the atmosphere may already have been answered for us in a number of public statements by Soviet military and political leaders .... Their major new book on Military Strategy . . . says, “Soviet military strategy acknowledges the need to study the use of space and space vehicles to reinforce the defense of the socialist countries. ... It would be a mistake to allow the imperialist camp to gain any superiority in this area.’ ” (Text) Speaking at a symposium on the Exploration of Mars in Denver, Colo., Wolfgang E. Moeckel, chief of lrc’s Electromagnetic Propulsion Division, said: “The potential of electric propulsion for Mars exploration is as great or greater than that of other systems now under development and it becomes even more attractive for the exploration of the farther reaches of the solar system.” (lrc Release 63-35, Lewis Chronology, 4-5) Highlights of parellel studies on three classes of Nova launch vehicles, conducted by General Dynamics/Astronautics and Martin-Marietta Corp. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, were presented by Andrew Kalitinsky, gd/a Program Director. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,34) Dr. H. O. Ruppe of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Future Projects Office estimated manned Mars mission would require about $9 billion for interplanetary spacecraft, $5 billion for operating costs (including procurement of Nova launch vehicles), and $2 billion for remaining production and procurement costs. Dr. Ruppe presented paper on “Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit to Mars Orbit and Return,” discussing results of Project Empire (Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip Expedition) contract studies by Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Ford Co. Aero-nutronics Div., and General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp. Results of studies indicated: only marginal capabilities exist for allchemically propelled space vehicles; even with nuclear-powered upper stages, manned roundtrip flight would be difficult task; because of eccentricity of earth’s orbit, flights during 1975-80 period may be technically or economically unfeasible; manned Mars program would require unusually high degree of coordination within entire National space program. {NTT, 6/7/63, 11; Marshall Star, 6/12/63,1? 4) Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, said: “[Manned Mars mission] will be a very major undertaking exceeding the Apollo program In total cost and difficulty. For that reason, we must realistically recognize that one of the factors determining the timing of such a mission will be the availability of funds and manpower. We must recognize that we cannot undertake such a mission until the Apollo mission begins to phase out. “If, as will probably be the case, rendezvous in earth orbit and some orbital assembly or propellant transfer will be required to perform the Mars landing missions, an earth orbiting space laboratory will probably precede the accomplishment of the actual planetary missions. The cost of such a system would also be high but it would probably be a necessary stepping stone to the planetary missions .... “The unknowns in such a mission will require the accumulation of a great deal of basic information and . . . substantial development efforts for all of the systems and facilities that would be required in such a mission. I think it is to be expected that the time required for development of these systems puts the accomplishment of a manned Mars landing mission off until late in the seventies and more probably into the early eighties .... “I expect that large chemical rocket booster stages, in combination with nuclear rocket upper stages, will be used to accomplish the Mars landing mission. I expect also that such vehicles and propulsion systems will be used to perform the preliminary missions of manned fly-by trips around Mars and trips into orbit around Mars. It is conceivable that such missions could start in the latter part of the 70’s . . . .” (Text) A. James Shiner of nasa Man-System Integration delivered paper prepared by him and Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research: “A manned orbital research laboratory . . . becomes a distinct requirement to obtain human design requirements for a Mars vehicle system, whether that system be nuclear or chemical. The manned orbital research laboratory will help answer many of our questions about the space environment^ and man’s ability to not only survive, but to perform useful functions in prolonged space missions. The manned orbital research laboratory under study by the Langley Research Center will have to operate for prolonged periods of time to obtain the required human research and biotechnology data needed for design of advanced space systems. A manned orbital research laboratory will eventually be used to simulate Martian voyages as well .	. .” (Text) Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert predicted need for military patrol in space “to determine at all times what is hap741-623 0—64--16 pening in near-space and to deal with any threat there . . . . [Space patrol] would provide on-call protection for U.S. space activities, both scientific and military, in the event of hostile enemy actions.” (Rocky Mountain News [Denver], 6/7/63) Dr. W. M. Sinton, Lowell Observatory astronomer, said in June 7 address that possible vegetation on Mars would probaby resemble cactus, especially barrel or saguaro cactus. (AP, Balt. Sim, 6/8/63) Dr. Gerard de Vaucouleurs of Univ. of Texas described recent Mars observations from Pic du Midi in French Pyrenees. Studying spotted patterns of dark areas, Pic du Midi found seasonal darkening or Martian surface was actually a filling in of spaces between dark spots on the planet. Dr. de Vaucouleurs found it difficult to reconcile large-scale changes of dark areas with recent findings that Mars was extremely dry. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/63) Jwne 7: France’s President Charles de Gaulle opened 25th International Air Show at LeBourget Airport, visiting U.S. space exhibit as well as other exhibits. (NYT, 6/8/63,35)
Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, touring India with his bride, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolavev, said in New Dellii that U.S.S.R. was planning a spacecraft capable of sustaining the life of a crew for three years. This was the estimated time for a manned flight to Mars or Venus and return, with some 14 months of this actual roundtrip flight time and the other two years waiting on the planet for the proper orbital relationship for the return flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/12/63)
jpl awarded Avco Corp. Research and Advanced Development Div. an $83,000 contract for study of entry and landing of ballistic capsules on Mars and Venus. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
Memorandum titled “Space Race with U.S.S.R.” from Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, was made public. Dr. Welsh said U.S. space program was in the building stage this year and few space spectaculars could be expected in 1963; U.S.S.R. may attempt the following in 1963: manned orbital mission of eight days, manned orbital rendezvous mission, close-up photographs of planet Mars (with mars i probe), and several unmanned lunar soft-landing probes. Memorandum had been written before launching of Soviet probe lunik, iv, believed by many scientists to have been an unsuccessful attempt to soft-land on the moon. (Text; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
U.S.S.R. mars i passed planet Mars, but with its communications systems dead as they had been since March 21. All subsequent attempts to restore communication had failed. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/63)
nasa devices for detecting life on Mars, to be ejected from Mariner interplanetary probes and soft-landed onto planet’s surface, were discussed in article in The National Observer. Gulliver, first in series, would be 1.5-lb. dome-shaped device equipped with two 23ft. sticky strings; upon landing, strings would shoot out of dome and then reel back inside, gamering up samples of whatever is on surface to be deposited m solution of distilled water, sterile beef broth, malt extract, vitamins, other nutrients, and radioactive carbon. If adhesive gathers microbes similar to those on earth, microbes would multiply in the solution and produce radioactive carbon dioxide which would be detected by Geiger counter in dome and radioed back to earth. Another device, known as Multivator, designed by Dr. Joshua Lederberg of Stanford Univ. and still under development, was designed to make 24 different biological and chemical tests of micro-organisms. Third life-detecting device is Wolf Trap, named after its designer, Dr. Wolf Vishniac of Univ. of Rochester; it would suck in samples of planetary soil or air and introduce them to broth somewhat like that of Gulliver. (National Observer, 2/11/63)
Routine radio contact with mars i interplanetary probe was made over distance of 98,863,000 km. (61,430,502 mi.), about 12,000,000 km. (7,364,400 mi.) farther than last U.S. radio contact with mariner ii Venus probe, according to Tass. (mariner ii’s last contact was at 54.3 million mi.) (Pravda, 3/17/63, 1, afss-t Trans.)
In hearings on U.S. space program, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony of Dr. Philip Abelson, Carnegie Institution of Washington’s Geophysical Laboratory; Dr. C. S. Pittendrigh, Princeton Univ. biology dept.; Dr. Simon Ramo, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc.; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of Calif, prof, of chemistry; and Dr. Polycarp Kusch, Columbia Univ. physicist. Dr. Abelson charged Project Apollo was harming future expansion of scientific knowledge and ‘‘taking away from our national security”; he declared that “manned space exploration has limited scientific value and has been accorded an importance which is quite unrealistic . . . .” Dr. Pittendrigh testified he approved of lunar exploration program chiefly because of its value toward eventual exploration of Mars. He cautioned that manned Mars landing should be made only after it is assured there would be no contamination by terrestrial organisms. Dr. Ramo expressed his approval of Project Apollo, but advised a “calm watch” to assure such a project would not begin to “dominate” U.S. technology and economy. Dr. Urey, taking issue with Dr. Abelson’s suggestion that Apollo costs were hindering U.S. science and education, said that “if we should decide not to do the space program we will probably do less for education than we would otherwise . . . .” Dr. Kusch testified he opposed high priority for Project Apollo because “we have great national needs that far outweigh the exploration of space.” He cited such necessities as conservation of natural resources, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/63) Jwne 10: usaf decision to recover manned spacecraft at Edwards, Holloman, and Wendover Air Force Bases was reported in Missiles and. Rochets. All mission command and control would be exercised by Satellite Test Center, Sunnyvale, Calif. Unnamed usaf spokesmen said first program operating under this arrangement would be X-20 (Dyna Soar) in its air-launched phases. (M&R, 6/10/63,34)
Soviet press agency Tass reported in Krasnaya Zvezda that routine radio communications with mars i interplanetary probe were conducted Feb. 13-19 and that telemetry information was received from the probe. Tass said that at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time mars i was 67,432,000 km. from earth. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/20/63,1, afss-t trans.)
Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by International Academy of Astronautics to succeed the late Dr. Theodore von Karman as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Director since 1961. (iaa Release No. 14) During May: Paul D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, permanent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,” replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and because, being much closer, we can send back information and samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space station, the moon has the advantage of providing a large, stable platform with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a stratigraphic record of its history and of meteoritic material which has accumulated on it. These advantages are in a sense a one-way street. We can make many of the observations proposed for the space station from the moon as well, because the moon has essentially a space environment. But we cannot examine the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release) During May: nasa awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of F-l engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which had initiated F-l development. {M&R, 5/6/63,13)
F. J. Krieger, rand Corp. specialist on Soviet astronautics, said in report for usaf Project Rand that Soviet Cosmos satellites probably are “para-military” spacecraft of two types: (1) recoverable vehicle as large as Vostok spacecraft and (2) 4,400-lb., non-recoverable vehicle launched from another site and with different booster. Krieger also stated his belief that U.S.S.R. had six attempted probe launchings end in failure between August 25 and January 4 caused by inability to get fourth stage out of parking orbit. First three were attempted Venus probes; next two, Mars probes; last one, moon probe, (rand Memorandum RMOKAK TkT» *	A	TTT 7 j /Cia //**>	f\r\\ OUtfU—r JAj 111 II. V. YY tC^^/ZV/ oo, zz)
mars i interplanetary probe was 78,843,000 km. (48,980,675 mi.) from earth, Soviet newspaper Izvestia reported. From Feb. 20 to March 1, scheduled radio contacts were made; “a series of control commands were transmitted to the station.” Tass said that on March 1 “a number of corrective guidance commands were transmitted to the spacecraft. The strength of radio signals, which are being received from the interplanetary station, decreased somewhat . . . .” (Izvestia,, 3/3/63, 5, afss-t Trans.; Pravda, 2/2/63, eos Trans.)
Plans for modular Mars spacecraft as presented by D. M. Hammock, Assistant Chief of Spacecraft Technology Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, were described in Missiles and Rockets. Six-man crew would undertake 400-day expedition to Mars in three-module spacecraft—Mars mission module, Mars excursion module, and earth entiy module. Hammock said nasa was evaluating merits of manned space stations, permanent lunar bases, and Mars expedition as follow-on to Project Apollo, and that technology needed for Mars spacecraft would be simpler in many ways than that required for lunar base or space station. (M&R, 5/13/63,34)
Tass reported Soviet scientists had lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe on March 21, when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth. Probe was continuing on its flight toward vicinity of Mars but telemetry data indicated difficulty in orientation system had misaligned its radio antennas. Tass said mars i had recorded considerable change in boundaries of radiation belts around earth; “sphere of maximum intensity” in innermost belt was farther out than previously noted. Intensity of cosmic rays had almost doubled m last four years, Tass said. Important findings were made concerning stability and energy of interplanetary and solar plasma, and mars i made possible first scientific observation of junction of earth’s ionized gas envelope with outermost belt of charged particles. Other data on intensity of magnetic fields in space and distribution of meteoric particles were /B.U	K/’I'7/CQ. A „. lFl S /Ol /K9 OA \ A UW1 UUU. \ A/Ull. AJ to/U / i.1 / y XA (/. rr Iv.y KJ J LJ % / \J*Jy y
Utmost care would be taken in the assembly and checkout of the Mariner B spacecraft intended for a landing on Mars in 1966 so that the Mars lander would be completely free of earth microbes that might contaminate the Martian environment. Workers with even minor colds would be barred from the assembly area. The final assembly would be subjected to a dry heat at 275°F for 24 hours, then sealed into its special can and placed aboard the booster for launching. The special can would not open until the spacecraft was some 350 mi. from earth, considered to be the limit of earth microbes. {Wash. Post, 11/7/63)
U.S. Dept, of Commerce translation of article, “How to Fly to Mars, by Soviet scientist Prof. G. Chebotarev, was reported. “The ‘Mars-1’ interplanetary station was launched from a heavy satellite in a circular earth satellite orbit; the velocity of the satellite was 4.9 miles a second. The rocket was launched from this satellite at a velocity of 3.1 miles a second, but the rocket left the orbit at 8 miles a second. 741-683 0—64“It headed toward Mars in a hyperbolic trajectory and left the earth’s sphere of attraction at 4 miles a second. For it to assume an orbital path around Mars the station would have to be braked to a velocity of 3.2 miles a second . . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/12/63, A5)	_
John L. Sloop, Director of nasa Propulsion and Power Generation in Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Propulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the moon in this decade will depend completely on chemical propulsion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propulsion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use each type in the application best suited to its characteristics. We see much larger chemical propulsion systems than we have today. Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satellites and between distant points on the earth. We see chemical propulsion packages carried dormant for months on long space missions but ready at the touch of a button or a signal from earth to perform their task. We see chemical propulsion systems for landing and take-off from the moon, Mars, and Venus where compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed. Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency use . . . .” (Testimony)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. press conference in Rome, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, chief U.S. negotiator, and Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced signing of an accord for a joint weather satellite program and called for broader American-Russian cooperation in space activities. Agreements were reached under space cooperation accord signed by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. last June, and after ten days of closed-door negotiations by teams of specialists. Agreement would become effective after a 60-day waiting period pending possible changes by either Government. Under the joint weather satellite program, each nation would launch a satellite on a different orbit to collect meteorological data, while a 24-hr. cable and radio communications network would be established for exchange of information and cloud-cover pictures, such data to be made public throughout the world. Launching of Echo II later in 1963 would provide basis for communications experiments which could lead to a global communications network, including the exchange of radio and TV programs. Both nasa Deputy Administrator Dryden and Blagonravov expressed hope that the accord just negotiated would lead to broader agreements. Blagonravov was quoted as saying that “the first step is always the hardest.” Dryden was quoted regarding the Warsaw meetings later this year on probes of Mars and Venus as saying: “I hope there will be future coordination to avoid duplication.” (Text; AP, Wash. Post, 3/21/63,1)
Soviet newspaper Pravda said mass i space probe was more than 26-million mi. from earth and successfully continuing its flight toward planet Mars. There was no mention of mid-course correction maneuver to bring the probe closer than its estimated 120,000-mi. distance from Mars in June. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/31/63)	... During January: Series of Gemini parachute design qualification tests was successfully completed at El Centro, Calif., for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Parachute system would undergo two more test series before qualification; system would be backup mechanism for two-man Gemini spacecraft recovery in case of water landings. ( msc Roundup, 1/23/63,1)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in interview that plans for 360-ton, four-man spacecraft to fly from earth to Mars were in “quite an advanced stage.” Emphasizing that execution of such plans was not yet approved and funded by nasa, he described nuclear-electric powered spacecraft and said it was “projected for beyond the 1970V’
Members of recent U.S. Mt. Everest expedition, William F. Siri, Univ. of California physiologist, and Prof. Maynard M. Miller, Michigan State Univ. scientist, said in New Delhi interview that laboratory study of rock and snow samples from Mt. Everest might provide clues to life on Mars. Siri said environment on Mars is “just a little bit worse” than on Everest’s peak, citing Everest’s thin air, low temperatures, lack of liquid water, and intense solar radiation. (AP, Richmond News Leader, 6/18/63)
“First conclusive detection” of water vapor on Mars was announced by Cal Tech. Mars’ water supply was found to be minimal—perhaps as little as half a cu. mi. compared with millions of cu. mi. on earth. Finding was made by analysis of spectrum of light from Mars gathered by Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories in California. (Hill, NYT, 6/5/63,17)
nasa announced selection of 10 experimenters for Mariner spacecraft’s Mars fly-by mission, scheduled for 1964. Experiments for the probe, which would make measurements of interplanetary space as well as of vicinity of Mars, were: television, magnetometer, low-energy cosmic-ray experiment, cosmic-ray spectrum experiment, cosmic-ray ionization experiment, plasma probe, cosmic i -Ft*o nrl ormoIi*Amntn»* niff OpWtA VlllUtUi J Ulll U t 1U1UL pilwLl/lllUlUl Of and radio propagation, (nasa Release 63-71) Television broadcast of biweekly program narrated by Jacques Sallebert, French radio and TV correspondent in New York, sent direct from New York to Paris via relay i communications satellite for first time. Program consisted of views of lower New York City and of New York Harbor. Reception in Paris was described as considerably better than prerecorded broadcasts previously used and as comparing favorably with any TV program originating in Paris. (NYT, 4/12/63, 45) Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa Nuclear Systems Office and Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, testified before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “The space nuclear systems program involves large amounts of funds, manpower, and facilities in nasa’s program and, in addition, involves substantial effort on the part of the Atomic Energy Commission. We are convinced that the high performance potential of these systems for space propulsion and electric power generation justifies the substantial effort that we are devoting toward the early development of such systems. It is 741-623 I clear that if we are to perform extensive space exploration missions beyond our first manned lunar landings, it will be necessary to have available to us nuclear propulsion systems and if we are to establish large space laboratories, lunar bases, and are to travel to distant planets, we will have to rely on the availability of large nuclear electric power generating systems . . . .” (Testimony)
Soviet astronomer G. A. Tikhov concluded that Martian vegetation, if it exists, is blue rather than green, because of light and temperature conditions on Mars. In translation/abstract of Tikhov’s report, issued by Dept, of Commerce, he reported that “plants in the Far North on earth should have entirely different optical properties than in temperate latitudes and on mountains. Martian plants should be closest to the Arctic and mountain species, whose spectra have quite inconspicuous chlorophyll bands.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
James T. Dennison, of nasa Technology Utilization Office, said in paper delivered at annual meeting of National Association of Business Economists, Cleveland: “. . . We suggest that the greatest contributions of our government’s aerospace programs to the business economy have been the psychological boost of setting for ourselves an utterly impossible goal and then buckling down to reach it. And this adventure has come at a time when there were those who cried that our democratic capitalistic economy was sluggish, that we were being outdone by overseas and overland competitors, that gloom was here and that doom was close at hand. “The challenge of the exploration of space, of putting our fellow man safely into a desperately hostile environment, has provided a spur to great segments of our American business economy. And that spur will be keeping us on the jump until • we get those men to the moon and back, and, then perchance, take off for Mars.” (Text)
National Geographic Society announced two scientists with astronomical instruments were recently lofted by plastic-skinned balloon to 15-mi. altitude in experiment to record radio sounds from stars. National Geographic Society outlined other recent scientific contributions by man’s oldest means of flight, including balloon-lifted telescop e camera which made unprecedented photographs of sunspots and another instrumented payload which obtained man’s clearest observations of planet Mars. Balloon-carried instrumentation now probing upper atmosphere is obtaining valuable data on astrophysics, meteorology, and aeromedicine. {Chic. Trib., 8/20/63)
nasa announced mariner ii Venus probe had been so successful that repeat flight scheduled for 1964 had been canceled. Interplanetary efforts would be concentrated instead on such projects as sending probe toward Mars in 1964 and later flight to Venus with advanced Mariner probe in 1965. (nasa Release 63-3; jpl Release)
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was nearing halfway mark on its flight to vicinity of Mars, news agency Tass announced. Tass quoted Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, as saying mars i was about 30 million mi. from earth. ( upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/5/63)
robes to the moon and Mars by 1970, by converting the Blue treak booster to use of liquid hydrogen, (cpi, Wash. Post, 11/15/63)	^
Instruments onboard mars i interplanetary probe confirmed existence of a third radiation belt, Soviet news agency Tass announced. Third radiation belt had been discovered in 1959 by Soviet rockets which had gathered particles at 50,000-mi. altitude, Tass said, and its existence was verified when mars i recorded stream of charged particles far beyond the second radiation belt. Number of particles in this outermost belt greatly exceeded that in first two belts, according to Tass. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/17/63)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director nasa Goddard Institute of Space Studies, speaking at the American Society of Newspaper Editors, attempted to explain the “scientific effort” in the context of the entire space program: “I think, personally, that there is also a powerful general stimulus wbich comes from the need for developing new ideas and technologies to operate in and master a new environment. One must go back to the explorations of the late 15th Century to find a parallel to what we are about to witness in the next 30 to 50 years. Those explorations 450 years ago and their results awakened interest in the world and an intellectual ferment which were the necessary foundations for the development of a scientific revolution. “The ideas of a scientific revolution could not have flowered in a static society with fixed ideas of what could and could not be done. It took the explorations of the 15th and early 16th centuries to shake established notions enough to permit the birth of modem scientific thought. In a subtle and deep sense, this is one of the reasons for the interest of the scientist in the exploration elements of the space program .... “I think that the history of the last 100 years demonstrates that we need not expect a very long wait before space research will feed back into everyday affairs and play a role in them. “In the 19th century, the lag was rather long. The Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell published a treatise on electromagnetism in 1864, but not until 1901 did Marconi transmit the first wireless signal across the Atlantic. “More recently, in 1932, Chadwick discovered the neutron in England. Fermi set the first atomic pile critical at Stagg Field in Chicago in 1942, only 10 years from the basic discovery to a very formidable application. “Still more recently, Bardeen and Brattain and Shockley at the Bell Labs discovered the transistor in 1948 and only six years later the first transistorized power amplifier appeared on the market .... “. . . the exploration of the moon has a very special role to play, precisely for the reason that would make one think the moon is uninteresting scientifically—specifically because the moon is a relatively lifeless body. It has no atmosphere, no oceans, nothing to wear away the record of the history of the solar system, and of whatever has occurred to the surface of the moon since its birth. “On the earth, record of even tremendous surface events disappear within 10 to 50 million years, a very short time compared to the age of the planet, and mountains form and are turned over. With the action of weather, everything changes and disappears as the millions of years go by. That is probably also true on Mars and Venus which resemble the earth in this respect. But the moon has no oceans, no atmosphere, no mountain-building activity that we can discern. For this reason, the moon is a kind of Rosetta Stone of the solar system from which we can read the past. That is why it is so interesting to the scientist. He has the opportunity to find there the record of the early history of the solar system. “To the student of the origin of the earth, the moon is even more interesting scientifically than Mars or Venus. “. . . if the moon and the planets were formed out of gas and dust in the condensation that surrounded the primitive sun, then we can expect such condensation to accompany the birth of every star. There are one hundred billion stars in our galaxy alone. Nearly every one of them we expect to have a planetary system around it. Some small fraction of those planets will be at the right distances from their suns, from their stars, and of the right size to have conditions favorable to the development of physical life as we know it. “If that is the case, it follows that life must be a relatively commonplace thing, physical life in the universe . . . “. . . there is one small instrument on the Tiros which has not achieved as much attention as it deserves. The size of a quarter, it is a black disc which detects the infrared energy radiated from the top of the atmosphere. That is the energy which is reflected back into space from the earth. We can accurately estimate the energy coming to the earth from the sun and we can take the difference between the two and calculate the amount of energy remaining in the atmosphere. “This energy deposited in the atmosphere constitutes the driving force that generates weather activity. With the aid of satellites, for the first time we can measure the energy difference and hope to break through from the day-to-day forecasting, which depends on immediately preceding events, to the week-long or two-week forecasts.” (Text)
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, Dr. Allan Brown, biology prof. at Univ. of Pennsylvania, urged that U.S. initiate a program to land a scientific probe on Mars in 1969, because the Martian “surface could be sampled during spring and summer when there would be the best chance of detecting plantlife organisms.” He recommended adapting Saturn IB booster to carry a several-hundred -pound instrumented payload. Dr. Brown estimated significant scientific probe of Mars could be achieved in 1969 at cost of $2.9 billion over six years. He suggested international cooperation on the project “should be more easily achieved than in any other area of space research or exploration in which both U.S. and Soviet programs are involved.” {M&R, 1/6/64, 14)
nasa was examining the nuclear-pulse propulsion concept (Orion) which had been studied under usaf contracts for some live years. Nuclear-pulse—a series of controlled nuclear explosions—was considered a possible means of propulsion for fast manned trips to Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in the 1975-1995 time period. The fast trip would be desirable because component lifetimes would run around 10,000 hrs., somewhat over one year. It would therefore be highly desirable that the round-trip be possible in one year’s time. If Orion were chosen as the propulsion system, some amendment to the nuclear test-ban treaty might be necessary to legalize its use. nasa was studying the Orion potential through a contract issued in June 1963 to the General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics.	11/4/63, 34)
Symposium on exploration of Mars would be held in Denver June 6-7, cosponsored by nasa, American Astronomical Society, American Institute of Biological Sciences, and American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, nasa announced, (nasa Release 63-68)
Spectroscopic studies of Mars indicate Martian atmosphere is too thin (10 millibars pressure) for wing- or parachute-landings by spacecraft, according to Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona. Until recently, pressure on Mars was generally considered to be 85 millibars, based largely on observations by Dr. Audouin Dollfus of the Paris Observatory. Earlier this year, Dr. Kuiper had estimated surface pressure to be 17 millibars, but more precise analysis led him to 10-millibar conclusion, nasa scientists planned further observations for March 1965, when Mars is closest to earth, to gain decisive evidence. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/26/63,1)
R. W. Gillespie, systems engineer of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., said in Los Angeles press conference: “America’s giant program for a [manned] lunar landing should be reoriented to allow for a manned landing on Mars and a manned capture [orbital flyby] of Venus by 1973. Most of the talent now working on the lunar landing would have to be diverted for the Mars and Venus flights.” He said he was “one of those who thinks there is some form of life on Mars” and that a landing there would be of more value than one on the moon; scientists already have a pretty good idea of what man would find on the moon. Gillespie was in Los Angeles for 9th annual meeting of American Astronautical Society. (L.A. Times to Wash. Post, 1/16/63, A7)
Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, prof, of biology at Princeton Univ., urged at National Academy of Sciences meeting in Washington that President Kennedy proclaim U.S. opposition to contamination of Mars by landing probes on that planet. He added that U.S. should make available its research on decontamination to U.S.S.R. Dr. Pittendrigh emphasized he approved decision to relax sterilization of lunar probes but declared his opposition to landing spacecraft on Mars where possibility of life exists. (NTT, 4/25/63)
nasa issued procedures on decontamination of lunar-landing spacecraft and planetary-landing spacecraft, based on recommendations ' by nas-nrc Space Science Board made public this date. Because sterilization procedures employed on previous Ranger lunar spacecraft—particularly heat cycle—were suspected of directly contributing to Ranger mission failures, nasa lowered decontamination requirements for current Ranger spacecraft. It was now only required that microbes on Rangers be “reduced to a minimum.” Regarding lunar probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The lunar surface with its high temperatures, intense ultra-violet radiation, paucity of moisture, and high vacuum is a most unfavorable environment for proliferation of terrestrial organisms . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . minimize contamination to the extent technically feasible . . . [and develop] a sterile drilling system to accompany an early Apollo mission to return an uncontaminated sample of the lunar subsoil . . . .” n\sa procedures ^or M*rs I2.nd.1r* " missions required. th»t sjpEics-craft be sterilized and that this decontamination be effectively achieved without jeopardizing spacecraft reliability. Regarding Mars probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The contamination of Mars through the impacting of nonsterile probes from the Earth could destroy an opportunity to carry out a meaningful search for life forms on Mars with remote detectors. This opportunity is unique and its loss would be a catastrophe . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . accord the highest priority to the prevention of the biological contamination of Mars until sufficient information has been obtained about possible life forms there so that further scientific studies will not be jeopardized . . . .” (nasa Release 63-200; nas-nrc Release; nas-nrc Space Probe Sterilization)
Speaking at the Fourth International Space Science Symposium in Warsaw, Poland, Dr. R. S. Young of nasa’s Ames Research Center, said that certain earth bacteria not only survive but grow satisfactorily in a laboratory-created Martian environment. Knowledge of growth of earth organisms on Mars is important for two reasons, Dr. Young said. First, the extremely complex problem of decontaminating earth spacecraft depends upon proof that earth organisms do not present a hazard to other planets. Second, as much information as possible about survival on Mars or on other celestial objects is needed for designing instruments on spacecraft to detect and analyze such life if it exists. (The Cleveland Press, 8/1/63)
Soviet scientists lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth; however, no mention was made of this fact by the Russians until May 16 (see May 16). (Balt. Sun, 5/17/63; Av. Wk., 5/27/63,24)
