jpl had recommended use of a steerable entry vehicle or steerable parachute system for 1969 Mars probe, Missiles and Rockets reported, jpl wanted to land the complete vehicle and achieve telemetry from the Martian surface, notably on whether or not signs of life existed. Chief area of interest was Syrtis Major, prominent green area on Martian equator that might be one of the more likely spots to support life. (M&R, 4/20/64,11)
Details of Phoebus-powered nuclear rocket engine, as described by Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, in series of lectures sponsored by NATO Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development (agard) : The second-generation nuclear rocket would have 250,000-lb. thrust, using 5,000-megawatt Phoebus reactor. In clustered formation, the engines could launch manned spacecraft out of earth orbit on Mars trajectory. Ground-test firings of first-generation (low-power) Phoebus would be conducted in 1965-66, and tests of the heavier Phoebus reactor in 1967. (M&R, 10/12/64, 17)
Prof. Marcel Florkin of Liege Univ., a member of the Committee on Space Research (cospar), said that many American and Soviet scientists shared his belief that men cannot survive weightlessness in space for more than five or six days. He said that Soviet scientists had produced photographs showing abnormalities in cell division attributable to the sustained weightlessness some of their astronauts had experienced. Prof Florkin said that under present conditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the only alternative would be space vehicles that could produce artificial gravity to simulate normal human environment. (O’Toole, NYT, 12/24/64)
Resolution approved at final session of cospar recommended that no spacecraft be landed on Mars if there were more than one chance in 10,000 that it was carrying earthly micro-organisms that could contaminate Mars. Resolution also said no nation should attempt an “unsterilized fly-by” of Mars if there were more than three chances in 100,000	of its accidentally hitting the planet. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 5/21/64)
Soviet Union announced that the spacecraft, zond ii, headed for Mars in an apparent race with mariner iv, had run into difficulties. The Soviet report said that in the first few radio contacts between zond ii and the ground “the power supply on board the space station was about half of the expected level.” Position information indicated the probe was 25,000 mi. from earth. (Witkin, NYT, 12/2/64, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64)
It was reported that contractors were accusing nasa of naming a Mars exploration idea “Project Beagle” just to appeal to President Johnson. NASA officials denied this and stated that the project was named after the ship in which Charles Darwin sailed around the world. (Av. Wk.. 7/20/64, 15)
mariner iv lost its lock on Canopus. “Current analysis supports the theory that a dust particle reflecting the light of the sun passed through the field of view of the Canopus tracker,” NASA said. Loss of lock on the star would not alter the spacecraft’s course, would merely affect its attitude, which would be of importance only when the spacecraft neared Mars and attempted to photograph the planet. NASA planned to command the spacecraft to reacquire Canopus soon. jpl, manager of the Mariner program for NASA, reported that a solar plasma probe experiment, which had functioned perfectly for eight days, had ceased to transmit useful information. (AP, Houston Post, 12/8/64)
MARINER IV passed the 50-million-mi. mark on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars. The spacecraft was operating normally and transmitting items of information at a rate of 33%/sec. Nearly 10 million scientific and engineering measurements in space and outside the earth’s orbit had been transmitted in its first 29 days of flight, (nasa Release 64-326)
Two mathematicians at Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of Univ. of Calif. achieved first accurate description of the orbit of Mars, Univ. of Calif, announced. The mathematicians, Joseph L. Brady and Edna Vienop, calculated the planet’s orbit with aid of computers used to develop nuclear weapons. Brady said calculation left Mercury as the solar system’s only planet without accurate description of its orbit. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/2/64, A3)
Thomas Jefferson Wong, 40, internationally known research scientist and head of manned Mars mission studies at nasa Ames Research Center, died after apparent heart attack. Mr. Wong had been with Ames for 13 years. [Palo Alto Times, 3/2/64)
FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriation Bill containing $5,250 billion NASA appropriation, was signed into law by President Johnson. NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement on the effect of the appropriation, saying that nasa would “maintain the basic momentum and direction of the program as presented to Congress but will make a number of adjustments to meet the Congressional reduction of $195 million, to effect those specific changes directed by Congress, and to take advantage of experience gained from operations conducted during the nine months since the budget was submitted. “Although these adjustments will affect launch schedules and program milestones, Dr. Dryden, Dr. Seamans, and I are convinced that it is best to make a maximum effort to gain operational leadership in manned space flight and that the manned lunar landing should continue to be targeted within this decade. This will stretch NASA and its contractors to the limit, but we have advised the President that we are not at this time willing to give up this goal which is so challenging- and which is so important as a focus for the efforts we must continue to make in all our programs. . . . “The target date is only five years away. Our assurance that it can be met is less than under President Johnson’s budget, but we still hope that with hard work, dedication, continued successes, and continued support we can meet it. We are going to make a hard try. “This decision does not involve the transfer to manned flight of funds from space science and applications programs or advanced research and technology programs. These programs will require some adjustments, but will not be drastically reduced as would be necessary if funds were reprogrammed to benefit manned space flight. “In the program for unmanned planetary exploration, the combination of a heavy workload at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the short lead time available, and the importance of applying our resources to a major advance beyond the limited Mariner make it unwise to undertake a Mars mission in 1966 with the current Mariner-type spacecraft. The development of a spacecraft with much greater scientific promise for launch to Mars in 1969 is being initiated. . . .” (NASA Release 64-221)
At cospar, Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Carl Sagan said acetaldehyde gas, believed to exist in atmosphere of Mars, turns to sugar on contact with ultraviolet sunlight. Martian life, which probably is microorganic, possibly gives off the acetaldehyde gas and then feeds on the sugar that falls from the atmosphere, Dr. Sagan said. (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Aviation Week & Space Technology that U.S. space program had “entered a whole new period,” in which U.S. was faced with exploring all the practical applications of knowledge suddenly gained through the space effort. “My view is to create stability, and the satellite may be one of the most important tools yet developed to create stability ill the world. ... In this effort, modern technology is going to play a very important role. The balance of technological power may be more important than any other form of power balance in the next decades ahead.” He said NASA was developing a broad technological capability to conduct missions with vast international application. “This will enable our nation to say to other nations of the world, ‘Join with us and we will undertake these missions together.’ ” “Overt expression” of this new focus of national space program planning would be expressed in forecast report NASA was completing for President Johnson, the article continued. Report would emphasize broad range of general space capabilities available in the future and describe specific possible post-Apollo missions—such as manned lunar base, earth-orbiting space stations, Mars probes—stressing that selection of such a goal should be a national decision. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64, 22)
Dr. Harrison Brown, Cal Tech geochemist, said in Science article that as many as 2,000 earth-like planets capable of supporting life may exist in the nearest corner of the Milky Way Galaxy. Based on studies of this portion of the universe—volume of 10,000 cubic parsecs—Dr. Brown theorized: “Virtually every main sequence star should have a planetary system associated with it.” He calculated there were approximately 1,000	such stars in the region and 60,000 dark bodies of Mars’ size or bigger, or an average 60 “dark companions” to each of the stars. He determined a typical star should have four such planets, and of these “on the average some two planets per visible star might provide suitable environment for the emergence of life- processes which are based upon chemical systems similar to those on earth.” Dr. Brown’s paper propounded higher probability of life in the universe than previously theorized. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/11/64)
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. concluded in its manned Mars exploration study for NASA Marshall . Tlight Center that future interplanetary space travelers should be no taller than 5'7" and no heavier than 145 lbs. Six of these “20 percentile” men—smaller than approximately 80 per cent of American men—on a manned Mars flight would require 1% lbs. less food per day than larger men, thus saving nearly 500 lbs. of food cargo weight on a one-year trip. Study said 70,000 lbs. could be saved in gross weight of Mars spacecraft if the six astronauts were 20 percentile men. (dm&ssd Apogee, 6/64)
A policy statement issued by the Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human Welfare of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (aaas) charged that social and political pressures on the scientific community arising from such major U.S. space programs as Apollo, Starfish, and West Ford constituted a “serious erosion of the integrity of science.” The report was issued following a five-day meeting held by the association in Montreal, Canada. Commenting on the “spare race” aspects of NASA’s program, the committee said the pattern for orderly development of research had been altered by the “essentially political decision to pursue project Apollo.” The report concluded that Apollo did not appear to be based on the orderly systematic extension of basic scientific investigations. Another NASA program to come under fire at the AAAS meeting was the Voyager Mars exploration project attacked by Dr. Barry Commoner, professor of plant physiology at Washington University. Dr. Commoner said finding life in any form on Mars would have tremendous scientific significance, and that he was not opposed to the basic idea of searching for life on the planet. “I simply feel this country is not yet prepared to make a commitment of this scope,” he said. “We could at this time be a lot closer to resolving this question if the scientific community had been given the opportunity to fully discuss it.” He said even though the commitment had been made it was not too late to discuss fully the question of life on Mars before the 1971 launch. He said he hoped Congressional space committees would ask for complete justifications on the Voyager project. (Av. Wk., 1/4/65, 18; Abraham, Phil. Eve. BuU., 12/28/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/64)
NASA selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of contract for feasibility and preliminary design studies for automated biological laboratory (abl) to detect and describe indigenous life on the planet Mars. The one-year study would define life-detection payloads for Voyager-class missions, which were under study bv NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 64-182)
Article in Pravda described Soviet radar observations of the planets Venus, Mercury, and Mars as “an outstanding achievement in Soviet science and technology.” The value of the astronomical unit was computed, as a result of radarastronomy measurements, to be equal to 149,599,300 km., with an error of ±2,000 km. Radar fixes on planets Mercury and Mars in June 1962 and February 1963 confirmed their reliability in determining the astronomical unit. First radio communications via Venus, transmitted in November 1962, also were described. Article was signed by M. Subbotin, Director, Institute of Theoretical Astronomy, and Member of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. (Pravda, 3/16/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Frank Gifford of U.S. Weather Bureau, Oak Ridge, Tenn., postulated that “canals” on Mars are actually sand dunes 2,500 to 3,000 mi. long. Size of the dunes would indicate surface pressure of about 30 millibars, close to the 25 millibars calculated by jpl from spectrographic measurements. In Martian gravity and air density, wind speeds would have to be five to ten times those on earth to form dunes, and such winds have been observed in Martian dust storms. (M&R, 2/17/64, 21) During February: NASA Hq. contracted with rand Corp. for evaluation of alternate approaches to conducting Project Apollo and attaining its goal. (SBD, 2/14/64,248)
Missiles and Rockets reported that NASA planned two Mariner-type flights to Mars in 1969 and a Voyager mission to Mars in 1971. M&R reported that D. P. Hearth, of the office of Advanced Lunar and Planetary Programs in the NASA Office of Space Sciences, said that he expected both new projects to be funded in the FY ’66 budget. According to Hearth, neither project had won program approval by top NASA officials, but the chances for both appeared good. Both 1969 and 1971 would offer attractive launch windows because propulsion requirements to complete the missions would be the smallest of any period in the next 15 years. (M&R, 6/1/64, 15)
NASA and dod began implementing agreement on a single new system to improve communication and coordination of research and technology information between the two agencies. The agreement abolished certains forms and procedures which the two agencies had used independently for reporting on research and technology data, and instituted a new standard reporting form for common use. After the changeover is completed (July 1, 1965), all research and technology work of NASA and dod will be covered on the new form, and any scientist or staff member from NASA or dod will be able to obtain full information by fast machine processing on any given type of work. Signed by NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown, the agreement was worked out in a series of conferences over a period of more than one year. It was sponsored by and would be continued under the Supporting Space Research and Technology Panel of the Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb). (nasa Release 64-258) October I: Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper told MIT conference on earth sciences that continuing research had verified Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to allow spacecraft to land by parachute. Density of Martian atmosphere, according to Dr. Kuiper, had been found to be less than two per cent of that at sea level on earth. The new measurement was made by spectro-graphic studies. (Abraham, Phil. Eve. BuU., 10/1/64)
Dr. N. A. Kozyrev of Pulkovo Observatory, U.S.S.R., told conference on geological problems in lunar research in New York that volcanic activity was evident in two of the moon’s craters—Alphonsus and Aristarchus. Overall, he said, “the Moon had an internal energy which can be not less than the internal energy of the earth.” And from analysis of certain light wavelengths, he believed there was “significant volcanic activity on Venus and only slight activity on Mars.” (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
Success of ranger vu spotlighted NASA’s preparation for further lunar and planetary exploration, including two more Rangers (early next year), Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft, Lunar Orbiter photographing spacecraft, and Project Apollo manned lunar expedition, as well as two Mariner spacecraft to gather data from the vicinity of Mars (last quarter of 1964). (nasa Releases 64—196,64-205)
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. preliminary study of a manned Mars mission, called Project Deimos, was described by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal of the Armed Forces. Conducted by Douglas engineers J. L. Woodworth, G. A. Ursini, and Phil Bono, the study was based on six-man crew making 830-day round trip. Key to study was chemical-fuel rocket booster of 18,000,000-lb.-thrust power capable of placing 800,000	lbs. in earth orbit. Reusable booster would be fueled in orbit (by other reusable boosters making 10 trips) before sending spacecraft into Mars trajectory. (J/Armed Forces, 10/10/64, 8)
At NASA background briefing for news media, Doctors W. Randolph Lovelace II, Orr E. Reynolds, and Frank B. Voris made presentations on space medicine, biosciences, and effects of space environment on man. Dr. Lovelace described the close working relationship between the offices of Space Medicine, Biotechnology, and Space Science and Medicine. He pointed out Center responsibilities as well as the “detailed task-level technical coordination” completed at the NASA—dod level “which ensures most effective use of all existing facilities” throughout the Nation. In question period, Dr. Reynolds discussed timing of life-detector experiments for Mars:	. . we had hoped that it would be possible to have a landing capsule on Mars for the 1966 mission. Just as the plans for that were being developed, questions were raised by recent astronomical data about the density of the atmosphere of Mars that made it very difficult, if not impossible, to design the proper landing system. “At the present time we are hoping to have a landing vehicle for Mars for the 1969 opportunity. This is not an improved program. But we are working on the development of plans in that direction. It has already been decided that the biological sciences payload, that is, the life detector instruments, or whatever else the biological community thinks are most appropriate for that flight, will have high priority on any landing mission. “So I think the best guess now would be that certainly our first opportunity would be for 1969, and we certainly hope we will have such instruments aboard.” Discussing space radiation, Dr. Reynolds said: “. . . a number of committees and meetings that have been held by the radiobiologists in this country have recommended that an experiment be done below the radiation belt carrying a known source of radiation. The reason for this is that there have been reports from organisms, living organisms flown in the natural radiation belt, of a higher than expected effectiveness of the radiation. There is no good theoretical basis for knowing why this should occur. . . Experiment for checking this would be flown in first flight of Biosatellite, carrying known source and dosage of radiation below the area of the Van Allen belts. Asked about the previous data, Dr. Reynolds said : “There are experiments both by United States experimenters in piggyback flights, and the Russian experiments that show a higher than expected effectiveness of the ambient radiation in genetic effect and in systemic effect. These experiments we strongly suspect had this result due to lack of adequate dosimetry, measurement of the actual dosage that was encountered. For this reason the radiobiologists who have been advising us have recommended this experiment with a known source so as to eliminate any question of whether the dosimetry was wrong. . . .” Dr. Voris discussed “our studies into the biological effects of extremely low magnetic fields and into alternating and high magnetic field forces. Because of a recently expounded theory that individual neurons possess individual and isolated electromagnetic fields of their own, it is conceivable that the functions of the human nervous system may suffer impairment as a result of exposure to electromagnetic fields that deviate markedly from ambient terrestrial levels. . . .” Asked about slow rotation for manned space stations to provide partial gravity, Dr. Voris said that it presented “a problem in disorientation and in the effects of mal de mer. Slow rotation is fine if you can keep your head immobilized and become acclimated to it and stay in one spot. If you move around, move with the turn or away from the turn, or move from the periphery of a circular station into the center, you are changing the field force there, you are developing what is called a Coriolis effect, and you then disturb the balance mechanism or vestibular mechanism of the body and you develop recurrent effects such as seasickness.” (Transcript) .	' 766—508 O—65----12
Washington Evening Star editorialized about recent discovery that “Mars is covered by great yellow clouds of gaseous compounds of nitrogen and oxygen, or smog” and about scientists’ conclusion that the clouds preclude any chance of man’s finding life on Mars: “Quite the contrary. This clearly indicates that Martian life exists and the Martians are one, hopefully two, generations ahead of us in smogging up the atmosphere. As for landing there, all we need are spacemen from Los Angeles.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/64)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
President Johnson named Dr. Charles Stark Draper, head of Dept of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as a recipient of the National Medal of Science. Dr. Draper, a leader in developing aeronautic and astronautic instruments and controls, was one of 11 scientists to be so honored. (NYT, 11/28/64, 16) November 28: NASA mariner rv Mars probe was successfully launched into interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy, Fla., by an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. The Agena D separated from the Atlas 115 mi. up and injected itself into a parking orbit around the earth. It then reignited and injected itself into a Mars trajectory, mariner iv was detached and locked onto the sun for solar power and stabilization on one axis and opened its solar panels. Later, the probe would lock on the star Canopus for second-axis stabilization—the first time a star would be used for an attitude reference on a long space mission. In addition to equipment for televising the Martian surface, mariner iv carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near earth, Mars and in deep space. The trajectory as presently calculated would carry mariner iv within 151,000 mi. of Mars by mid-July, (nasa Releases 266, 288; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/64; NYT, 11/29/64; Miles, Wash. Post, 11/30/64)
Preliminary design for re-entry spacecraft for manned Mars missions during 1971—75 period was submitted to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center after six-month study by Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Msc announced. The earth re-entry module would travel to Mars and 'back attached to 4- to 6-man Mars spacecraft, then would be detached and used for last eight hours. It is designed to withstand re-entry heating of about 35,000° F. at speeds up to 44,000 mph, protecting crew with ablative heat shield about 3^ in. thick, (msc Release 64-6; MSC Roundup, 1/22/64, 1, 3)
Martin Marietta recently completed NASA-funded, DOD-concurred-upon study of Centaur upper stage mated with various Titans. Most promising configuration—particularly for heavy Surveyor spacecraft and for advanced Mars missions—was using Centaur as trans-stage for Titan III-A (without the strap-on solids). (SBD, 5/7/64, 34)
mariner ill (Mars 64) was launched into interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy with an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle, but spacecraft communications failed when fairing did not jettison, preventing solar panel deployment. The Agena stage pushed the mariner iii into a parking orbit around the earth and coasted to the proper position for injection into a Mars trajectory. The Agena again ignited 32 min. after launching and sent the spacecraft toward Mars. Tracking data indicated that the second-stage Agena D booster shut down four seconds early on the second burn, mariner ill’s four solar panels, designed to use power from the sun to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries, were prevented from deploying by failure of nose fairing to jettison. Further, the spacecraft did not align itself properly with the sun so that the communications antennas would be properly pointed. In addition to TV equipment for taking pictures of the Martian surface, mariner in carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near Mars and in unmapped space after swinging past the planet. This launch marked the first use of the USAF’s new Agena D upper stage and also the first U.S. space mission requiring a second igniting of the Agena D. (nasa Releases 266, 288; ksc Release 20664; msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 7; Sullivan, NYT, 11/6/64, 16; Chic. Trib., 11/6/64; Balt.Sun, 11/6/64,1; hhn-48)
Paul G. Johnson of aec—nasa SNPO said at aiaa meetings that early explorers of Mars may pass by planet Venus on way back to earth, to slow down spacecraft to safe re-entry speed. Side trip would lengthen voyage by a few months. Johnson also said that nuclear rockets might make Mars trip possible in 1980’s. Mission could involve six to eight crewmen and take from 400 to 500 days, (nasa Release 64-165)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden stressed to Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at opening of its third session in Geneva, that U.S. scientists shared the concern of those from other countries over possible contamination of Mars and other planets. (NYT, 5/23/64)
Hurricane Dora with her 125-mph winds approached the U.S. Atlantic coast from Cape Kennedy to Myrtle Beach, S.C., and workers at the rocket launching center dismantled five of the six rockets being prepared for launch this fall. Only the Saturn ISA-7 rocket was secured in its gantry; removed were Titan II (for GT-2 Gemini launch), Atlas-Agena (for Mars probe launch), Thor-Delta (for Imp launch), Atlas-Centaur (launch vehicle development launch), and Atlas for USAF reentry test, (upi, NYT, 9/9/64, 1; Witkin, NYT, 9/9/64, 23)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
mariner iv Mars probe finally locked its sensor on the star Canopus after fixes on three wrong stars. Jet Propulsion Laboratory officials noted that picking up wrong stars was not critical in the early stages of the flight. If the mariner iv had not dropped these wrong fixes of its own accord, the action could have been commanded from the ground. Only if Canopus were in the sensor’s sights would the TV camera be aimed at the Martian surface when mariner rv flew past the planet 7% months from now; only with Canopus in vieiw would scientists know the spacecraft’s attitude with the precision needed for a midcourse rocket firing of maximum accuracy to refine the course of the trajectory and bring the mariner iv within about 8,600 mi. of Mars instead of the presently anticipated distance of 151,000 mi. (Miles, Wash. Post, 11/30/64; Witkin, NYT, 11/30/64, 1; National Observer, 11/30/64; Witkin, NYT, 12/1/64, 1) .
mariner iv underwent a critical course change to make it possible for the craft to take useful pictures of Mars during the fly-by in July 1965. In response to commands radioed from earth, a small rocket on the base of the spacecraft, which could add anything between an eighth of a mile an hour to 188 miles an hour to the craft’s speed, was fired. Initial indications were that the correction was successful and accurate. Severed days later, tracking equipment and associated computers confirmed that the rocket firing had produced three changes in mariner iv’s flight path: (1) the Mars fly-by from 151,000 mi. in front of Mars to a closest approach of 5,400 mi. behind Mars; (2) the arrival date from July 16, 1965, to July 14; and (3) the flight path past Mars from the leading edge to the trailing edge of Mars. The maneuver was followed by sun and Canopus reacquisition. A second midcourse maneuver would not be required. The midcourse rocket used by mariner iv was the first to be used by this country that was capable of a second firing, (nasa Release 64-310; Witkin, NYT, 12/6/64,67; Miles, Wash. Post, 12/6/64)
Lewis Research Center completed wind tunnel tests to study the aerodynamic forces which would occur on the launch vehicle when Mariner spacecraft was launched toward Mars, (lrc Release 64-55)
The Soviet Union launched zond ii probe in the direction of the planet Mars. The purpose of the launching was said to be trying of the station’s systems under actual conditions of prolonged space flight and gaining of practical experience. Scientific investigations in interplanetary space would be carried out simultaneously. The probe was proceeding along a trajectory close to the computed one. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 12/2/64, 1, atss-T Trans.; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 12/2/64)
In Washington Evening Star article, William Hines reported Georgetown Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess’ conviction that life cannot exist on Mars. Dr. Kiess’ spectrographic observations of the planet convinced him no oxygen or water vapor existed there. Nitrogen compounds have been detected, and Dr. Kiess believed Martian atmosphere is 97-99% pure nitrogen gas. He believed density of air at Martian surface is greater than is generally believed, meaning that nitrogen tetroxide could exist as gas, liquid, and solid—gaseous above 70° F, solid below 14° F, and liquid in between. In laboratory experiments Dr. Kiess had demonstrated that when various nitrogen compounds are subjected to temperature changes they turn color to duplicate “seasonal” color changes observed on Mars, even creating artificial “snow storm” and simulating waxing and waning of Martian “polar caps.” Dr. Kiess’ view was minority opinion, refuted by majority of scientists. Dr. Lewis Kaplan of jpl said in interview that Dr. Kiess’ conclusions were based on spectrographic analyses which had been refuted by better spectrographic analyses of Vancouver, B.C., scientists. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/4/64)
Soviet annual report to cospar listed 21 satellite and 114 rocket launchings for 1963. Omitting any mention of when U.S.S.R. might launch major spacecraft, report said past manned space flight had “set some new problems before scientists requiring immediate solution for successful preparation and realization of more prolonged space missions. ...” A major question to be answered was whether it was “possible for an astronaut, after two or three weeks stay under conditions of weightlessness, to endure satisfactorily stresses acting on an organism during re-entry.” Also studies must be made of methods to safeguard astronauts’ cardiovascular systems. Longest section of report was on medical and biological problems of manned space flight; it offered evidence that U.S.S.R. was paying increasing attention to weightlessness and other problems of manned space flight. Soviet report was first such version ever submitted in English and was thought to be strikingly free of propaganda. Possibly significantly, report referred to U.S. space research in correlation with Soviet research ; for example, findings of mars I were said to correlate with findings of U.S. explorer x and mariner ii. (AP, 5/9/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/64)
Italy’s largest private monitoring center said it had recorded radio signals indicating a new Soviet space launch. It speculated that the Russians might have placed a satellite in parking orbit around the earth as a base for a Mars launch. {Phil. Inq., 11/7/64)
mariner IV, bound for Mars, began passing through a second stream of meteoroids. In its first 23 days of flight, the craft had made 7Y2 million scientific and engineering measurements in interplanetary space and was 3,748,352 mi. from earth, traveling at 6,970 mph relative to earth. Its velocity relative to the sun was 72,902 mph. The straightline distance from the spacecraft to Mars was 107,592,980 mi. (NASA Release 64-323)
NASA announced industry design competition for Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) for detecting possible life on Mars. An abl would be landed by Voyager spacecraft to be flown in 1970’s. Proposals resulting from preliminary studies would lead to contract for a one-year effort to review scientific objectives, define an experimental payload suitable for landing and operation on Mars, and establish spacecraft and launch vehicle requirements, abl would incorporate several life-detection devices still in developmental stages and would be equipped to analyze and describe any organisms discovered by such devices. (nasa Release 64-134)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, head of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona, said at meeting of American Geophysical Union in Washington that Mars did not have enough water to support any but microscopic life forms. He described recent observations from McDonald Observatory in Fort Davis, Tex., that showed Mars to be enveloped in sheath of atmospheric ice crystals. Dr. Kuiper said in Martian spring the frost covering its pole during the wintertime evaporates directly into the air rather than melting. He estimated Martian air to be two parts nitrogen to one part carbon dioxide, with small amount of argon and even less water vapor and oxygen. Dr. Hyron Spinrad of Univ. of Calif. (Berkeley) described recent observations of Mars from Mt. Wilson Observatory. He said Mars was so cold that water melted only in the afternoon and when Mars was nearest the sun; amount of water in the Martian air was a thousandth of that in sea-level air in the arid southwestern U.S. The speakers rejected the idea that Martian air contained nitrogen-oxygen compounds, proposed last December by Georgetown Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess and chemist Dr. Sebastian Karrer. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/64,8)
American Institute for Biological Sciences expressed concern that NASA was not giving sufficiently high priority to the investigation of extraterrestrial life. The Institute, a federation of biologists, said NASA should begin planning a project for detection of possible life on Mars when the planet comes into favorable position in 1969. Search for extraterrestrial life also was advocated by nas Space Science Board nearly two years ago. NASA originally had hoped to perform the Mars biology mission in 1964, but technical, scientific, and political obstacles delayed the attempt. (Finney, NYT, 6/11/64, 2; Wash. Post, 6/11/64)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, reviewed 1963 highlights in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Although direct measurements of the physical properties of the Moon await successful lunar flights, our Earth-based work has continued with some exciting results. Lowell Observatory scientists detected evidence of gas escaping from three different spots in the area of the lunar crater Aristarchus. This observation suggests that the Moon may be far from inert, and it has an important bearing on how we may conduct our lunar investigation. For example, if the Moon is seismically active, the seismograph may play an important role in the investigation of the lunar surface. . . . “Also, much effort was applied to clarifying the data from Earth-based or balloon observations of Mars. One important subject of controversy developed. Whereas it had been believed previously that the pressure at the surface of Mars is around 85 millibars, where 1000 millibars is roughly one atmosphere of pressure, it is now believed by many that the surface pressure on Mars may be as low as 10 or 11 millibars. This has serious implications with regard to landing a capsule on Mars. If the lower pressure is correct then retrorockets have to be used, whereas with the higher pressure atmospheric drag could be used to slow down the incoming capsule. “Significant new knowledge on the fundamental physical nature of the universe may have to await the launching of the first oao. In the meantime, sounding rocket experiments continue to provide data in ultraviolet and radio astronomy. . . . “Although the formal development of Scout had been completed, additional work was required to improve its reliability. The primary objective of the December 1963 Scout firing was to determine the efficacy of the measures taken to correct observed deficiencies. The virtually perfect vehicle performance during this firing encourages one to look for a high success rate in future Scout firings. . . . “Performance of all Atlas-boosted launch vehicles would be considerably improved by introducing a mixture of fluorine and oxygen (flox) as the oxidizer. Careful study shows this can be done with admixtures of up to 30% fluorine without major redesign of the propulsion system. We are, therefore, planning to flox the Atlas. A primary objective of this program is to provide for additional payload in the Surveyor investigations. . . .” (Testimony)
Cornell Univ. announced that scientists at the Ionospheric Observatory at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, bounced a radar signal off the planet Mars while it was about 138,000,000 mi. from earth today. Cornell said this was the farthest distance at which Mars had been detected by radar. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/20/64)
Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of NASA Biosciences Div., told Missiles and Rockets that it probably would be 1971 or 1973 before U.S. landed Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) on Mars: “I think it would be awfully optimistic to think that we could fly a fully integrated laboratory system to the Martian surface in 1969. I would like to hope such a mission would be feasible in 1971, and the 1973 launch window would also provide a good opportunity.” Other unnamed NASA officials were said to have considered launch of abl with Saturn V booster in 1971 as improbable, citing the high cost and “problems with sterilization methods which have to be solved.” abl missions would be part of the Voyager planetary program. (Mc&R, 8/24/64,15)
Britain’s VC-10 long-range jet aircraft made its first commercial passenger flight—a boac flight'from London to Lagos, Nigeria. The aircraft featured rapid lift, allowing it to use shorter runways than its U.S. counterparts, the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/30/64,57)	_ April 29—May 1: Air Transport and Space Meeting and Production Forum held in New York, sponsored by Society of Automotive Engineers and American Society of Mechanical Engineers. At the meeting, NASA Ames Research Center scientists reported results of a study of a manned Mars mission: Nova-class launch vehicles and nuclear-propelled spacecraft, combined with extensive aerodynamic braking techniques at Mars and Earth, would allow manned Mars mission to be made with a single, direct launch from Earth. Use of aerodynamic braking at Mars and Earth would reduce total velocity requirements 50 per cent. (M&R, 5/4/64, 17)
