Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for Research at NASA Lewis Research Center, discussed possible propulsion systems for future space-flight beyond the moon before the Conference on Civilian and Military Uses of Aerospace sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences. He cited a manned Mars project as a prime example of a mission that could be performed by a number of different propulsion concepts. For example, manned trips by chemical rockets would be weight-restricted, but chemical rocket systems would have the advantage of having been extensively flight-tested on many other missions. Although the reactor for planned nuclear propulsion systems had only been ground tested, evaluations of complete nuclear rocket engine systems were expected within the next few years. Electric propulsion systems for manned spaceflight were even further in the future and might not be ready by 1980; but by then the mission capability of the nuclear rocket would have been so thoroughly demonstrated that it would be more attractive than chemical engines for those missions requiring increased propulsion capability. Even further into the future were nuclear systems such as the gaseous-corecavity reactor which would yield higher performance, (lrc Release 65-5)
In an article in Foreign Affairs entitled “Slowdown in the Pentagon,” Hanson W. Baldwin said: “The sprawling bureaucracy of big government; the control of major military or paramilitary projects by agencies over which the Defense Department has no direct authority, including the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Bureau of the Budget; congressional legislation and executive regulation—social, political and economic; the tremendous size and complexity of the Armed Forces; overcentralization and overregulation in the Pentagon; too much service rivalry and not anough service competition—all these and other factors have become builtin roadblocks in defense development and contracting. “The creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has provided another type of problem. NASA stemmed from the same kind of political philosophy that nurtured the AEC. Atom bombs were too powerful to allow the generals to play with them; ergo, a civilian agency must control nuclear power—and it must be channeled away from nasty military purposes. The same scientific-political pressure groups that advocated this concept helped (with President Eisenhower’s approval) to establish NASA, again on the theory that space efforts must be controlled by civilians and that space must not be used for military purposes. . . . “But in the case of NASA, the problem has been compounded. For while the aec is essentially a research and production agency, NASA is an operating agency as well. From a small highly efficient aeronautical research agency, it has now expanded into a gargantuan multibil-lion-dollar empire, with tentacles all over the country, managing the biggest program on which the United States has ever embarked—to place a man on the moon. “In its early years, NASA was sluggishly if at all responsive to military needs, and the Pentagon itself was inhibited from any effective space developments (though, curiously, the only effective space boosters available were military ballistic missiles). Gradually the liaison, due to Dr. [Edward C.] Welsh and others, has been greatly improved. Numerous military officers, active and retired, now hold some of the most important positions in NASA, and in addition the Armed Forces have furnished most of the astronauts and by far the most important part of the facilities and services used by the agency. The two-headed control still offers difficulties, but today the main stumbling blocks to the rapid development of military space projects are Secretary McNamara and his Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. Harold Brown, who in his new political role in the Pentagon has become a remarkably unadventurous scientist. “Often the President’s Scientific Adviser, whose contacts with Pentagon and other Government scientists cut squarely across organizational lines, has also acted as roadblock to new developments. He exercises tremendous power without either specific responsibility or specific authority; therefore, his intervention often not only delays but confuses. The Adviser’s great power stems largely from his White House status; unfortunately around him has grown up a small but important office manned by men more impressive as bureaucrats than as scientists, who represent, in effect, another echelon of delay. . . .” {Foreign Affairs, 1/65; CR, 2/4/65, 2007) During January: Committee assignments for both parties were made in both Houses of Congress. New members on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Joseph Tydings (D-Md.), Len B. Jordan (R-Ida.), and George D. Aiken (R-Vt) •	.	. New members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Roy A. Taylor (D-N.C.), George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), Walter H. Moeller (D-Ohio), William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.), Brock Adams (D-Wash.), Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.), Weston E. Vivian (D-Mich.), Gale Schisler (D—111.), and Barber B. Conable, Jr. (R-N.Y.). (Comm. Off.) During January: Marvin L. White. AFCRL’s Space Physics Laboratory, predicted the sun was encircled by “rings” of electric current totaling nearly 200 billion amps. Although total current was high, White postulated that the current density was low because the current was spread over a large area; he predicted current density to be about three trillionths of an ampere per square centimeter, the same order of magnitude as in the earth’s atmosphere. White’s calculations were based on particle flux data from mariner ii. (oar Research Review, 1/65, 1-2) With launch of two balloons to 87,000-ft. altitudes from Chico, Calif., AFCRL began one-year series of high-altitude balloon flights to measure moisture in the stratosphere. Series would consist of vertical soundings—25 in all, at the rate of two per month—in which all data would be obtained in recoverable instrumented payload parachuted to earth when balloon descended to 30,000 ft., and horizontal soundings—five 11-day flights at float altitudes averaging 75,000 ft.—in which data gathered over thousands of miles would be telemetered every two hours to ground stations, (oar Research Review, 5/65,15—16) In an article on detecting extraterrestrial life, William R. Corliss in International Science and Technology described some of the plans for collecting data on possible life-forms elsewhere and some of the factors making the search for extraterrestrial life so challenging. He noted the complications for Martian life-detection if retrorockets were necessary to brake the landing of a scientific package: “First, of course, they add weight to the landing package, right where it hurts the most. Also, their control adds complexity and increases the chance of failure. Finally and perhaps most importantly, they would make the problem of life-detection more difficult and any results more ambiguous; the rocket exhaust would tend both to fuse the surface of the landing area (maybe even killing any existing organisms), and to add combustion contaminants of its own in the most crucial area—around the lander.” He listed the variety of experimental instruments proposed for detecting extraterrestrial life (or clues of life) and explained why the dependability of these instruments—based on different physical and chemical principles—varied widely. (Int. Sci. & Tech., 1/65, 28-34)
During a luncheon speech at the Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System, presented in Denver, Colo., by the American Astronautical Society, Mai. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, formerly NASA Director of Launch Vehicle Programs, said it was now generally agreed that the near-earth space area “looks more promising from the standpoint of potential military applications” than lunar bases, Mars flights, and other projects suggested earlier. USAF was seeking refinement of its knowledge in astronomy, geophysics, geodesy, and other areas. More pressing, he said, was to study the space environment as related to weapon systems and orbiting satellites. (Partner, Denver Post, 2/29/65)
Three Univ. of California (Berkeley) scientists concluded on the basis of their laboratory studies that Dr. William M. Sinton’s spectroscopic evidence of organic matter on Mars was not valid. Dr. Sinton of Lowell Observatory had made spectroscopic studies of Mars in 1959 that suggested infrared radiation from dark portions of Mars was comparable to that produced by some terrestrial plant life. The California chemists—James S. Shirk, William A. Haseltine, and George C.	Pimentel—concluded Dr. Sinton had detected vaporized “deuterated water” (TLO plus heavy hydrogen—deuterium) rather than plant-produced molecules, (upi, S.F. Chron., 2/28/65)
NASA’s mariner iv, en route to Mars, passed the 20-million-mile mark in its distance from earth. The spacecraft was functioning normally and was transmitting data on scientific measurements taken in interplanetary space, (nasa Release 65-58)
NASA announced it would request preliminary design proposals from private industry for the unmanned Voyager spacecraft that would land scientific instruments on Mars in 1971. From these proposals, several contractors would be chosen to perform a 3-mo. program design definition. Previous NASA studies had indicated the system might consist of a spacecraft “bus” or main body, a propulsion and braking system, and a landing capsule. (NASA Release 65-15)
Houston Chronicle reported that preliminary funds for the unmanned exploration of Mars would be included in the NASA FY 1966 budget. On Oct. 30, 1964, the Space Science Board of NAS had recommended to NASA that Mars be the next goal because it was the likeliest of the planets to be inhabited by living things and would therefore be of greater scientific importance than the moon or proposed manning orbiting laboratories. (Mackaye, Houston Chron., 1/14/65)
Alternate methods for re-establishing communications with mariner IV on its next closest approach to earth around Sept. 4, 1967, were being considered by Mariner project planners at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported: (1) attempted reacquisition beginning in early February 1967, making use of the spacecraft’s high-gain directional antenna to obtain data from the spacecraft for up to 10 mo.; (2) reliance solely on mariner iv’s low-gain antenna for transmission, permitting two-way communications for four to six weeks around September 1967. In the 10-mo. plan, reacquisition would be initiated when the spacecraft was about 135 million mi. from earth. Due to relative sun-earth positions in February 1967, the angle at which the high-gain directional antenna would be permanently fixed would enable it to' be aimed at the earth by having mariner iv roll about its longitudinal axis, which would be pointed at the sun. The 100-kw. transmitter at Goldstone tracking station would send the necessary commands to mariner iv. In the latter plan, use of the 210-ft. antenna, expected to become operational at Goldstone in January 1966, could extend reception of intelligible telemetry signals to as long as six weeks, compared with four using the standard 85-ft. dishes of the Deep Space Network. W. A. Collier, assistant Mariner project manager at jpl, told Aviation Week that mariner iv would be of particular scientific interest in 1967. First, there were no other interplanetary probes being sent away from the sun at that period. Second, when mariner iv passed within 6,000 mi. of Mars July 14, the gravitational pull of the planet had tilted the plane of the spacecraft out of the plane of the ecliptic. mariner iv, 5.3 million mi. above the ecliptic in September 1967, would give scientists their first chance to compare interplanetary findings outside this plane with those obtained in it. Preliminary estimates were that the 10-mo. plan would cost between $5 million and $15 million, while the four-to-six-week project would cost less than $1 million. mariner iv, launched Nov. 28, 1964, was in solar orbit with a period of 567.11 days, perihelion of 103.1 million mi., and aphelion of 146.2 million mi. (Watkins, Av. Wk., 8/2/65, 32)
Evidence that the bright areas of the Martian surface contained iron oxides in a loose combination with water was reported by Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. to the Biophysical Society’s annual meeting in San Francisco. He said reflected light of hydrated iron oxides in an earth-bound laboratory matched the sunlight reflected from the Martian surface when viewed in the ultraviolet and infrared. Dr. Sagan believed that confirmation of the iron-water compounds on Martian deserts, which showed up as bright areas to earth astronomers, suggested conditions were once right for life to originate on Mars. He said he was convinced that when life of a primitive form had started, the chances were it had survived. (Balt. Sun, 10/18/65)
Soviet propaganda needs in the wake of Mariner 4’s flight to Mars appear to have been influential in determining the timing of the latest Soviet space shots,” wrote Harry Schwartz in the New York Times. He continued: “Moscow’s decision to send up last Friday two rockets—one putting five small satellites into orbit and the second orbiting the heaviest man-made object yet put into space—seems to Western observers to be a transparent Soviet effort to counteract the propaganda defeat Moscow suffered as a result of Mariner 4’s historic voyage. That defeat was all the greater because of the failure of the Soviet Mars probe, Zond, sent on the same journey at roughly the same time Mariner 4 was launched.” (Schwartz, NYT, 7/18/65)
Five lunar and Martian experts applied geological methods to interpreting Mars and the moon at the Geological Society of America Symposium in Kansas City. They found similarities between Mars and the moon: both bodies were subjected to slow erosion from showers of micrometeoroids from space; there was no evidence of surface water on either. Dr. Robert P. Sharp, Caltech, said that Martian craters were three-and-one-half times more numerous than on the lunar maria, but not as numerous as on the moon’s uplands. He believed the planet had an extremely thin atmosphere of carbon dioxide, temperatures ranging from 35° C to —100° C and no liquid water. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, related experiments on earth with features on the moon in effort to explain why the moon was being eroded. A nuclear explosion in Nevada, for example, created a meteorcrater-like hole, resulting in hundreds of secondary impact craters. “I think the surface is a fluffy material, about one meter thick, resting on the floor of small craters,” he said. “The bulk of matter is moved by the impact of small micrometeoroids. Probably a good deal of the material is melted and the melt may fly off into space.” Bruce C. Murray, Caltech, said that physical observations by studying emissions and radiation showed the moon emits light and other wave lengths in the same way that “fine, loose powder does.” He believed the outer one-half millimeter is covered with dust. Infrared heat samplings showed variations indicating a heterogenous type of rock near the surface. Dr. E. C. T. Chao, U.S. Geological Survey, discussed tektites—small, dark, glass, button-shaped objects, which he believed had been formed by meteoric impact, presumably on the moon, and had splashed off to fall on earth. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, showed a geological map of the moon with the ages of various areas in different colors. He said the Survey had mapped three million square miles in the potential landing areas on the equatorial belt. He found five different “episodes of movement” on the surface. (McCoy, Kansas City Times, 11/6/65)
The impact of a meteorite might have begun life on earth, Dr. Brian Mason, U.S. National Museum, told the annual meeting of the Geochemical Society of America in Kansas City. Scientists had speculated that the presence of organic compounds—substances containing carbon and nitrogen—in meteorites indicated that life exists, or had once existed, elsewhere in the universe. Mason noted that such compounds could be made without life, but added: “I believe . . . they may be a forerunner of life. A falling meteorite may be the way life got started.” Mason said that most meteorites appeared to come from the asteroid belt which orbits the sun between Mars and Jupiter. This belt might be a planet that never collected to become a single body, he suggested. Dr. Mason was conducting research on the chemical differences a man-earth environment had imposed on meteorites. (Houston Chron., 12/5/65)
Discussing the need for sustaining engineering funds for Centaur starting in fy 1966, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications: “A preliminary study and design phase is being initiated by NASA this Fiscal Year [for adaptation of the Centaur to the Saturn ib] . The primary mission for this vehicle is the Voyager. Initial studies indicate this vehicle is capable of launching a payload to Mars in excess of 8000 pounds during all of the opportunities in the 1970’s. Generally, the modifications necessary to create this stage combination are not particularly difficult. They do represent a large engineering effort, but there is nothing apparent at this time which indicates that new technologies will be required. The Centaur will be mounted, along with the Voyager, inside a fairing the size of the Saturn (260-inch diameter). By constructing this size fairing the technical problems associated with adaptation of the Centaur to this new booster are significantly reduced and the diameter required for all of the Voyager missions is obtained.” Dr. Newell described NASA’s sustaining university program as an effort “to broaden the national research base in areas of importance to the national space effort and increase our capability to replenish continually the reservoir of basic knowledge. . . . “In response to the continuing manpower requirements, NASA conducts a predoctoral training program, under which grants are made to universities to select and train outstanding students in space-related fields. Specialized training for selected students offers them identification with the national space effort, and involves them directly in the new programs of the space age. . . . “At the present time, about 1,957 students are in training at 131 institutions. The disciplines represented by these 1,957 students are distributed as follows: physical sciences, 51 percent; engineering, 37 percent; life sciences, 8 percent; behavioral sciences, 4 percent ... In September 1965, about 1,275 new students will begin their three years of study and research as NASA predoctoral trainees. At that time, 142 institutions, located in every state in the union, will be participating. With the proposed budget of $25 million for fiscal year 1966, about 1,300 new students would enter the program. Consequently, the NASA goal of an output of 1,000 Ph.D.’s per year will not be reached before fiscal year 1968 or fiscal year 1969 ... Of the students participating to date, 40 trainees have received their Ph.D. degrees. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634—35)
Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum placed on display a quarter-scale model of the gt-3 spacecraft, a full-scale model of ranger IX along with some of the photos it took, and a model of mariner IV Mars probe. The spacecraft were part of an exhibit depicting NASA’s broad program of space research. (NASA Release
In an article in the Orlando Evening Star, Barry Goldwater said: “Defense Secretary Robert McNamara has indicated that space weapons are too costly, as though any dollar cost is too high for the security of 190 million Americans and a billion allies and friends. The only major space-military program McNamara has permitted to stay alive is the Manned Orbital Laboratory, and he has so slowed and limited this that its orbit is apparently toward nothing but bureaucratic extinction. “We have deployed one or. two so-called ‘satellite killers,’ but they are a pitiful particle of what really is needed. “Pictures of Mars are fine. So is a trip to the moon. But the first job of any administration is to secure the nation against its enemies. “We will not remain the most powerful nation on earth for long if we do not reverse the suicidal Johnson-McNamara refusal to let us arm ourselves in space.” (Orl. Eve. Star, 8/4/65)
mariner iv, nasa’s Mars flyby and photographic probe, reached the distance of one AU (Astronomical Unit) from earth at 9 p.m. EST. An Astronomical Unit is the mean distance of the earth from the sun that had been established, partially from data received from mariner ii, as 92,956,000 mi. The probe had traveled over 271 million mi. in its orbit; its velocity relative to the earth was 51,442 mph. (nasa Release 65-171)
Second XB-70a research bomber underwent a 10-min. heat-friction test from Edwards afb withstanding 530°C heat at 1,900 mph at 70,000 ft. The air inlets control system was also tested at twice the speed of sound at 63,000 ft. in the 145-min. flight, (ap, NYT, 12/23/65, 43) December 22: NASA deferred the first unmanned Voyager planetary exploration mission until 1973 and scheduled one 1967 Mariner flight to Venus and two 1969 Mariner flights to Mars. First Voyager mission had been planned to orbit Mars in 1971 and a second to orbit and land instrumented capsules in 1973; no further Mariner missions had been scheduled. Changes in the planetary exploration program were being made to obtain the greatest possible return from funds available for FY 1966, those anticipated for fy 1967, and from information available from previous missions, (nasa Release 65-389)
usaf announced a high vacuum test chamber that would simulate space environment and altitudes up to 990,000 ft. was being constructed at Wright-Patterson afb. Liquid metal system components such as space radiators, and expandable structures such as solar reflectors, would be tested in the chamber. Chicago Bridge and Iron Co. was constructing the facility, which would be completed in Sept. 1965, under a $699,780 contract awarded in Nov. 1964. (afsc Release 1.65) During March: Asked in an interview for the San Diego Union if the U.S. would succeed in landing a man on the moon in this decade, Dr. Donald F. Hornig. special assistant to President Johnson for science and technology, said: “When you lay down a schedule, it says that if everything goes as I see it, making allowances for reasonable difficulties, this is what Fll do. It’s a tight schedule and will take a lot of doing. We also have to acknowledge that unforeseen problems may arise. . . . When we started in 1961 on a nine-year program it was not wishful thinking but it was a purely paper exercise. We have slipped some on our schedules, but in a sense we have gained ground in that we have not run into any serious difficulties yet. We are now entering the hardest period of all, when the pieces begin to come out of the factory and have to be put together and tested.” Answering a query if there would be a manned expedition to Mars one day, he said: “It would be harder than going to the moon. I don’t anticipate he will go soon. But we have started the unmanned exploration. The results may whet our appetite or may prove that conditions are so inhospitable that it isn’t worth the effort.” (San Diego Union, 3/7/65)
mariner iv, 49,373,799 mi. from earth and traveling 34,738 mph relative to earth, had covered 206,868,340 mi. in its journey toward Mars at 9:00 a.m. est. (nasa Release 65-111)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, Voyager project manager at jpl, told the Christian Science Monitor in an interview that NASA had decided to launch the Voyager spacecraft with the Saturn V booster instead of the Saturn IB. “This,” Dr. Burcham said, “means we can put a heavier retro-rocket pack on the spacecraft. It will enable us to release the lander after the spacecraft has gone into orbit around Mars instead of 10 days before reaching the planet, as planned earlier, and that will give us a better chance of putting a lander on the surface.” (Cowen, CSM, 12/1/65)
“A manned expedition to Mars within 15 years seems entirely feasible,” North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information Systems Div. President Harrison Storms told William Hines of the Washington Evening Star. In charge of building the spacecraft for the Apollo moon landings, Storms offered an approximate timetable for a Mars expedition: “Start planning for it in 1970, start cutting metal in 1975 and go in 1980.” A recent report from the National Academy of Sciences had suggested 1985 as a feasible target date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
mariner iv spacecraft took and recorded IOV2 photographs of black space on command from the Goldstone Tracking Station in California. Playback of five of the black-space pictures began on command, mariner iv now was more than 171 million miles from earth, 11 million miles from Mars, (jpl Release)
A New York Times editorial by Harry Schwartz concerning Soviet-American cooperation in space: “The real issues relate to the advantages and disadvantages in the moon race itself—including, of course, its propaganda aspects. “The argument that cooperation will not mean significant savings is strongest for the immediate future, but its force weakens rapidly as one extends the time horizon of both nations’ future space efforts. Even in the next year or two both countries could gain from a full pooling of space technology and knowledge because this would reduce the number of Gemini-type flights each would have to engage in. . . . “Major cost advantages can certainly be gained by agreement on a division of labor between the Soviet Union and the United States, if it is accompanied by a decision to send mixed crews on major missions. For example, a pooling of information and resources might permit one country to focus on the hardware needed for the moon trip, while the other concentrated on the equipment needed to send men to Mars. . . . “But the major savings from real Soviet-American cooperation in space might come from another direction entirely. In both countries influential voices are urging major military efforts looking to the creation of armed national space fleets . . . The time is past due for decision between space cooperation, or the extension of a rivalry that could cost both Soviet and American peoples dearly—and perhaps not solely in terms of vast sums wasted.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/14/65, 31, 32) Dr. James H. Wakelin, Jr., president of the Scientific Engineering Institute of Boston, said in an address at the Conference: “We must look forward to undersea dwellings, laboratories and military installations in which men would live and work for the economic good and military defense of the United States.” Dr. Wakelin advised President Johnson to appoint a National Advisory Commission on the Ocean to develop a 10-yr. program for study, exploration, and use of the seas, (upi, NYT, 6/15/65, 6) Capt. Jacques-Yves Cousteau urged the organization to “preserve and protect the sea from pollution.” He also warned against conducting undersea explorations entirely with instruments and suggested: “Let us go down . . . and see for ourselves, with our eyes.” (Casey, Wash. Post, 6/16/65, A14) opening remarks, Maj. Gen. Don Ostrander, afosr Commander, said: “The purpose of these Cloudcroft meetings is to stimulate ideas—to act as an intellectual catalyst. . . . We all have a responsibility to try to understand the complex interrelationships between science and technology, and between technology and national defense; through understanding, to participate in the excitement and urgency of the creative turmoil which is such an inescapable part of the age in which we live!” Historian A. Hunter Dupree, professor of history at the Univ. of California (Berkeley) and a consultant to NASA, said that scientists with a negative attitude regarding the Nation’s manned space flight activities had a laboratory-limited view of scientific endeavor and had lost perspective of the contributions made to American and world science through exploration and survey expeditions in the field. He pointed out the relationship of the Pacific voyages of Capt. Cook to Darwin’s later theory of evolution and said: “One can as little predict the results of space exploration as Captain Cook could have predicted Darwin’s theory.” According to Dupree, it was the general expansion of knowledge that would lead to later fruitful developments. But to justify these developments immediately or to justify exploration in terms of predictable developments would be a mistake. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/16/65; afosr Release 5-65—2; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 106110) An artificial frog’s eye which could be sent to the surface of Mars to detect living organisms was described by Warren McCullough and Louis Sutro. Research had revealed there were four varieties of ganglion cells in the eye of the frog—each processing different information. The MIT scientists had proposed the following scheme to nasa: the artificial eye would be coupled to a microscope in a tiny computer. Samples of Martian soil would be seen by the frog’s eye through the microscope. When movement was detected, the eye would inform the computer, which would decide whether a picture of the moving organism should be taken for relay back to earth. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al) Theories on biological rhythms were proposed by Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. at the AFOSR seminar. He suggested that oscillations or biological rhythms were serving a fundamental function that was not yet fully identified and that all organisms undergo oscillations with a periodicity that matches that of the external world—roughly 24 hrs. Light, even in negligible amounts, could alter these oscillations. In Pittendrigh’s view, once the true face of biological clocks—time measuring mechanisms innate in all living organisms—was seen, science would have vital clues to how life developed on earth and how biological rhythms determine what it is all living things do. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/22/65, A6) Star collisions were suggested by astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. as one way that energy now associated with a host of new objects observed throughout the universe was released. He said a prime candidate for providing the right kind of environment for star collisions was elliptical galaxies. In their predeath condition, elliptical galaxies start to lose stars that comprise the galaxies. Star loss causes the galaxies to shrink and become denser. The remaining stars rush in and out through the heats of these galaxies at speeds possibly as high as 24 million mph—greatly enhancing the chance for star collisions. The effect of collisions at these speeds would be to release amounts of energy equivalent to that calculated to be stored in the quasi-stellar radio sources. Gold had not observed such star collisions, but dense regions on the “brink of destruction” had been detected. “We must inspect each in turn,” Gold said, adding, “maybe we will learn that something totally different is involved, a new type of energy source that physics doesn’t know about.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/23/65)
NASA announced it had determined the areas of Mars to be photographed by mariner iv’s tv camera during the July 14 fly-by. Recording of the first picture would occur when the spacecraft was approximately 8,400 miles above the Martian surface, mariner’s camera would be pointing at the northern Martian desert, Amazonis. The camera would then sweep southeast below the Martian equator covering the Mare Sirenum, the southern desert Phaethontis, Aonius Sinus, and into the terminator or shadow line. The spacecraft would be about 6,300 mi. above Mars for the final picture, (nasa Release 65—42)
Three basic capsule designs for the Project Voyager Mars lander vehicle were being studied by a special planetary missions technology steering committee at NASA Langley Research Center, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology. Low atmosphere density values for Mars determined by the mariner iv occultation experiment would have to be taken into consideration before final capsule design specifications could be prepared. (Av. Wk., 9/20/65, 28)
We’ll be lucky if we have nuclear propulsion around 1980,” and electric propulsion is still further down the line for sometime after 1985, according to Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for research at NASA Lewis Research Center. Evvard gave his views on advanced propulsion systems at the sixth annual Space Technology Series sponsored by the Canaveral Section, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, at Brevard Engineering College, Patrick afb, Fla. A pioneer in electric propulsion and advanced nuclear rocket studies, Evvard believed such concepts should not be considered for Mars missions of under 100 flights per year. Only frequent flights would increase the need for higher specific impulse and would justify the expense, he said. Meanwhile, he predicted, chemical rockets of less than 500 sec. specific impulse would lift men to Mars, not by direct ascent but through a succession of parking orbits and assembly of hardware in space. Evvard told the meeting that since May 13, 1964, at least nine tests on Kiwi, Nerva, and Phoebus nuclear reactors had proved out a thrust greater than 50,000 lbs., at a specific impulse in excess of 750 sec. (Text)
An article in Human Events expressed fear that Russian military space capability surpassed that of the U.S.: “. . . Four times in the past 2 months, Red Star (a newspaper published by the Defense Ministry) has trumpeted the claim that Russia now has orbital space rockets with the capacity of wiping any aggressor off the face of the earth. “There is no doubt at all about the intended identity of the aggressor and among American scientists back home there is little doubt about the weapon. “There is little doubt because the United States spent 7 years and $10 million between 1958-65 to plan the nuclear-powered space orbiting system called Project Orion. We have high-ranking scientists who believe the Russians have copied or adapted Orion, which has been declassified since October, 1964. The Russians might easily have cracked the secrecy before that. “It is a first generation vehicular system that is capable of carrying 8 men and 100 tons of payload to Mars and back. It is a jet-propelled engine or engines powered by a nuclear reactor which, in effect, bombs a shield at the rear of the vehicle and drives it forward. The usual limitations of temperature do not affect this vehicle because the hot debris of the explosions makes only a momentary contact with the shield. The limitations of using full nuclear power are also absent because the reactor is outside the vehicle. “Guidance, mobility, range, the exchange of crew-members, and the restocking of the payload are all within this space cruiser’s capability. Its potentials as a raider of earth targets, and as an interceptor of our space satellites, are almost limitless. It may not be the never-never ultimate weapon, but it will do until another comes along.” {CR, 8/25/65, A4807-08)
Management of the Voyager landing capsule system had been assigned to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Harris M. Schur-meier, former Ranger Project Manager at Jpl, had been named Voyager System Manager. Currently in a design study phase, Voyager was planned for unmanned planetary explorations beginning with a Mars mission in 1971. (nasa Release 65-242; jpl Release 346)
President Lyndon B. Johnson was inaugurated. In his Inaugural Address, he said: “For every generation, there is a destiny. For some, history decides. For this generation, the choice must be our own. “Even now, a rocket moves toward Mars. It reminds us that the world will not be the same for our children, or even for ourselves in a short span of years. The next man to stand here will look out on a scene different from our own. “Ours is a time of change—rapid and fantastic change—baring the secrets of nature—multiplying the nations—placing in uncertain hands new weapons for mastery and destruction—shaking old values and uprooting old ways. . . . “Change has brought new meaning to that old mission. We can never again stand aside, prideful in isolation. Dangers and troubles we once called ‘foreign’ now live among us. If American lives must end, and American treasure be spilled, in countries we barely know, that is the price that change has demanded of conviction. “Think of our world as it looks from that rocket heading toward Mars. “It is like a child’s globe, hanging in space, the continents stuck to its side like colored maps. We are all fellow passengers on a dot of earth. And each of us, in the span of time, has only a moment among his companions. “How incredible it is that in this fragile existence we should hate and destroy one another. There are possibilities enough for all who will abandon mastery over others to pursue mastery over nature. There is world enough for all to seek their happiness in their own way. “Our own course is clear. We aspire to nothing that belongs to others. We seek no dominion over our fellow man, but man’s dominion over tyranny and misery. . . .” (Text)
NASA announced that mariner iv, scheduled to reach the vicinity of Mars July 14, had traveled over 168 million mi.—more than half way. (NASA Release 65-80)
“One absolute certainty is that if the atomic bomb had not gone off at Alamogordo 20 years ago tomorrow, the spacecraft Mariner 4 would not have flown past Mars yesterday,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He continued: “Space and the atom are more closely interrelated than most people realize. We are in a space race today because—and only because—big rockets were developed by the East and West starting about 15 years ago. . . . Solely to carry atomic (and later hydrogen) warheads. There would have been no space race without big rockets because the staggering development costs for space applications alone could never have been justified. “The ‘aerospace business’ of the non-atomic ’60’s, then, would have been ‘airplane business’ pure and simple—and airplanes would be much different than they are today. There would be no ‘atomic energy industry,’ of course—and these two differences would have a measurable economic impact. Probably a million jobs nationwide depend either directly or indirectly on space and the atom. “Equally obviously, two vast bureaucracies dedicated to ‘running’ space and the atom would not exist. The Atomic Energy Commission has about 7,300 employes and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration about 33,000. Together they ‘own’ something like $18 billion worth of property.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/15/65)
A new theory stating that molecules adsorb on the surfaces of ionic (electrically-charged) surfaces by unbalanced electrical fields of force had been developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory under sponsorship of the NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, NASA announced. Knowledge of the exact mechanics of gas adsorption would be vitally important in innumerable scientific, industrial, and medical fields. (NASA Release 65-340) During October: jpl Director William H. Pickering, describing mariner iv’s Mars mission in Astronautics and Aeronautics, wrote: “This mission has proven to be of immense scientific and engineering importance. New scientific information is now available on regions of the solar system never before penetrated with instruments. Observations from the vicinity of Mars suggest entirely new concepts about the nature of that planet. Spacecraft performance has shown our ability to design and construct a remotely operated device of astonishing complexity. Its continued operation establishes a standard of reliability seldom, if ever, attained. Even maintaining two-way communications over distances exceeding 100-million mi. remarkably demonstrates advances in communication technology which were not thought possible a decade ago. “The design concepts underlying Mariner date back to 1959 when the Jet Propulsion Laboratory began the Vega program. In 1960, Vega was modified to become Ranger. The Mariner series took its present form in 1961, when a mission to Venus was planned for the planetary opportunity in August 1962. . . .” (Pickering, A&A, 10/1965,20-21)
A detailed report on the progress of the Mars-bound mariner IV spacecraft was presented at annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C.: mariner iv, launched Nov. 28, 1964, was on course to fly by Mars shortly after 9 p.m. edt on July 14. Four of mariner iv’s six experiments were still working well. The ionization experiment had ceased to function and data from the solar plasma probe were only partially interpretable. At 3 p.m., mariner iv was 58,176,037 mi. from the earth. It had traveled 221,330,000 mi. on its journey of 325 million miles. mariner iv had returned a considerable amount of scientific data. A cosmic ray telescope aboard the 575-lb. spacecraft had, for example, “observed” more solar protons than alpha particles from the sun. John A. Simpson of Univ. of Chicago said this indicated there was a “different kind of mechanism operating on the sun for accelerating these particles in space.” A report from a team of scientists from NASA GSFC and Temple Univ. indicated that mariner iv was encountering increasing amounts of cosmic dust as it moved further away from the sun. mariner iv’s cosmic dust detector had been hit 95 times. Dr. James A. Van Allen predicted that if Mars had a magnetic field no stronger than '/sod1 the intensity of the earth’s, MARINER iv would detect it in July. Richard Sloan of JPL said he and his colleagues planned to try to establish a radio lock with mariner iv in September 1967 after it had journeyed through space and come back to within 40-50 million miles of earth, (nasa Releases 65-117, 65-117-A, 65-117-B, 65-117-C, 65-117-D, 65-117-E, 65—117-F; Transcript)
Saturn V launch vehicle was under consideration by NASA for its Voyager program of unmanned planetary exploration, beginning with a 1971 Mars mission. NASA had considered developing a Saturn IB/Centaur launch vehicle, but the greater thrust of the three-stage 7.5-million-lb. thrust Saturn V would give more flexibility to planning early Voyager missions and would also provide the launch vehicle capability at the beginning of the Voyager program necessary for future missions. Saturn V, being developed by MSFC, would undergo its first flight test in 1967. (nasa Release 65-328)
mariner iv, launched two months ago, was 11,873,789 mi. from earth and moving toward Mars at a speed of 12,291 mph relative to the earth at 9 a.m. est. Velocity relative to the sun was 67,086 mph. (nasa Release 65-21)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 155.5 km. (96.6 mi.) The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Because of an attitude control system failure no experimental results were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Editorial comment on the successful transmission to earth of pictures of Mars taken by mariner iv: “There is something absolutely staggering about the idea of a piece of machinery from this country’s workshops finding its way to Mars and then pausing on schedule to make picture signals which bounce back here 12 minutes later. “Such a feat cheers up the most confirmed pessimist. After all, if man has the genius to reach back and forth into the universe, surely he will discover a way for peoples, nations and ideologies to live and survive together back here on this insignificant little planet.” (Wash. Post, 7/18/65) “Though all its findings are not yet in, it is already clear that Mariner 4’s historic journey to Mars is the most successful and most important experiment man has yet conducted in space, as well as one of the most brilliant engineering and scientific achievements of all time. “The triumph scored by mariner 4 in this first successful attempt at the exploration of Mars emphasizes a point suggested by the earlier achievements of instrumented probes, notably the Ranger photographic voyages to the moon. That point is that a great deal of scientific information about earth’s nearest neighbors in the solar system can be obtained relatively cheaply and without risk to human life by utilizing fully the potentialities of existing instruments. Cameras and other research devices can undoubtedly be placed in orbit about or landed softly on the surfaces of the moon and nearby planets. And intensive exploitation of the capabilities of unmanned rockets can make far safer the ultimate dispatch of man into far distant space.” (NYT, 7/16/65)
President Johnson signed into law the High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 (pl 89—220) in White House ceremony. He said: “. . . In recent decades, we have achieved technological miracles in our transportation. But there is one great exception. “We have airplanes which fly three times faster than sound. We have television cameras that are orbiting Mars. But we have the same tired and inadequate mass transportation between our towns and cities that we had 30 years ago. “Today ... an astronaut can orbit the earth faster than a man on the ground can get from New York to Washington. Yet, the same science and technology which gave us our airplanes and our space probes, I believe, could also give us better and faster and more economical transportation on the ground. And a lot of us need it more on the ground than we need it orbiting the earth. . . . “The High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 really gives us, for the first time in history, a coordinated program for improving the transportation system that we have today, and making it a better servant to our people. . . .”	( Text, Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 329-30)
Refined data on Martian atmosphere’s density, ionization, and composition, based on analysis of radio signals from mariner IV during its occultation experiment, were reported by scientists at American Geophysical Union meeting held at Southern Methodist Univ., Dallas, Tex. Martian atmosphere was now thought to be much thinner than previously believed: it now seemed that air pressure at Martian surface was only about one-5,000th that of earth. Theory that Martian atmosphere was more dense at heights of 25 mi. or more above the surface than earth’s at comparable elevations was not upheld; observations reported today indicated Martian atmosphere was thinner than earth’s at all elevations. Temperature was about —250° at location of maximum ionization in Martian atmosphere (78-mi. altitude, about one-fourth the expected height). In earth’s ionosphere, temperature is higher than 2,200° F. Atmospheric composition that would account for the mariner iv observations, the scientists said, would be largely carbon dioxide. (Earth-based observations of Mars had shown the presence of carbon dioxide in its atmosphere.) Only scant amount of carbon dioxide is present in earth’s nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere. The scientists making this report were Dr. A. J. Kliore of jpl and Dr. Von R. Eshleman of Stanford Univ. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/4/65,1,12)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Alfred Eggers, speaking to the Aviation Space Writers Association in Washington, D.C., said one of the basic programs now underway in oart was to establish a mission capability flexible enough to satisfy most mission requirements for the balance of the century. Describing the capability as a “platform” that could support whatever mission the Nation wanted, he cited the present indecision over the mission that should be undertaken after the lunar landing. Given the difficulty of obtaining a consensus from the American public and government in the matter, the only useful alternative was to develop such a platform. He said the present oart program would enable this country to go to Mars, Venus, the asteroids, or the moons of Jupiter before the end of the 20th century. (Text)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
$12 million, 210-ft.-dia. antenna at jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station, Calif., was being readied to permit the tracking of very distant space vehicles sending faint signals to earth, including mariner iv, now in solar orbit. Called the Mars station, the antenna would be able to track a signal with a strength of only one-thousandth of one-billionth of one watt. (Wash. Post, 10/8/65, A3)
In a Washington Evening Star article, “Costs Soar in Lagging TFX Project,” Richard Wilson wrote: “Here’s the latest word on that $8 billion miracle airplane program, the tfx. It is costing about $5 million per plane instead of the estimated $2.2 million. It is too heavy for the Navy to use. It could have been ready now but it isn’t because the Kennedy administration lagged a year while evaluating and reevaluating the aircraft so that General Dynamics Corp. could get the contract. . . . “Nobody knows for sure that the Boeing plane would have worked out any better but the top military men all thought so. . . . So far as realizing any billion dollars savings as was at first advertised, this doesn’t appear very likely if the Navy has to have a lighter version. In view of the nearly doubling of cost per plane, it does not seem likely in any case. . . .” (Wilson, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65) September 13-18: International Astronautical Federation’s 16th Congress was held in Athens. Participants were greeted by King Constantine of Greece. Introductory speeches were made by the president of the IAF, Dr. William H. Pickering; chairman of the International Academy of Astronautics, Dr. Charles S. Draper; and president of the International Institute of Space Law, Dr. I. Pepin. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/12/65; Izvestia, 9/14/65, 5, atss-t Trans.) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, reported at a plenary meeting of the Congress that the Apollo program had now passed the half-way point and was moving forward at full momentum. He listed three primary commitments: “—the first Saturn V carrying an unmanned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1967. “—the first Saturn V carrying a manned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1968. “—the manned lunar landing is scheduled to be accomplished prior to 1970.” Following his presentation, von Braun told a news conference that “many Soviet and American scientists will participate to lay the foundation for extensive cooperation on the moon.” He said there were indications that the moon’s surface was solid enough to bear the weight of the spacecraft. Soft spots had been identified and would be avoided. He estimated that a landing on Mars would occur 15 yrs. after a successful lunar landing. (Text; NYT, 9/15/65, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, outlined broad objectives of the Saturn-Apollo applications missions, earth-orbital and lunar: “(1) Evaluate and extend man’s capabilities to operate in space effectively as an astronaut and as a scientist. “(2) Conduct observations of the Earth, extra-terrestrial phenomena, and experiments dependent on the space environment. “(3) Qualify systems and crews for subsequent long-duration space missions.
Experiments at NASA Ames Research Center by Dr. John Young and Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma indicated that Mars may lie under a steady rain of edible sugars produced photochemically in the Martian atmosphere. It was speculated that the sugars and other compounds might drift to the Martian surface, seep into the soil, and form underground reservoirs of nutrients. Results of tests for survival of 50 strains of earth bacteria in simulated Martian atmosphere indicated that the strains of bacteria which form hard spores and are thus most likely to survive space flight are most sensitive to the freeze-thaw extremes of temperature that prevail on Mars. Thus, while the bacteria might survive on Mars in spore form, they would not grow there and would not contaminate the planet. Other bacteria would die en route. (S.F. Chron., 1/28/65)
A 37-man study group chaired by Dr. Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. and convened by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences at the request of NASA had reconfirmed the Academy’s appeal for exploration of Mars to receive “the highest priority among all objectives in space science—indeed in the space program as a whole” and endorsed NASA plans to use the 1969-73 favorable Mars window for intensive study of the planet with the Voyager spacecraft. In its final report transmitted to NASA Administrator Webb, the group said that “given all evidence presently available, we believe it entirely reasonable that Mars is inhabited with living organisms and that life independently originated there,” and thus that “the biological exploration of Mars is a scientific undertaking of the greatest validity and significance.” The panel noted, however, that “while we are eager to press Martian exploration as expeditiously as the technology and other factors permit, we insist that our recommendation to proceed is subject to one rigorous qualification: that no viable terrestrial microorganisms reach the Martian surface until we can make a confident assessment of the consequences.” The group made seven basic recommendations: (1) “every opportunity for remote observation of Mars by earth-bound or ballon-and satellite-borne instruments should be exploited”; (2) “. . . An adequate program for Martian exploration cannot be achieved without using scientific payloads substantially larger than those currently employed in outer unmanned space research program. . . . We see very substantial advantages in the use, from the onset, of the new generation of large boosters which are expected to become operational toward the end of the decade”; (3) since flyby missions “yield at best a fleeting glimpse of the planet” and carry a relatively small array of instruments, “we deliberately omit an explicit recommendation in favor of any flyby missions additional to those already executed or planned”; (4)	“Every effort should be made to achieve a large orbiting mission by 1971 at the latest. This mission should precede the first lander. . . . By ‘large’ we mean a scientific payload that would include instrumentation for infrared and television mapping, microwave radiometry and bistatic radar, infrared spectrometry, and optical polarimetry”; (5)	“The first landing mission should be scheduled no later than 1973 and by 1971 if possible” and will “ultimately demand a large lander” like Abl (Automated Biological Lab) ; (6) “The task of designing an Abl should be initiated immediately as a continuing project”; and (7) to maintain “a continuing dialogue among all potential investigators and the engineers responsible for implementing their scientific goals,” the Academy’s Space Science Board should have a standing committee, (nas Release; Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/26/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/26/65, 2; Sullivan, NYT, 4/27/65, 1)
Photographs of Mars by mariner IV did not contradict his theory that life may exist on that planet, according to Dr. Joshua Lederberg, prof, of genetics at Stanford Univ. School of Medicine. His views were supported by Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Dr. Lederberg said important point was that “we still do not know the abundance and distribution of water on Mars. However much there is, almost all of it must be frozen.” Presence of water on Mars could be confined to frost covering the polar regions or could even be locked within the Martian crust. Pockets of water could be warmed by volcanic activity, forming pools where life could exist. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/65)
Dr. Barry Commoner, professor of plant physiology at Washington Univ. in St. Louis and chairman of the aaas Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human Welfare, told Aviation Week and Space Technology that the question of the probability of finding life on Mars had not been “fully and fairly aired,” and that an “overbalance of the positive viewpoint has been presented to Congress and the public by NASA officials.” Dr. Commoner said that if asked his views on Voyager as a tax-paying citizen, his feeling would be that “the value of pursuing a program to find life on Mars at this time is not worth the $1.25 billion to be invested because the problem of finding life there has not been adequately explored.” He had made similar charges in a speech at the aaas meeting last December in Montreal. Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, was reported by Aviation Week and Space Technology as listing six major points in defending NASA’s position regarding Mars exploration: (1) Numerous competent scientists had said there was little liquid water on Mars and that the planet had a dry, dusty surface with high ultraviolet radiation. Changing patterns on the planet indicated some form of seasonal change, however. (2) With the evidence at hand, it was not possible to say there was life on Mars, only that life might be there. (3) If there were life on Mars it might be similar to basic life forms on earth. (4) The only reasonable approach we could take to the exploration of Mars would be to make sure we looked for life before the planet was contaminated from earth. If life was not found on Mars, it still would be valuable to determine how far the planet’s chemical processes had progressed toward life formation. (5) The Voyager program had not been sold to Congress on the basis that there was life on Mars. It has been pointed out during budget hearings that there might not be life on the planet but nobody could responsibly take the position that there wasn’t. Therefore, the early emphasis of Project Voyager was on bioscience. (6) The Mars exploration was part of an overall program to explore the solar system, including the moon, comets, and other planets. Mars happened to be the planet NASA was focusing its attention on because it would be in the optimum launch position through the mid-1970’s. (Av. Wk., 1/4/65, 18)
Two more MARINER IV close-up shots of Mars were released by NASA. The first three photographs showed an almost unbroken strip of terrain more than 600 mi. long. They revealed features down to two miles in length, including several crater-like objects, a kidneyshaped depression 20-30 mi. in width, and ridges and depressions similar to those on the moon. None of them showed straight-line features that might have been taken by earth-based observers to be canals. Except for the suggestion of an arid, wind-swept, desert-like terrain, the pictures did not bear directly on the question of life on the planet. During a press conference held at JPL, Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, said that mariner iv had been a “magnificent success.” The computer which had reconstructed the numbers transmitted by mariner iv into photographs had proved capable of cleaning up and intensifying the image to a remarkable degree. The pic tures were of a high quality, and, in addition, the lighting conditions were expected to improve the detail in later photographs. Comparison of overlapping areas—one picture in a pair exposed through a green filter and one through a red filter—might reveal some things about color on Mars that would not otherwise be obtainable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 7/18/65, 1, 50; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/18/65. Al, A6; WSJ, 7/19/65, 1)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
mariner iv successfully performed a final .tracking correction before its encounter with Mars on July 14. A preprogramed command electronically altered the look-angle of the star sensor to compensate for the changing relationship between the spacecraft, the sun, and Canopus. The star sensor must be pointed at Canopus so that the Mars probe would be properly aligned and stabilized in attitude. (nasa Release 65-198)
According to Dr. Colin Pittendrigh, Dean of the Graduate School and biology professor at Princeton Univ., mariner iv photographs of Mars did not provide any new evidence that life could not exist on that planet. Even though Mars appeared virtually waterless in the photographs, he pointed out, the area photographed was only a small fraction of the planet’s total area. “A scan across our Atlantic Ocean might lead some to say there is no land on earth.” (ap, Miami Her., 9/19/65)
Dr. N. M. Sissakian of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said in an article in Krasnaya Zvezda that the attention of Soviet biomedical researchers had been increasingly drawn to the complex effects of combinations of spaceflight factors. They were interested in the stability of cells and organisms to very low temperatures, and the effect of artificial cooling of animals on their ability to withstand oxygen deprivation, acceleration, radiation, and other factors. The ability of algae and lower animals to survive a vacuum was of interest to exobiologists, as was the ability of certain chemical compounds to screen out harmful effects of ultraviolet irradiation. As part of the continuing effort to simulate conditions existing on other planets and study their effects, soil infusoria were found able to adapt to the wide temperature range in a chamber simulating Martian atmosphere. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/3/65, 6)
Pictures of Mars relayed to earth by mariner iv would be released to the public within 36 to 48 hrs. after they were taken July 14, NASA announced, mariner iv was expected to take more than 20 photographs in about 21 min. and radio them back to earth in digital form; while not as detailed as the Ranger photographs, they were expected to make a valuable contribution to space exploration. mariner iv would pass within 5,600 mi. of the planet. The pictures would be taken at somewhat greater distances while Mars was in sunlight relative to the spacecraft, fNASA Release 65-210; upi, NYT, 6/29/65)
Some highlights of the year in physics: Planet Mars has no substantial magnetic field, according to scientific experiments by mariner IV Mars probe. Because of this, Martian life-forms would have to be able to withstand intense radiation, but possibility of Martian life was not ruled out. mariner iv also reported Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to readily support parachute or glider-type descents for soft landings on the planet. Comet Ikeya-Seki, the brightest comet to enter the solar system this century, was discovered Sept. 18 and subsequently studied from the ground, airplanes, and rockets. The comet passed within 300,000 mi. of the sun and made a hairpin turn Oct. 21, when it broke into three pieces. Results of NASA’s testing of public reaction to sonic booms, begun in 1961, showed that no serious psychological or physiological effects result from sonic booms. Commercial use of the supersonic transport, to begin in early 1970’s, was expected to create sonic booms that, when Sst’s come into full use in the U.S., would be heard by everyone about once a day. On the subject of antimatter, two items: Swedish physicist Hannes Alfven theorized such cosmic phenomena as quasi-stellar radio sources (“quasars”), radio stars, and supernovae may be powered by matter-antimatter annihilations; and, antideutrons were produced in the laboratory by scientists of Columbia Univ. Unwanted noise from a BTL horn-reflector antenna being used in comsat research may have been radiation from the birth of the universe. This interpretation was based on the “big bang” theory of the universe’s formation and was propounded by a group of Princeton Univ. scientists. Decision was believed near on which of the three principal models of the universe was correct—the steady-state, expanding, or oscillating universe theory. Results in astronomy based on red-shifts of “blue-galaxies” (discovered in 1965) and quasars hinted at an oscillating universe, (aip News, 12/22/65) During 1965: Among highlights in the U.S. communications satellite program were: initiation of commercial comsat operations, with EARLY BIRD I in synchronous orbit over the Atlantic; initiation of a synchronous-orbit comsat program to furnish communications for Project Apollo and for expanded commercial service; and growth of the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium to 48 member nations, representing every continent. Communications Satellite Corp. represented the U.S. and served as manager for the consortium. (Com-SatCorp Release)
mariner tv approached within 5.500 mi. of Mars and took the first close-up pictures in history of that planet. At 10:28 a.m, edt, a signal from the tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, had commanded mariner iv to turn on the encounter equipment. Obeying the command 12 min. later—the time it took the signal to reach the spacecraft across 134,000,000 mi.— mariner iv’s scan platform with TV cameras and two Mars sensors began searching for the planet; the tape recorder began a 10-hr. warmup. By 1:10 p.m., the spacecraft’s sensors had found the proper angle from which to photograph Mars. On orders from JPL, the Johannesburg tracking station ordered the camera and its light sensor to stop the scan at 7/10 of a degree of the optimum aiming point. Throughout the day, the spacecraft continued transmitting scientific and engineering information via the telemetry system. At 7:50 p.m., the Mars probe made its first “sighting” contact with the planet. The telemetry system then shifted and began sending only information from the scientific experiments. At 8:20 p.m. edt, the first light from Mars struck the light sensor aligned with the camera and the 25-min. picture-taking sequence began. 21 frames were exposed and recorded on magnetic tape to be telemetered to earth over a 10-day period. Transmission of each picture would require 8 hrs. 25 min. Near the end of the fly-by, signals received at Goldstone tracking station had indicated a malfunction in the tape system. Telemetry received after the pass, however, showed no indication that trouble had occurred. At 10:12, mariner iv flew behind Mars, remained obscured for 53 min., and re-emerged beyond the planet, its transmitter beaming radio signals through the Martian atmosphere. From this occultation experiment, scientists might be able to gauge the depth, thickness, and component gases of Mars’ atmosphere by measuring how much these signals were bent and their speeds changed. Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, told a news conference that signals indicated all instruments on the spacecraft had performed properly during the flyby, (nasa Release 65-227; Sullivan, NYT, 7/15/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/15/65; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/15/65) July 14: A 44-day test of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Environment Simulator (Ses) had just ended, gsfc announced. In this project, the early performance of a scientific spacecraft in orbit around the earth was compared to the performance of a sister craft “orbited” inside the Ses: the uk-d scientific spacecraft—backup model for ARIEL II (uk-ii) launched successfully into earth orbit by U.K. March 27, 1964—was “flown” inside the Ses; flight plan for UK-D followed general flight plan of initial flight days of ARIEL n. Preliminary data indicated operation of the Ses was good throughout the test period. The spacecraft inside the simulator even experienced the same minor malfunction its sister spacecraft had experienced in orbit, (gsfc Release G-17-65)
In a luncheon address to the National Security Industrial Association in Washington, D.C., Lt. Gen. W. A. Davis (usaf), Vice Cdr. of Air Force Systems Command, discussed AFSC accomplishments in 1964:	. . Important strides were also made in the area of space. We carried out intensive studies on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). Last month the Secretary of Defense announced that proposals are being requested from industry for design studies to assist in developing the cost and technical information needed to proceed with full scale development of the MOL. Titan hi, the Standard Launch Vehicle 5A, completed two highly successful test launches. Systems Command also provided support to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This included the use of the Atlas-Agena combination to launch Ranger 7 on its successful photographic mission to the moon and Mariner 4 on its way to Mars. We also conducted the first launch of the man-rated Titan II. It was very successful. “There are a number of tasks ahead of us in space. One of our most promising present programs is the Titan ill space launching system. The Titan in will be used to launch the 24 satellites for the interim Defense Satellite Communications System. It will also be used to launch the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), which is designed to determine man’s capability to perform military functions in space. The mol will have an important bearing on our future space capabilities.” (afsc Release)	.
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was successfully launched from White Sands, N. Mex., to a peak altitude of 154.5 km. (96 mi.). The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, gsfc provided the payload instrumentation, (nasa Rpt. srl)
mariner IV had functioned in space for more than 1,100 hr. on its 6,000-hr. flight to Mars, and had flown 81.3 million mi., leaving some 245 million mi. to be travelled before the spacecraft would encounter Mars next July. The earth-MARiNER distance was 8,342,946 mi. at 9 a.m. EST with the spacecraft travelling 9,276 mph relative to the earth and 69,462 mph relative to the sun. (nasa Release 65-12, 1/14/65)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant mission results: “U.S. scientific satellites achieved the following firsts: discovery of the radiation belt, determination of the earth’s irregular geoid, ionospheric topside sounding (with Canada), solar spectroscopy, x-ray and ultraviolet satellite astronomy, polar orbits, and highly eccentric orbits to map the earth’s magnetosphere. Our deep space probes achieved the first successful direct monitoring of the interplanetary environment, the first lunar surface detail, and the first successful flight to Venus. We may soon achieve the first successful flight to Mars, if mariner iv completes its mission. In launch vehicle development, this program has yielded the first rocket stage using the high energy propellant combination of hydrogen and oxygen. It has also yielded the first and only all solid propellant space booster. U.S. meteorological satellites have yielded the following firsts: daylight cloud photography, night cloud observations including surface and cloud top temperatures, world cloud coverage, global heat balance and stratospheric temperature measurements, and direct cloud picture transmission to local users. Our communication satellites have been first in the following achievements: erection of large structures in space and their use as passive reflectors of radio signals; active repeating of radio signals at various altitudes and orbits of interest to system designers; transoceanic and intercontinental relay of teletype, facsimile, voice, data, and television; and achievement of the first true geostationary orbit. “The specific record of 1964 space missions of the Space Science and Applications Program ... is particularly informative because most major program areas achieved at least one highly significant success in 1964. Of the 10 scientific satellite missions attempted, 7 achieved full success and 2 partial success.” Dr. Newell observed that syncom ill communications satellite had been placed in a “virtually perfect circular equatorial orbit,” then maneuvered “to within about 1 mile of its station over the western Pacific where it successfully performed all its planned experiments. . . . The Syncom maneuver was comparable to the feat of Ranger VII in flying to within 6 miles of its target on the Moon. “Having completed our experiments with Syncoms II and III, we are turning them over to the Department of Defense. ... If required, full-time communications could be provided between the United States and southeast Asia by Syncom m. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 136-62)
Robert L. Sohn, scientist at Space Technology Laboratories, proposed to use the gravity field of Venus as a brake for manned spacecraft returning from Mars. “We don’t expect to have boosters powerful enough to launch spacecraft of the 1970s that can carry extra propulsion to brake reentry speeds. . . . The landing corridor will be so narrow that a small fractional error in navigation would send the spacecraft into an eternal orbit around the sun.” He said traveling near Venus on the return journey from Mars would slow a spacecraft as it passed through the Venutian gravity field. Then, with some midcourse maneuvering and navigation, the astronaut could return to earth and reenter earth’s atmosphere with greater margin of error. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 1/17/65)
Detection of the existence of life on Mars could be accomplished by a manned Mars-orbit mission without the necessity of a Mars landing, according to two NASA Ames Research Center officials in a Copley News Service interview'. Alvin Seiff, Chief of Ames’ Vehicle Environment Div., and David E. Reese, Jr., Assistant Chief of that division, said life on Mars could be detected from as far away as “several hundred thousand feet” from the planet’s surface. “We think we could get good accuracy during even hypersonic flight around Mars. . . . We don’t need to land men on Mars to find out what goes on there. We can find out about its atmosphere and whether life exists there through the use of a variety of instruments we now have at hand,” Seiff said. Seiff and Reese were in Denver attending aas Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System. (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 2/10/65)
mariner iv changed the rate of sending scientific data from 33^3 to 8U; bits of information per second by an automatic switching operation. This was the first command initiated by the spacecraft itself since it performed its mid-course maneuver Dec. 5. mariner iv had traveled nearly 63 million miles in its 325-million-mile flight to Mars; the straight-line distance between earth and the spacecraft was 6,156,704 miles. Systems were operating normally after 36 days in space. (nasa Release 65-4)
Plans for the exploration of Mars called for an engineering test shot in 1969 and an unmanned landing in 1971, Robert F. Fellows, NASA program chief for planetary atmospheres, said at Fifth Annual Space Conference at VPI. Additional unmanned Mars landings were scheduled for 1973 and 1975: larger capsules—up to three tons— were expected to' land in the early 1980’s. Fellows said that the 1971 mission would require two pieces of hardware: an orbiter that would circle Mars for up to 50 yrs. and a capsule that would be lowered to the surface of the planet. The orbiter would have a scientific payload up to 300 lbs. to relay information to earth for about a year. The capsule would penetrate the thin Martian atmosphere protected by a heat shield and, after landing, deploy its instruments, take soil samples, and relay the data to earth. Fellows confirmed that the interplanetary mission after Mars would be to Venus, with Jupiter next, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A10)
zond ill’s photographs of the hidden side of the moon received editorial comment in the New York Times: “Scientists and laymen from all nations will look forward to the pictures of the dark side of the moon that Moscow reports its Zond 3 satellite took last month. UnitI then the only photographic intelligence on the area had come from the pictures an earlier Soviet satellite took in 1959, a time when the available equipment—and consequently the quality of the result— was primitive by present standards. Six years ago' the marvel was that this feat could be accomplished at all. Now, in the wake of the photographic knowledge of the moon and of Mars obtained by this country’s Ranger and Mariner vehicles, world judgment of the importance of the Soviet accomplishment will depend upon the quality and the quantity of the new knowledge it provides.” (NYT, 8/16/65, E9)
At a background briefing at NASA Hq. on Advanced Chemical Propulsion, Adelbert 0. Tischler, Director, Chemical Propulsion Div., NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, revealed that NASA would probably be “confined to the Saturn IB and V for the next decade.” A maneuvering vehicle would be developed sometime around 1970 but would not be available for manned use until 1975. Tischler said that an ion propulsion system would never be applicable for deep manned space flight because of “its abhorrent thrust-to-weight ratio ... it is going to take a long time to accelerate the vehicle out of Earth orbit to arrive then later at the planetary orbit, and to decelerate in the planetary orbit, and vice versa. . . .” Ion propulsion systems would be suitable for unmanned missions, however, because unmanned systems generally were small and ion systems were small; also, time was not a factor. In addition, they might be practicable as auxiliary devices for midcourse corrections 'on manned interplanetary trips. After agreeing that present planning limited the application of nuclear systems to interplanetary trips, Tischler said: “There has been, during the last two years, a real marked decline of interest . . . about exploring Venus. I don’t think that is a correct viewpoint at all. I think there is a great deal ... to learn about Venus. “We shouldn’t eliminate the possibility of some other planets. We could easily . . . visit the asteroid belt. There are some good-sized asteroids. Ceres is one of them. We could ultimately . . . land on the Moon of Jupiter with such a system. I doubt if we will undertake a landing on Jupiter until we know how to fight gravity. . . . “All of these possibilities exist. In fact, I would even mention Mars has a couple of moons that we might use to land on in preference to Mars itself.” (Transcript)
Dr. Robert B. Leighton, Cal Tech professor, summarized the results of the mariner IV mission to President Johnson in a White House ceremony during which the remaining photos transmitted by the spacecraft were presented to the President and the Nation. Dr. Leighton said: “Man’s first close-up look at Mars has revealed the scientifically startling fact that at least part of its surface is covered with large craters. . . . “The existence of Martian craters is demonstrated beyond question; their meaning and significance is, of course, a matter of interpretation. The seventy craters clearly distinguishable on Mariner photos Nos. 5 through 15, range in diameter from three to 75 miles. It seems likely that smaller craters exist, and there also may be still larger ones than those photographed, since the Mariner photographs, in total, sampled only about one percent of the Martian surface. “The observed craters have rims rising a few hundred feet above the surrounding surface and depths of a few thousand feet below the rims. Crater walls so far measured seem to slope at angles up to about 10 degrees. “The number of large craters per unit area on the Martian surface is closely comparable to the densely cratered upland areas of the Moon.” Dr. Leighton said that no earth-like features were recognized and that clouds “were not identified and the flight path did not cross either polar cap.” Some of the fundamental inferences drawn from the MARINER IV photos were: “1. In terms of its evolutionary history, Mars is more Moon-like than Earth-like. Nonetheless, because it has an atmosphere, Mars may shed much light on early phases of Earth’s history. “2. Reasoning by analogy with the Moon, much of the heavily cratered surface of Mars must be very ancient—perhaps two to five billion years old. “3. The remarkable state of preservation of such an ancient surface leads us to the inference that no atmosphere significantly denser than the present very thin one has characterized the planet since that surface was formed. Similarly, it is difficult to believe that free water in quantities sufficient to form streams or to fill oceans could have existed anywhere on Mars since that time. The presence of such amounts of water (and consequent atmosphere) would have caused severe erosion over the entire surface. “4. The principal topographic features of Mars photographed by Mariner have not been produced by stress and deformation originating within the planet, in distinction to the case of the Earth. Earth is internally dynamic giving rise to mountains, continents, and other such features, while evidently Mars has long been inactive. The lack of internal activity is also consistent with the absence of a significant magnetic field on Mars as was determined by the Mariner magnetometer experiment. “5. As we had anticipated, Mariner photos neither demonstrate nor preclude the possible existence of life on Mars. The search for a fossil record does appear less promising if Martian oceans never existed. On the other hand, if the Martian surface is truly in its primitive form, the surface may prove to be the best—perhaps the only —place in the solar system still preserving clues to original organic development, traces of which have long since disappeared from Earth.” Dr. Leighton noted that “one of the most difficult problems associated with the Mariner photographic mission to Mars was the wide illumination range” that was encountered. Assisting Dr. Leighton in his presentation were: Prof. Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech; Prof. Robert P. Sharp, Cal Tech; Richard K. Sloan, jpl; and J. Denton Allen, jpl. President Johnson said he was a bit relieved that mariner’s photographs “didn’t show more signs of life out there.” He described the Mars pictures as “awe-inspiring” and said that “the flight of Mariner 4 will stand as one of the great advances of man’s quest to extend the horizons of human knowledge.” President Johnson presented the following awards: to Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPL, the NASA Distinguished Service Medal; to Jack N. James, Assistant Director of jpl for Lunar and Planetary Projects, the NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement; and to Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, the NASA Medal of Outstanding Leadership. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 7/30/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 7/30/65, Al, A3)
NASA requested that final proposals for scientific experiments for the 1971 Voyager missions to Mars be submitted by Nov. 19. Selection would be made by July 1, 1966. All 1971 Voyager experiments on the landing craft would be subject to strict sterilization requirements. (nasa Release 65-297)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at the dedication of the Space Science Laboratory at Univ. of Chicago, said: “The space effort is really a research and development competition—a competition for technological pre-eminence, which demands and creates the quest for excellence. . . . Should we fall behind in the area of space technology, we would jeopardize our ability to progress, on earth as well as in space. At stake is the technological balance of power in the world. . . . “The influence of our technological progress and prowess is and has been the deciding factor in keeping the peace; technological and scientific capabilities constitute a basic source of national power. Preeminence in the field is an instrument in international relations, and influences our dealings with other nations involving peace and freedom in the world. . . . “By mastering the restrained but decisive use of the power that modern science and technology give us, we are providing the Nation with the capability to achieve greater cooperation toward a world consistent with the ideals we seek for others as well as ourselves. . . .” (Text) nasa still assumed that life on Mars was possible, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, JPL, said at the dedication. Although photographs relayed by MARINER IV had indicated Mars was extremely cold and lacked oxygen and water vapor, some terrestrial organisms might live comfortably in this environment, he said. Horowitz felt that the unexplained seasonal color changes in the dark regions of Mars might indicate plant growth. (Kotulak, Chic. Trib., 10/14/65)
At aiaa/aflc/asd Support for Manned Flight Conference in Dayton, Ohio, Temple W. Neumann of Philco Corp. reviewed studies of manned Mars missions and discussed the importance of “early biological precursor missions” to Mars. He concluded: “It has been shown that the lack of biological, as well as critical environmental, data about Mars can have important ramifications in not only the cost, but possibly even in the feasibility of performing early manned missions to Mars. The importance of preliminary knowledge about the interaction of possible Martian organisms with man and his equipment has been shown to significantly affect surface operations, decontamination requirements, and equipment reliability. Further, the need for some preliminary data about the nature of Martian organisms is necessary in order to intelligently design an experimental program for use by the first manned landing expedition. The conclusion can therefore be supported that a precursor biological mission, such as that represented by the current ABL studies, is mandatory in the early 1970 time period if manned missions are to make effective use of the mid-1980 launch opportunities.” (Text, aiaa Paper 65-249)
Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill, Dr. Rolf H. Dyce, and Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., reported to the meeting of the American Geophysical Union that through radar studies with Cornell’s l,000-ft.-diameter radiotelescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, they had found an apparent “flat spot” on the planet Mars that seemed to correspond to markings seen there through telescopes. They also reported that radar observations indicated the planet Mercury rotated on its own axis once each 54 to 64 days, exposing all sides to the sun in a year. Its full day, corresponding to a 24-hr. earth cycle, would be about 180 earth days long. It was inconclusive whether Mercury rotated in the opposite direction from its orbit—a retrograde rotation—or in the same direction as its orbit—a direct rotation. Dr. Gold also speculated that Mercury could not have been in its present orbit for much longer than 400 million years. Otherwise, he postulated, the sun would have held the planet over a long enough period of time to force it into a synchronous or 88-day rotation. This suggested to Gold that Mercury might once have been a moon of Venus but broke away or was tugged away to establish its own orbit around the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/65; Clark, NYT, 4/21/65, 17; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/21/65)
A low-temperature, primal), non-rechargeable battery had been successfully tested over a range from —100° C to 68° C, NASA Lewis Research Center engineers reported. Designed by the Livingston Electronic Co., the battery delivered constant power and, when fully developed, could be used on Mars where the nighttime temperatures were —100° C and the average daytime temperature —30° C. (lrc Release 65-20)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
mariner iv, speeding toward Mars for a rendezvous in July, has knocked out the romantic notion that the ruddy planet is the site of a dying civilization millions of years older than ours and far wiser,” wrote David Dietz in the Knoxville News-Sentinel. Continuing: “This theory holds that the planet is drying out, losing its atmosphere and its water supply and that the inhabitants have taken refuge in underground cities. “Well, if this is the case, one thing is certain. The Martians forgot to take their radios with them. For the past five months, Mariner 4 has been sending a steady stream of radio chatter back to earth ... If little Mariner 4 can do that, there is no apparent reason why the Martians couldn’t do the same, providing, of course, that there are Martians of superior intelligence.” (Dietz, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/21/65)
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
mariner iv was 70 million mi. on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars after 40 days in space. All systems were operating normally (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/7/65)
A full-scale model of NASA’s mariner iv Mars probe went on display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum. Panels explaining the Mariner program would also be displayed; photographs of the Martian surface would be added to the exhibit as they were received. (NASA Release 65-231)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, science adviser to President Johnson, told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that a manned Mars expedition would take from four hundred to six hundred days. He continued: “The longest manned mission we are currently planning is some 14 days. Whether such a long mission is physiologically or psychologically feasible is almost impossible to judge before we have more experience with Apollo, AES, and other manned systems. In any case, we would have to build systems of greater complexity and reliability than we have yet dreamed of. “. . . if we compare the probable scale and technical difficulties of a manned Mars expedition with Apollo it is hard to conclude that its probable cost could be much less than perhaps five times that of Apollo—that is, of the order of one hundred billion dollars.” (Text)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, director of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona and principal scientific investigator on the Ranger project, replied to Robert C. Cowen’s article, “Was the Ranger Worth the Cost?”, which appeared in the Christian Science Monitor Nov. 18. Mr. Co wen had raised four principal questions: (1) Was the recent ranger vii mission scientifically justifiable? (2) Was it well planned and executed? (3) Were the results up to expectations? (4) Where do we go from here? Dr. Kuiper said in letter to CSM: “Ranger was the U.S. pioneering program of deep-space research and accomplished much more than getting the 4,300 lunar photographs. It established the worth and feasibility of the ‘parking orbit’ and other concepts of space ballistics, power supply, and communication, as well as preparation for Mars and Venus probes. . . . The cost of the 4,300 lunar records is therefore not the full $270 million (which moreover includes Rangers vm and ix, not yet flown) but, say, $50-$100 million. No ground-based effort, even with the 300-400-inch telescope costing over $100 million, would, even in the absence of our disturbing atmosphere, have yielded 100th of the magnification (resolution) obtained in Ranger vii. I definitely know of no better and cheaper way to get high-resolution photographs. . . .” In a reply to Dr. Kuiper, Mr. Cowen quoted from a letter by Dr. Andrew T. Young of Harvard College Observatory and published in Science:	. . It is clear that there are some things that can only be learned above the atmosphere, and it is important that we have a program directed at learning them. . . . [But] many things that can be learned from above the atmosphere can also be learned, much more cheaply, by ground-based techniques. For example, some of the most convincing evidence for life on Mars is based on a few hours of twilight observations with the 200-inch telescope. . . . But the 200-inch telescope has been available for planetary research only a few times, generally during daylight or twilight. . . . Rocket-borne research involves many costly failures, but a duplicate 200-inch telescope could easily be built and staffed for the $28 million that Ranger 7 alone cost. . . .”	(CSM, 1/4/65)
Experts had observed that some plants had an unusual ability to adapt to the most severe physical conditions, reported Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. Plants had been deprived of oxygen or supplied with very small amounts of it, had been exposed to argon or nitrogen atmospheres, and had been exposed to extreme cold in experiments which tested the effects of a simulated Martian climate on plant growth. It had been found that the cucumber, a heat-sensitive variety of plant, could withstand an argon atmosphere and frost; lettuce, tomatoes, beans, turnips, and other plants had been grown in compartments supplied with extremely small amounts of oxygen. This led to the speculation that not only lichens but small shrubs might be indigenous to Mars and that there may in fact be a rich and varied Martian flora. (Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika, 8/65, 96)
mariner iv finished transmitting its 21 photographs of Mars and sent about 10 percent of a 22nd picture before its tape ran out. The later pictures were eagerly awaited by JPL scientists because they should show the dark regions of Mars that some people believed harbor life. The photos were scheduled to be released later this week. (Wash. Post, 7/25/65, A7)
Pictures of Mars taken by mariner iv during the July 14 flyby received editorial comment in the Washington Post: “. . . If some people are disappointed because Mariner 4 did not produce any conclusive documentation on the existence of the long-suspected life on Mars, it should be remembered that this was not one of Mariner 4’s objectives. Even the Tiros, circling earth at far less distance from its surface than Mariner 4 was from Mars, has indicated only once in the thousands of pictures taken that the life we know exists here actually can be spotted from far out in space.” (Wash. Post, 7/31/65) During July: The support of science in the U.S. was discussed by Dael Wolfle in the Scientific American: “From 1953 until 1960 about 8 percent of the Nation’s research and development budget was devoted to basic research. The percentage has been rising since 1960, reaching almost 12 percent in 1965. As for the Federal Government’s funds, in 1953, less than 7 percent went for basic research. The figure has been rising since 1960, to about 11 percent in 1965. The universities are relatively much more prominent in basic research than in the total research and development effort, being responsible for almost half of all basic research. In contrast the industrial laboratories, which dominate in development activity, conduct only about a fourth of the basic research.” (CR, 7/14/65, A3760-61)
British scientist Dr. J. E. Lovelock told the Third International Symposium on Advances in Gas Chromatography in Houston that although pictures taken from space probes indicated no sign of life on Mars as we know it, life may be there. Dr. Lovelock said it was urgent that the unmanned spacecraft that would land on Mars be designed “so they would not rule out the possibility that life may take different forms and be of some entirely different nature on planets beyond our own.” {Houston Post, 10/19/65)
Transmissions from MARINER IV were received by the nine-month-old Tidbinbilla tracking station at Canberra, Australia—one of three primary stations in the worldwide network of space tracking stations built for the Mars probe. Since February, a movable reflector antenna had maintained daily contact with MARINER IV, picking up signals from Goldstone, Calif., station in the morning and relaying them to the Johannesburg station nine hours later. As the signals were received from mariner IV, they were retransmitted over the Pacific cable teletype to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After completion of mariner iv mission, Tidbinbilla would be used to track Surveyor vehicles.	(NYT, 7/18/65)
NASA had compromised the scientific value of the interplanetary research program by spending too little on the Deep Space Net communications system, according to Frank Drake, prof, at Cornell Univ., in Saturday Review article. Drake noted that mariner IV would only be able to relay 22 photos of Mars back to earth and that these would be of lesser quality—all because of communications limitations: “. . . one concludes that the space program could well use an array containing a hundred or more 85-ft. antennas. One array might cost $40,000,000, still only a few per cent of what will almost certainly be spent on planetary exploration in the next ten years.” (SR, 1/2/65)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of Science, editorialized: “To date the purely scientific results from our manned space program have not been impressive. With good reason, the engineering and medical aspects have been given overriding priority. In effect, our manned space program has consisted of a series of great technological stunts. . . . “Will the Space Agency be able to devise a continuing series of spectaculars of ascending dramatic quality? I think not. The first successful landing on the moon will be a climax. Just as succeeding climbs of Mt. Everest, after the first ascent, have drawn diminishing attention, later lunar travel will lose its novelty. “As for Mars, how many popular songs have been written about it? . . . More fundamental is the question, ‘How many people know where Mars is, or even care?’ Perhaps man will one day go to the planet, but the psychological and emotional impact of the trip will be pale in comparison with that of the first successful landing on the moon.” (Science, 10/29/65, 557)
Photographs of Mars returned by NASA mariner iv showed surface features which could be interpreted as possible Martian canals, wrote Eric Burgess, a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in London in a letter to the Society. Burgess interpreted a dark, 30-mi.-wide streak shown on photograph No. 11 as a rift valley. This surface feature occurred at the same location on Mars where some astronomers claimed to have seen canals. Burgess said the photograph revealed that the escarpments passed through the rim of a large lOO-mi.-wide Martian crater, indicating that this particular rift valley appeared after the formation of the crater. (L.A. Times, 8/16/65)
nasa mariner iv was 85 million miles from earth and traveling faster than 48,000 mph, nasa announced. A radio signal from the spacecraft, traveling at the speed of light, would take more than 7% min. to reach a ground station. The Mars probe was returning scientific measurements and engineering data continuously and daily setting a new record for distance of communications, (nasa Release 65-167)
U.S.S.R.’s zond ii would pass within 900 mi. of Mars on Aug. 6, according to Soviet space scientist Prof. Mstislav Keldysh. This announcement was relayed by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, who quoted Keldysh as saying ZOND II weighed about 2,000 lbs. Dr. Sheldon speculated that the probe’s considerable weight—four times more than mariner iv—could mean “it may be doing something more than a simple fly-by” of Mars, (upi, Denver, Post 3/10/65; upi, NYT, 3/11/65, 42)
usaf scientist Dr. Hubertus Strughold told the Aviation and Space Writers Meeting in Washington, D.C., that the possibility that frozen oceans beneath the surface of Mars may support life cannot be ignored. Men may even find enough moisture there to provide them water and oxygen for an expedition, “and thus a critical problem of extraterrestrial resources would no longer exist,” he said. The idea that an underground water table exists on the otherwise arid planet was only a hypothesis with no evidence at present; but a combination of older theories by other scientists plus “common horse sense” led him to speculate the water was there, Dr. Strughold said. (Text)
Water could have been present on Mars during the first 3.5 billion years of the planet’s history and then disappeared before its craters were created by meteorites, said researchers Edward Anders of the Univ. of Chicago and James R. Arnold of the Univ. of California at San Diego in a report in Science. The scientists said they believed the Martian craters were only 300 to 800 million years old, compared with up to 4.5	billion years for those on the moon. They added: “. . . The crater density of Mars no longer precludes the possibility that liquid water and a denser atmosphere were present on Mars during the first 3.5	billion years of its history.” (Science, 9/24/65)
mariner iv received 12 commands from JPL to check out spacecraft equipment that would be used if the spacecraft was still operating normally when it reached Mars next July 14. These commands dropped a lens cover off the television camera, turned on a scanning platform that carried the camera and two Mars sensors, turned on portions of television system and checked out the capability of mariner iv to perform the encounter sequence. It was not planned to take television pictures during this sequence. The lens cover was dropped at this time rather than at planet encounter to shake loose any possible dust particles that might interfere with the Canopus sensor, a light sensing device that locked on the star Canopus to prevent the spacecraft from rolling. (NASA Release 65—43)
mariner iv was performing normally after nearly 10 weeks in space, nasa announced. At 9 a.m. est the Mars probe was 14,421,246 mi. from earth and had traveled more than 117 million mi. in its sun-circling orbit. It was moving at a velocity of 14,478 mph relative to earth and 65,670 mph relative to the sun. Instruments aboard mariner iv Mars probe detected a solar flare and the spacecraft telemetered data to a tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, for relay to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, (nasa Release 65-30; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/6/65)
MARINER IV was nearly 40 million mi. from earth, traveling 30,000 mph relative to the sun. It had covered 188 million mi. in its orbit around the sun. The Mars probe had transmitted to earth more than 160 million bits of engineering and scientific information about planetary space, (nasa Release 65-95)
A warning that “In looking for life on Mars we could establish for ourselves the reputation of being the greatest Simple Simons of all time” came from Dr. Philip H. Abelson in an editorial in Science. Dr. Abelson was editor of the magazine and director of the Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory. He said he did not believe that life, particularly life resembling that on earth, would be found on Mars and proposed “a few inexpensive experiments” on earth to save years, billions of dollars, and the possibility of “considerable eventual disappointment” if the search for life on Mars should prove fruitless. Attempts to sterilize spacecraft to prevent them from carrying earth organisms to Mars might add “many years and billions of dollars” to the cost, the editorial said. It suggested, instead, careful selection of experiments to be sent to Mars and “relatively inexpensive studies here on earth” to determine whether sterilization were really necessary. (Clark, NYT, 2/13/65; Wash. Post, 2/13/65) During February: Dr. Leo Steg, manager of General Electric Co.’s Space Sciences Laboratory, Missile and Space Div., was named Engineer of the Year—1964. He was cited for outstanding contributions to the advancement of space science and the engineering profession. The award was presented by an amalgamation of 41 societies during the 1965 National Engineers’ Week in Philadelphia. (Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 13)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the American Society of Photogrammetry and the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, convening in Washington: “. . . since the dawn of the Space Age—in less than eight years—one of our most important tasks has been that of mapping—mapping the surface of the world and its geodetic figure; mapping the world’s weather, as revealed in its cloud patterns as seen from above; mapping the earth’s outermost atmosphere in three dimensions, and exploring its interaction with the newly-discovered solar wind; seeing and mapping astronomical sources for the first time in ultraviolet and X-radiation from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and mapping areas of our moon to an accuracy 2,000 times better than that now achievable from earth, and preparing to map areas of Mars to an accuracy as much as 100 times better than that attainable from earth. . . .” (Text)
The first close-up picture of Mars transmitted by NASA’s mariner IV in an eight-hour broadcast over a distance of 134 million mi. clearly showed the edge of the planet. Transmitted to earth as a series of 5 million radio signals representing zeroes and ones, the picture was received at the Madrid and Johannesburg tracking stations and relayed to jpl. A jpl computer reconstructed the digits to produce images consisting of a series of dots of varying darkness. With transmission at 8.3 dots a second, 8/4 hrs. were required to receive the photograph. The photo sequence began when the bright edge, or limb, of Mars was seen by a light sensor which triggered MARINER iv’s magnetic tape recorder. Initial information came from an experimental device called a “cluge” which built up a rough pattern of the photo on a monitor screen as it was relayed from the tracking stations to jpl. Taken at a low angle with an oblique view, the first photograph did not show the detail expected in later photographs. At a news conference at jpl, Dr. J. A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa, said that during its Mars flyby, mariner iv had discovered with a variety of detectors that Mars had little or no magnetic field and, therefore, no radiation belts. This would indicate that the planet lacks a liquid core and thus differs basically from earth. Lack of a metallic core, liquid or solid, would be evidence that the planet never went through the churning internal processes that gave the earth its layered structure. Mars would not have continents formed of lightweight rocks and ocean basins underlain with basaltic rock as found on earth. W. M. Alexander, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explained that there was no evidence of a belt or unusual concentration of cosmic dust around the planet, nor, pointed out Dr. H. S. Bridge, mit, was there any evidence of a shock wave caused by solar wind flowing across the planet. The solar wind was the steady outflow of thin, hot, high-velocity gas from the sun. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, when questioned by newsmen on the possibility of higher life existing on Mars, pointed out that the absence of a magnetic field indicated the planet’s atmosphere was hit with all types of radiation and the existence of life would depend on how deep the atmosphere was and the extent of radiation that reached the surface. Asked if he were discouraged about the possibility of finding life on the planet, Dr. Pickering replied: “No, I have always felt we will find some sort of life on Mars.” Dr. Pickering pointed out that one explanation for the reddish hue of Mars might be the presence of limonite, an iron oxide. This would suggest that iron was uniformly spread through the planet rather than being largely concentrated in the core, as on earth. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 1/16/65, 1, 10; Miles, Wash. Post, 7/16/65, A1,A3; Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/65,1, 6)
Dr. Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Lunar and Planetary Mission Studies, told Twin Cities aiaa Chapter in Minneapolis that NASA was “investigating and planning manned missions and experiments beyond the presently approved Gemini and Apollo programs. . . . “A logical sequence for future NASA manned space flight programs . . . begins with the Gemini and Apollo program base. The next logical development is the Apollo F.xtension System ( aes ) which is a stepping stone to advanced Earth-orbital operations, to lunar-orbital surveys, and to lunar surface exploration. The AES Earth-orbital activities are a development phase for an orbital research laboratory or early space station as well as a lunar exploration station. Based on the Apollo Command and Service module technology, we can also develop advanced logistic systems for larger orbiting space stations of indefinite life or for greater expansion of lunar exploration if desired. The advanced orbiting space station can likewise lead to an orbiting launch complex for planetary missions such as Martian flyby and exploration shelters or a lunar base for potential exploitation of the lunar environment. ... In Earth orbit, the AES can provide for experimental operations in the three major fundamental areas . . . : (1) flights to conduct scientific research in space requiring man’s presence; (2) Earth-oriented applications to increase the nation’s strength, and (3) development of advanced technology for support of both manned and unmanned space operations. ... In the field of Earth-oriented applications of manned space operations, NASA has been conducting studies and investigations jointly with the Departments of Commerce, Agriculture, Interior and Defense to determine how we might apply Apollo’s unique capabilities to improve our ability to forecast weather, to communicate globally at high data rates, to make an up-to-date inventory of the world’s resources, to monitor air and sea traffic on a global scale, to support a world-wide air-sea rescue service, to make better forecasts of food production and to provide a data-gathering system on a global scale. Experiments are also being evaluated to enhance over-all development of space operations. Biomedical, behavioral and other medical studies would be conducted as well as the development of advanced subsystems and technology for spacecraft. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Roman Smoluchowski of Princeton Univ. said at the American Physical Society’s meeting in Washington, D.C., that there was no life on Mars. All seasonal changes in the color of the planet could be traced to bombardment of minerals with energetic radiation under varying temperatures. Dr. Jane Blizard of Boulder, Colo., also speaking at the APS meeting, suggested that any astronaut braving a 400-day journey to Mars would be likely to get a fatal dose of radiation. Maybe, she said, long range forecasting of solar storms can be perfected in time. Or maybe “superconductive magnetic doughnuts” could be devised to shield spacecraft from barrages of protons spewed out in solar storms. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/65)
NASA awarded $100,000 in initial funds to General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Div. to determine vehicle design modifications and ground support requirements for combining the Centaur as a third stage with the two-stage Saturn ib launch vehicle. The combination was being proposed to launch unmanned Voyager spacecraft to Mars in 1971. Study would be under direction of lrc. (nasa Centaur Proj. Off.; Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release)
William Hines, science writer and columnist for the Washington Evening Star, was presented the AAAs’s top award for science writing in 1965 at the Association’s annual meeting in Berkeley, Calif. His award-winning entry was a series of articles on the journey of mariner iv to Mars. The articles appeared from Nov. 6, 1964, to Aug. 12, 1965. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/65, A2)
Dr. Clyde W. Tombaugh of the New Mexico State Univ. Research Center was quoted in an editorial in the Kansas City Times as saying that the “canals” seen on Mars through telescopes were fractures of the planet’s crust. He said: “The origin may be due to asteroids impacting on the surface, much as what happens when a stone hits the windshield of a car. I think I have the right answer. . . .” (McCoy, Kansas City Times, 3/5/65)
Referring to a French rocket launching site, comparable to Kennedy Space Center, that would be operating in French Guiana by 1968, Pierre J. Huss said in the New York Journal American: “French experts claim the Guiana location makes it possible to fire toward the east at an angle that makes use of the earth’s rotation speed. They say it also offers optimal conditions for launching vehicles to the moon or Mars.” (Huss, N. Y. J/Amer., 7/8/65, 9)
A Centaur rocket similar to the vehicle launched successfully into a simulated lunaT-transfer trajectory Aug. 11 from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, and a model of mariner iv photographic Mars probe were being exhibited in the NASA display at Cleveland’s Natural Science Museum. NASA had contributed displays to the museum for about 10 yrs. (lrc Release 65-60)
Soviet astronomer Sofia Kozlovskaya reported at the All-Union Conference on Planetary Cosmogony in Moscow that the density of matter on Mars and Venus was greater than that on earth: matter of Venus had approximately two per cent more iron; Mars had approximately six to eight per cent more iron than earth. In making these calculations, Sofia Kozlovskaya used a new “more exact model of the earth” which she had built with the data from recent seismic observations. (Tass, 7/20/65)
NASA’s mariner IV began feeling the gravitational pull of Mars a week before it was scheduled to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The tug was noticed at 5 p.m. edt in a slight change in speed as the 575-lb. spacecraft, 128,054,720 mi. from earth and 1,721,770 mi. from Mars, neared the end of its 228-day trip. At noon, the speed relative to Mars was 9,879 mph. Tracking engineers said the speed, which had been dropping two mph every six hours, would lessen because of Mars’ gravity at a rate of one mph every six hours through July 10 when the speed would begin to increase. No further sensing of the planet’s presence in space was expected until July 14 when instruments aboard mariner iv might detect an increase in radiation, (ap, NYT, 7/8/65, 13; ap, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
MARINER iv’s tape recorder was turned off at the end of its second playback of the 21 pictures it took of Mars on July 14. A spokesman for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said the second run of pictures would be compared with the first as a check against possible errors in transmission and reception. No significant differences had been reported yet by scientists studying the photographs. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 8/3/65; NASA Proj. Off.)
mariner iv set world space communications distance record shortly after 3:00 a.m. EST when it reached a straight-line distance from earth of 66 million mi. Soviet scientists reported two years ago that they lost radio contact with their MARS I spacecraft March 21, 1963, after 149 days of flight at more than 65 million mi. (nasa Release 65141)
. . . atmospheric effects, color, seasonal changes, and the large number of locations of interest will make Martian pictures 10-50 times more difficult to interpret than lunar pictures.” Robert L. Sohn, TRW Space Technology Laboratories, stressed value of earth-return missions and recommended serious consideration of round-trip missions and multi-plan round trips using DSIF as guide. He suggested that an 800-lb. spacecraft could make a fly-by of Mars, using the Venus swing-by technique and return to earth to enable recovery of a 50-lb. capsule. Use of swing-by techniques for round trips reduces earth launch velocities to those of the favorable years and also reduces earth reentry velocities. Additional advantages were closer passage with Mars at encounter and the opportunity to gather data on two planets. Elie A. Shneour, of Stanford University, said he “. . . could not say whether it was possible to draw up a set of experiments that would definitively search for life.” He maintained, however, that “discovery of any form of extraterrestrial life will be tantamount to a basic determination of the nature of all life on that planet.” (M&R, 2/22/ 65, 39, 41)	...
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “A strong smell of sour grapes is beginning to emanate from the Soviet propaganda machine with its waspish comments on recent U.S. space achievements. . . . “This . . . was evident in the Soviet propaganda barrage aimed at the Gemini 5 flight when it became apparent that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad would surpass the world space flight endurance record set by Soviet Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky in June 1963. Tass . . . charged that U.S. space officials were endangering the lives of the two Gemini Astronauts by keeping them in flight after the initial fuel cell problems in a supposedly rash effort to surpass the Soviet mark. Red Star, the official Defense Ministry newspaper, joined in by ‘exposing’ the Gemini 5 flight as a Pentagon plot to develop better space reconnaissance techniques and charged the peaceful scientific aims of space exploration were being subverted in Gemini by its military experiments. . . . “What is really significant about these Soviet sour grapes is that they reflect a realization that the USSR has been overtaken and is being passed in the space race by the U.S. program. The U.S. superiority in unmanned space probes has become clearly recognized by the world with the Ranger lunar pictures and the Mars data from Mariner 4. Gemini 4 and 5 finally erased the Soviet lead in the manned space flight. The solid operational foundation of the Gemini program has made possible the swift and sure pace which promises to eclipse significantly the Voskhod flights in the immediate future. . . .” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 21)
Studies carried out under NASA contract by the Union Carbide Research Institute had demonstrated the ability of many life forms to adjust to at least partial Martian conditions. It had also been demonstrated that lack of oxygen produced surprising results: turtles with little or no blood; plants that could endure lower temperatures than plants raised in normal air. Such temperature resistance would be an advantage on a cold planet like Mars. Dr. Sanford M. Siegel disclosed these findings during a press tour of Union Carbide and said that if earth life could withstand Martian conditions so well, Martian life, if there ever had been any, must have been able to evolve to cope with the situation there. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/1/65)
usaf successfully launched its first Minuteman ICBM of 1965 from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. The missile was sent on a 5,000-mi. course toward a target in the Pacific, (upi, L.A. Herald Examiner, 1/21/65) January 21:	mariner IV completed nearly one-quarter of its 7%-mo. journey to Mars and was more than 10 million mi. from earth. The craft was traveling 10,680 mph relative to the earth; velocity relative to the sun was 68,255 mph; total distance traveled was over 93 million mi. After 54 days in space, all systems were functioning normally except the solar plasma probe which ceased returning intelligible data one week after launch, (nasa Release 65-17)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
NASA’s mariner iv spacecraft, at 8:02 a.m., EST, automatically switched from its omnidirectional antenna to fixed narrow beam antenna to communicate with earth, thereby becoming radio-ready for the remaining 130 days of its Mars flight. JPL received report from tracking station at Canberra, Australia, of a prompt increase in signal strength. (NASA Release 65-78)
MARINER IV set a distance record for communications from American spacecraft. The Mars probe transmitted data from 54 million miles out, exceeding the record of 53.9 million miles set by mariner ii in 1963. (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 4/14/65; nasa Releases 65-111, 65-117)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
JPL scientists had sent notices to professional and amateur astronomers asking them to keep the strip of Mars over which mariner IV would fly next July 14 under surveillance from now on, with special emphasis on photography in March. “We don’t know what we may learn through this procedure,” a JPL spokesman said, “but we want all the information we can get. Suppose, for example, mariner photographs what looks like a dust storm. We’ll have a better chance of determining that fact if we have pictures of the same phenomenon taken through earth telescopes, even though it’s a different storm months earlier.” (ap, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 2/15/65)
Three members of the nas-nrc Space Science Board, Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, Dr. Harry H. Hess, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, appeared before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in its hearings on post-Apollo goals of the U.S. space program. They repeated the recommendation of NAS in its 1964 National Goals in Space 1971-1985 that emphasis be placed on unmanned exploration of the planets, especially Mars, and added that supplementary data would be forthcoming with the release of reports on the Space Research Summer Study—1965 (June 21-July 16). Dr. Hess noted that the 1964 study recommended highest priority be given to search for life on a neighboring planet. He said the only difference in the 1965 recommendation was to “give a somewhat higher priority to Venus but leaving Mars the number one objective.” (nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 5)	_
NASA invited scientists to propose, by August 15, the various experiments to be included in a continuing Voyager program of exploration of the planets. The Mars Voyager program would begin with a test flight in 1969 followed by an orbiter-lander flight in 1971 with other flights following in 1973, 1975, and beyond. The program would also include missions now under consideration for flights to Venus and other planets. The experiments to be included in the 1971 mission of the landing capsule would be subject to strict sterilization requirements. In following programs, there would be considerable latitude in the choice of experiments. (NASA Release 65-230)
Jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, speaking to the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., on “Exploring the Planets,” < :J: “Scientists interested in the solar system point out that all of the planets of the solar system present interesting challenges to the explorers. A study group at Woods Hole in Massachusetts this summer has set priorities on the exploration of the planets in the order of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter. We hope to make exploratory flights to all of these planets.” (Text)
NASA’s budget for fy 1967 received comment in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “nasa is nervously asking the White House for $5.76 billion for Fiscal 1967 and contends it must have at least $5.25 billion compared with the $5,176 billion Congress appropriated for this fiscal year. “The Apollo program to land a man on the moon appears—thanks to Russian competition—pretty safe from the budget cutters. But every other program is a potential target, including the $1.2 billion Voyager program to explore Mars and all kinds of proposals to exploit the Apollo hardware. . . . “The Johnson Administration has prepared a pat answer to complaints that its tight Fiscal 1967 budget will thwart new initiatives. With so much accomplished in this session of the 89th Congress, the argument goes, next year must be ‘a management year.’ ” {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 15)
United Press International (upi) reported that nasa had postponed until next week an attempt to have mariner iv photographic probe take pictures of the blackness of space. The pictures would provide scientists with a means of editing mariner iv’s photos of Mars. Communication problems forced the delay. (UPI, NYT, 8/27/65, 19)
Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), interviewed by a group of women correspondents, was critical of the Administration’s failure to “pinpoint” objectives beyond its 1970 goal to put a man on the moon. She said she found it “hard to believe” the Administration wasn’t thinking beyond the moon to Mars and Venus but that “it’s difficult to get the answers.” (Dean, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/65)
The recommendation to NASA by NAS-convened study group [see Apr. 26] that Mars receive “the highest priority among all objectives in space science,” evoked editorial comment from the New York T imes : “The biological exploration of Mars will not be cheap, and available funds for scientific research and development are limited. “The likely costs and returns of the search for Martian life must be compared with those from, say, programs for stepped-up research into cancer or for building giant accelerators that would permit physicists to peer more deeply into the recesses of the atomic nucleus. That broader consideration may well suggest a less concentrated program than the scientists had recommended. “Such a decision would have the added advantage of allowing more time for an effort to make the search for Martian life a cooperative international project and not, . . . merely one more arena for the wasteful duplication that is the essence of Soviet-American space competition.” (NYT, 5/2/65)
mariner iv spacecraft was functioning well on its mission to Mars, but the public should not “expect too much” from the photographs of Mars it was scheduled to take July 14, NASA scientists said during a press briefing. It was conjectural whether the 21 photographs the Mars probe, would take would be clear enough to disprove or verify the theories held by some scientists that there are canals and some form of life on Mars. Scientists who would study the photographs pointed out that 21 pictures would only enable them to see 1% of Mars. Nevertheless, any pictures of the surface would be far superior to the best observations now obtainable with earth-based telescopes. The first few photographs might be made public immediately after being received, but the others probably would not be released until they had been studied for weeks or months. (Transcript, Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/23/65; Hill, NYT, 6/23/65, 7)
U.S.S.R.’s zond ii—launched Nov. 30, 1964—was believed still racing toward Mars, but with its radio power dead. Although zond ii’s specific mission was not disclosed, Tass had announced it was intended to “test the systems of the spacecraft in practical conditions of a prolonged space flight and to accumulate experience.” Tass had also said “unprecedented” plasma-jet engines were powering the Mars probe, (dpi, Houston Chron., 7/14/65)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff told mit students:	“The Russians are pretty cautious about disclosing much about their launch vehicles, but we know pretty well what vehicles they’re using.” Dr. Sheldon noted that ZOND II, the Soviet Mars probe, would pass near the planet perhaps one month after mariner iv. The U.S. Mars probe was due to come within 5,400 mi. of the planet on July 14.	(Boston Globe, 2/17/65)
The rash of reports on strange visitations to earth received comment from Walter Sullivan in the New York Times: “Whether or not [flying saucer enthusiasts] are aware of it, this is the time when space probes would be arriving from Mars, if inhabitants of-that planet were engaged in a similar effort [to the mariner iv Mars flyby]. The earth overtakes Mars every two years and two months, coming within a few dozen million miles of it. There was such an approach this spring. The United States and the Soviet Union anticipated it by firing vehicles toward Mars last November. If there were any Martians equipped to do so, they would have fired their vehicles toward earth at about the same time,” (Sullivan. ATT, 7/13/651
“On Wednesday, if all goes well, one of the epoch-making experiments in the history of science will take place as mariner iv comes within 6,000 miles of Mars and takes pictures for transmission back to earth. Not since Galileo first trained his telescope on the moon has there been such a prospect for a quantum leap in man’s knowledge of a nearby world. “Whatever the results of the picture-taking experiment, the accomplishments of mariner iv are already historic. Launched last Nov. 28, it has traversed a preassigned course for more than seven months. During this time it has flown roughly 350,000,000 mi. while communicating back to earth new scientific data as well as a steady flow of information on its flight and its internal condition. This performance far exceeds all similar earlier feats. “For comparison we may note that mariner ii—justly famed for its flight past Venus in 1962—needed to fly only three and a half months and 180 million miles to reach its objective. And while mariner II sets a record signalling to earth from a distance of 53.9 million miles away, mariner iv has recently been transmitting from the neighborhood of Mars, now over 130,000,000 miles distant from this planet.” (NYT, 7/11/65, E10)
. . . The Biosatellite Program is a second-generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and development. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to test critically major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will help delineate hazards to astronauts and assist in determining and defining effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights may involve, for example, physiological changes such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. Also, the effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Twenty experiments have been selected for flight to study the effects of weightlessness and decreased gravity during 3- to 30-day orbital periods. The experiments include a wide variety of plants and animals from single-cell organisms to higher plants and animals. The effects of weightlessness will be studied on the primate, especially the central nervous, the cardiovascular, and the skeletal systems during orbits of 30 days’ duration. “Experiments have been selected to study the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation to determine if there are any antagonistic or synergistic genetic or somatic effects on various organisms. “Experiments are included to study the effects of the unique environment of the Earth-orbiting satellite and removal from the Earth’s rotation in relation to biological rhythms of plants and animals. . . (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, outlining progress made toward the objective of solar system exploration, said:	“ ... It would appear . . . that enough experience and know-how has been accumulated to make the move to a five-ton Voyager spacecraft on the Saturn IB Centaur launch vehicle a reasonable next step in the unmanned exploration of the solar system. There is no question but that the size and weight of Voyager, plus the increased demands that will be placed upon it, will make the development of the Voyager a complex and difficult undertaking. But certainly, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory and Mariner have shown us that we can deal successfully with complexity. As a matter of fact, the increased weight and size may afford considerable relief from the need to tailor every last function to a gnat’s eyebrow in order to achieve the intended mission, as has been the case hitherto. . . .” Dr. Newell said that reliability was probably the most difficult problem for deep-space long-duration missions and that “. . . the development of adequate spacecraft systems will not be the problem. The most serious threat to long life operation will lie in the potential random failure of one or more [spacecraft] components.” He added that this would probably be an ever-decreasing problem as we gained experience with launch vehicles and that “. . . launch vehicle reliability is far less a difficult program than that of long spacecraft lifetime for very deep-space missions.” In conclusion, Dr. Newell said:	"... Nevertheless, the time has arrived when many thoughtful people urge a vigorous program of solar system exploration. The President has in his Fiscal Year 1966 budget request included funds to support initial conceptual and design studies of a Voyager spacecraft. Funds are also included for the development of a launch vehicle consisting of the Saturn IB plus the Centaur. Final decision as to whether to move ahead with the development of the Voyager spacecraft would come a little over a year from now.” (Text) Missiles and Rockets reported that scientists at the Symposium had differing opinions on Mars goals. Gilbert V. Levin of Hazleton Laboratories opposed the 1971 scheduled landing of the Voyager:	“. . . although we insist that Mars should not be contaminated by terrestrial life before we search for Martian life, we fail to recognize that this is tantamount to saying that the U.S. must get there first, because the U.S. appears to be the only nation willing and able to sterilize its spacecraft. “I’m all for Voyager, but an initial step in the Voyager program should be some early landers at the earliest opportunities. We should go ahead and devote efforts to develop a program to land on Mars in 1969.” Temple Neumann, Automated Biological Laboratory program engineer with Philco’s Aeronutronic Div., agreed with Levin:	“If the planetary biological exploration task is to be performed in a sound scientific manner, the U.S. must do it—first.” Lawrence B. Hall, NASA Special Assistant for Planetary Quarantine, re-emphasized “the disastrous effects that an unsterilized spacecraft could have on Mars. ... If a single micro-organism should land on Mars and have a replication time of 30 days, it could grow to the bacterial population of Earth in eight years. This could not only compete with Martian life but could result in drastic changes in the geochemical and atmospheric characteristics of the planet.” JPL’s Gerald A. Soffen said that “since the decision between Mariner landers and Voyager missions has not been made yet, scientific experimenters have to think in terms both of small payloads and large ones. Numerous small missions would provide a good opportunity to perform experiments in different locations and during different planetary seasons.” Bruce C. Murray, of Cal Tech, said:	“. . . finding the right location, getting there, and interpreting the biological experiment results in a way that would indicate definitively whether life was or was not present would call for at least 100 times more photography than was currently assumed.
