nasa selected Martin Co. for negotiation of $3-million, incentive-fee contract to build 11 experimental spacecraft equipped with parachute payloads "to investigate parachute designs and techniques for landing instrumented capsules on Mars.” Four would be launched by high-altitude balloon systems and seven by Honest John-Nike rockets under ' LaRc’s Planetary Reentry Parachute Program, (nasa Release 66-229)
nasa Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968 at ieee conference in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain; or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee /., 10/25/66)
msfc had awarded General Electric Co. a $147,884, 12-mo. contract to study design and systems requirements of an electrically propelled space vehicle for manned Mars landing missions and to identify areas of technology in which concentrated research would produce maximum benefit to manned planetary program, (msfc Release 66-271)
North American Aviation, Inc., received a one-year, $48,229 contract from msfc to "investigate the best methods and hardware for performing manned Mars and Venus flybys with maximum use of Apollo/Saturn systems ... as a stepping stone to manned landing missions.” (msfc Release 66-187)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Space Sciences Subcommittee, recommended in Astronautics & Aeronautics that manned and unmanned earth-orbital missions be given major emphasis in the next few years. He suggested lower priority be assigned manned planetary exploration and establishment of manned lunar bases, but that unmanned Voyager Mars and Venus missions be given more extensive support. (A&A, 9/66, 12-14)
Six years of exploratory work at jpl and nasa centers on practical problems of landing on Mars was summarized by R. P. Thompson of jpl in Astronautics & Aeronautics. He concluded that: (1) design of first lander should be simple and conservative, and capable of thorough testing so that no single failure mode would cause "catastrophic failure of mission”; (2) independent backup should be provided for every critical event in landing sequence with "selective” redundance to achieve high reliability; and (3) capsule should be instrumented to allow diagnosis of failures. (A&A, 7/66, 66-73) During July: David H. Stoddard, M.D., Director of NASA Occupational Medical Division, cited in Hospital Topics two "ideal” physiological monitors developed in space medicine—biotelemetry, which permitted immediate observation of data, although subject was aware he was being monitored; and electrocardiocording, which did not allow immediate observation but "permits the subject to go where he pleases, do what he pleases and to almost forget that he is being monitored.” (Hospital Topics, 7/66, 39)
U.S. had current "edge” over U.S.S.R. in overall space capability but this status had been "recently acquired and is not sufficient to form even the slightest basis for complacency,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn. Industrial Luncheon in Washington, D.C. Dr.Welsh analyzed the areas of relative accomplishment: "(1) Number of spacecraft. The United States has placed almost 400 spacecraft into earth orbit and on escape missions, while the USSR has put slightly less than 200 on such missions. . . . However . . . Soviets have placed each year a greater total weight of payloads. ... (2) Lunar and Interplanetary. The United States has been far less active but considerably more successful in its interplanetary activities. . . . We have photographed Mars and had a productive fly-by of Venus while the USSR’s active interplanetary program has been primarily plagued by failure. In addition, we have taken some 17,000 photographs of the moon and are taking hundreds more by the magnificent Surveyor spacecraft. ... (3) Manned Flight . . . U.S. . . . has a distinct lead over the USSR with about 1500 man flight hours in orbit compared with about 500 . . . with the longest individual flight as well as the longest extra-vehicular activity. Also, the U.S. has had two controlled rendezvous maneuvers, one docking experiment, and considerable manned spacecraft maneuvering experience. So far, the USSR has achieved none of these latter goals. (4) Space Applications. The United States has navigation, weather, and communications satellite systems in regular operation, while the USSR is still in the developmental stage in such activities. (5) Scientific Data . . . the larger number and greater variety of U.S. scientific payloads, as well as the wider and freer dissemination of the information obtained, may well have added more to the world’s store of knowledge. (6) Propulsion . . . the USSR has surpassed the United States in the field of propulsion so far as the amount of thrust is concerned [but] this thrust advantage is much less true today as both countries have in operation and under development larger and more advanced propulsion systems.. . (Text)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, jpl Voyager program manager, told Aviation Week in an interview that heavy funding for the Voyager Mars program was anticipated with FY 1968 funds if the Vietnam war did not create new funding problems. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 40)
NASA had invited 33 firms to submit proposals on a 12-mo. study of Mars and Venus flyby missions in 1975-1982 period using Saturn/Apollo hardware with minimum modifications. Study would emphasize earth escape stages based on modifications of the upper stages of Saturn V launch vehicle (S-II and S-IVB), orbital tanking and assembly operations, launch windows, spacecraft, and probes to be launched from spacecraft to planet’s surface, (msfc Release 66-73)
Mars polar caps are white with dry ice, not frozen water in the form of frost, wrote Dr. Robert B. Leighton and Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech in Science. Their argument was based on mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, flyby which indicated that planet’s atmosphere is very thin and largely composed of carbon dioxide which, in frozen form, is dry ice. Theory that white on Mars polar caps is ordinary frost was based on observations of its reflectivity in the infrared and on manner in which it affected orientation of light waves. Authors believed there might be frozen water on Mars, but suggested it is all underground in the form of permafrost. (Science, 7/8/66, 136-44)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
Employment in aerospace industry would increase to 1,266,000 by June 1966—a gain of 94,000 or eight per cent from September 1965, reported Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn. Aircraft employment was expected to show greatest increase, with missile and space employment remaining relatively stable. (Aerospace News, 3/15/66) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, delivering the first Annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture, stressed the importance of the contributions of men such as Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden to the dramatic development of the space program: "The history of nasa reflects much of Dr. Dryden’s understanding of how progress can be made and what the conditions are that produce effective responses to the challenges being faced. A pivotal concept that has guided NASA administration has been that of the relation of the research and development project to many rapidly growing disciplines of science and technology. A project serves a larger purpose than its own defined immediate ends. A project is a disciplined and organized effort directed to a specific objective; one of its principal characteristics is that it has a schedule. As such a project provides a creative and driving force in the total achievement of science, engineering, and technology _____” (Text) Wesley A. Kuhrt, United Aircraft Research Laboratories, predicted interplanetary and translunar tourist travel for FY 2001: "A six-day round trip to the moon via 35-passenger, nuclear-powered 'clipper’ ships would cost each adventurer $10,000. For an 18-month trip to Venus, the passenger would pay $32,000. Steerage class to Mars, a two-year undertaking, would cost $35,000. But for $70,000 a passenger could ride the Mars Express to and from the red planet in 11 months. . . .” All fares assumed the Government would underwrite the cost of developing the spacecraft, Kuhrt said. Other predictions made at the symposium included teams of superhuman astronauts bred over several generations as a result of present studies in genetics and molecular basis of life; communications between ordinary persons in their homes and anyone, anywhere; versatile robots to perform human tasks; cosmic cargo transported at $10 per pound; network of satellites to link everyone in the world so they could speak in their native languages via rapid automatic translating computers; and man-shaped robots sending back threedimensional pictures to human masters hundreds of miles away. Harvard astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that the trip from other galaxies had already been made and that earth had already been visited from space at least once. (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) told a luncheon audience that "we must lay out basic objectives far enough ahead that they will serve as relatively fixed goals—or in non-technical terms, as dreams. Such an early dream of man was to fly like a bird; later, we gradually translated this dream into making it easy for everyone to fly in an aircraft. We have these dreams and they affect our progress strongly. ...” To meet these ends, Karth recommended forming a "Hoover-type” Commission to review planning and decision-making system in the area of science and technology. In addition he cited the need for "frequent, systematic, large-scale surveys and analysis of science and technology from the near-term to the distant frontiers of knowledge. . . .” (Text) In a prediction of what the "Space Age Society” would be like in 2001, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told the symposium: "The major development over the coming years will be the speed of change. We already have great difficulty maintaining our perspective regarding the change which has taken place during the last 8 or lO years. Well, that rate of change is like the tortoise pace compared with what; is coming in the future. ... "Some with fertile imaginations foresee the time when there will be large scale emigration from earth to growing settlements on the moon and the planets. While I see the great growth in the ability to travel to such distant spots safely and speedily, I see little likelihood of any sizable movement of population even though nuclear reactors would furnish much of the competence to make conditions in such places both livable and productive. My reason for not predicting such movement is due to the simple belief that living conditions are going to be so improved here on earth that few would want to leave. .. . "As for space travel, we can certainly let our imaginations soar, as we are now only in the infancy of growth. The space child has barely learned to walk. The future with its space travel being almost as common as airplane travel is today is yet to come . . . but it will come. Interplanetary trips, at speeds many times what we now attain, will take place in craft as reusable as the jet plane is today, with at least as many passengers aboard. . . . "One more thing I can predict with great confidence. The debate on the worthwhileness of space technology and space exploration—still continuing on the part of those of little vision—will have disappeared completely within a decade or so. The benefits will have become so obvious and the potential so exciting that even the most near-sighted will be aware of the rich space harvest. . . (Text; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/16/66, A10; Hoffmann, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/16/66) Importance of materials science and space vehicle technology was discussed by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa Hq. oart. "The structural designer of future launch vehicles will face many new and challenging problems. Launch vehicles ... [will be] larger, complex, and more costly. If we are to reuse these launch vehicles without having to spend large sums of money either to bring them back or to refurbish them after recovery, major advances will be required in structural and materials technology.” Development of new materials and methods, such as "superinsulations” to prevent heat leakage; stronger shielding materials to protect spacecraft from meteoroids and intense radiation; advanced lifting-body designs for greater reentry precision; and folding spacecraft parts which could be reassembled in space, would play a major role in U.S. space program before the year 2000, he said. (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, nasc staff member, discussed overall economic outlook for space age up to FY 2001. Sheldon noted that U.S. space program took about one per cent of gross national product and estimated that "Soviet Union is putting about two per cent of their Gnp into space efforts . . . .The close tie with military rocketry has speeded space development in these recent years, but it has also saddled space technology with an expendable ammunition philosophy rather than aiming at the lower operating costs of a recoverable transport philosophy. . . . "Today we probably are headed toward an age of conservation, and one of deliberate recycling .. . the task of the remainder of this century may include the development of closed ecological systems for long-duration space flight, and on a different scale, heroic measures to recycle waste water and to reprocess industrial and consumer wastes into reusable products. . . . "If our urbanized society requires closed ecological systems even here on Earth, we can, in effect, air condition whole cities.” Discussing weather modification and climate control, he said: ". . . whether we bend nature itself, or create new sealed urban units, each almost self-sufficient in its ability to control its temperature, clean and recycle its air and water, and put all other wastes to productive use, some such heroic measures will be needed as this century runs out.” (Text)
NASA successfully conducted second rocket-launched test [see Nov. 5] of a Mars entry parachute as part of an advanced technology effort to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected parachute at 120,000-ft. altitude. Parachute descended to earth 40 min. later carrying 200-lb. payload with instrumentation for measuring shock of parachute opening and its oscillation characteristics. Experiment series was managed by LaRC. (nasa Release 66-298)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
Comparing U.S. and U.S.S.R. Mars exploration efforts in Science, Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech Associate Professor of Planetary Science, and Merton E.	Davies, rand Corp., said of nasa’s mariner iv July 14, 1965, flyby: "The American scientific community should, and evidently does, feel proud and gratified that the Mariner mission to Mars, through successful utilization of national resources, not only accomplished a remarkable technological feat but also discovered extraordinary new facts ... beyond the reach of earth-based instruments.” Authors termed "disappointing” U.S. decisions to terminate Mariner program, fly extra Mariner C spacecraft to Venus in 1967, drop plans for 1971 Voyager launch, and "fill the gap” with an abbreviated 1969 Atlas-Centaur program. U.S.S.R., they noted, had spent "between five and ten times as much on flight programs for planetary exploration” as U.S. and, in spite of "six consecutive failures in their efforts to explore Mars,” may have developed a reliable 2,000-lb. spacecraft for Mars flyby. Authors predicted U.S.S.R. would launch two Zond spacecraft in December 1966: "It will be surprising to us if at least one . . . does not reach the planet and return new facts about it.” They suggested 1971 as earliest likely date for Soviet landing of survivable payload on Martian surface and concluded that by 1967 "the U.S. will be ready to make an enduring national commitment to the exploration of the planets, and be ready to demonstrate intellectual appreciation of discovery as well as enthusiasm for technological achievement.” (Science, 2/25/66, 945-54) Week of February 28: NASA delegation extended President Johnson’s invitation for European participation in U.S. manned and unmanned space programs in discussions with officials of West Germany, France, U.K., and Italy. Delegation had been instructed not to make any offers or commitments but to express potential opportunities of participation in future U.S. space flights on equal basis with U.S. scientists. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 2/28/66, 23) During February: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, summarized progress in development of electric propulsion in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "The first laboratory experiments with electrostatic thrustors began in 1958. In the early thrustor models, power efliciencies and propellant-utilization efficiencies were 20-30%; lifetimes did not exceed a few hours; ion-current densities were less than 1 milliamp/cm2; the problem of beam neutralization was unsolved— was not even well understood. Mission applications seemed far in the future. Today, only seven years later, electrostatic thrustors are very close to flight readiness. Two systems, the ion-bombardment system and the surface-ionization system, have reached power efficiencies and propellant efficiencies above 90%; they produce ion currents of about 20 milliamp/cm2. Beam neutralization has proven in the laboratory as well as in actual space tests, and engine lifetimes of several-thousand hours have been demonstrated. With a few more years of refinement and quality engineering, these ion thrustors will be ready for extended missions into interplanetary space. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 71-2) During February: Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, noted two viewpoints on achieving Soviet cooperation in space research in Astronautics & Aeronautics:	. . the one holds that the answer . . . lies in finding a suitable device, either bilateral or international—a new idea, an imaginative approach, a twist ... for example, a proposal for an international space laboratory. . . . "The other view is that the device is substantially irrelevant and that it is the basic relationship between the two countries, the basic political and military realities, which will determine at any given time whether cooperation is feasible or not.” (A&A, 2/66, 20)
Daniel J. Haughton, president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., suggested at American Petroleum Institute meeting in New York that aerospace and petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint exploration of earth’s continental shelves. He said that within 35 yrs. the world’s population would have doubled and a large segment of this population would be hungry: "The oceans represent the last great source for feeding them and providing the chemicals and minerals and water to meet all the future needs of man.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/16/66, C12) NASA Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), in report on "Management Scheme for Apollo,” concluded: "There is no single approach to program management that will guarantee success. The development of and experience with various management systems, techniques and tools in the past several years have contributed extensively to a more scientific approach. The 'art’ element remains, however. The integrated implementation of those concepts and their associated procedures and disciplines is sometimes confronted with considerable resistance within an organization. This has merit, for it forces management to thoroughly screen new concepts as to validity, feasibility and salability. Once a new management system is approved, however, it deserves and requires the personal support of the program director through line channels to stimulate its overall implementation and acceptance at the grass roots level. . . (Text) DeMarquis D. Wyatt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Programming, said that NASA’s cost model had "significantly facilitated management decision making in complex on-going programs by providing an overnight computational capability of great capacity. The computer program is capable of handling the interrelated cost influences of up to 60 different hardware configurations at an unlimited number of plants and an unlimited number of production fines within each plant. It can . . . summarize program costs for as many as 24 fiscal years and can subdivide and allocate these costs to up to 8 different funding sources or users.. . .” (Text) . Franklin P. Dixon, Director, Planetary Mission Studies, NASA omsf, outlined manned Mars landing program for consideration as U.S. national space goal. Proposal called for seven-step program based principally on extension of mission-duration capability and including earth-orbital "Space Station/Mission Module,” Mars and Venus flybys, and Mars landing. Discussing long-range NASA planning, he noted: "At the present time planning for the Saturn Apollo Applications Program includes subsystem developments for long duration manned flights. . . . This provides a logical growth pattern toward manned planetary travel with the easier flyby missions within technological reach by the 1975 to 1980 time period for actual operational flights.” (Text)
Checks of distributions of Martian and lunar crater diameters indicated that the visible surface of Mars was 2.2-to-3 X 109 years old, Alan B. Binder, Univ. of Arizona, reported in Science. This result implied that in the early history of Mars large-scale subaerial erosion occurred. Of 69 Martian craters with diameters greater than 10 km., 13% had central peaks. This compared favorably with the frequency (11.7%) of central peaks among lunar craters and may indicate the peaks resulted from the impact mechanism rather than post-impact volcanism. Well-defined system of lineaments shown in mariner iv photographs may indicate that Mars had lost appreciable angular momentum during its history. (Binder, Science, 5/20/66, 1053-5)
NASA mariner iv, launched from etr Nov. 28, 1964, for Mars flyby July 14, 1965, was 216 million miles from earth—greatest distance it would reach before gradually returning to within 30 million miles in 1967—and still operating. Goldstone Tracking Station of NASA’s Deep Space Network (dsn) tracked a signal from the spacecraft, but no attempt was made to receive data because of the extreme distance, dsn would continue attempting to contact mariner iv once a month to see if it was still operating. Daily engineering and scientific data from the spacecraft had been suspended Oct. 1, 1965, by ground command that set new space communications record of 191,059,922 mi.—more than twice the distance from earth to the sun. {nasa Release 66-7)
Analysis of available evidence concerning possibility of an advanced form of life on Mars by Univ. of Maryland astronomy professor Dr. Ernst J. Opik appeared in Science. Dr. Opik said the most heavily eroded craters visible in photos taken by mariner iv during the July 14, 1965, flyby dated from the earliest period of the planet’s history, implying that Mars had never had a dense, moist, earth-like atmosphere for any extended period and would therefore be a poor prospect for life. Dr. Opik argued strongly for at least a primitive form of vegetation, citing in particular a region of 1.2 million sq. km. that had darkened rapidly from 1946 to 1954. He likened this to the change a distant observer would have seen on earth as a consequence of the virgin lands development program in U.S.S.R. Vegetation was the best explanation for such changes; however, if it were not vegetation, "it must be something specifically Martian.” The planet, he added, "may become a source of great surprises in the future.” (Science, 7/15/66, 255-65)
New absorption bands, probably caused in part by reduced gases in the Martian atmosphere, had been found in near-infrared spectrum of Mars by Fourier spectroscopy, Lewis D. Kaplan, jpl, and Janine and Pierre Connes, Observatoire de Meudon and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France, reported in Science. The authors believed the presence of such constituents might have "important implications for the possibility and nature of life on Mars.” (Science, 8/12/66, 739-40)
jpl selected Litton Industries, Inc., Guidance and Control Systems Div., for negotiation of a $3-million contract to design, fabricate, and check out data automatic subsystem (Das) for 1969 Mariner (unmanned) flights to Mars, jpl had management responsibility to NASA for Mariner/ Mars project, (nasa Release 66-289)
Evidence for volcanic origin of lunar craters was presented in a letter to Nature by Univ. of Western Australia geologist G. J. H. McCall. Eleventh frame of photographs by nasa’s mariner iv spacecraft revealed scalloping in walls of Martian craters comparable to scalloping in terrestrial calderas—such as Krakatau, Indonesia, Aso, Japan, and Crater Lake, Ore. McCall had also detected scalloping in lunar craters, which he believed "closely resemble terrestrial volcano-tectonic craters.” Taking "pronounced scalloping ... to be a valid indication of volcano-tectonic subsidence,” McCall questioned whether lunar craters could be explained by hypervelocity impact. (McCall, Nature, 9/24/66, 1384-5)
One of the world’s largest and most sensitive automatic space tracking and telemetry antennas was officially dedicated at Goldstone, Calif. Newest facility in nasa’s Deep Space Network (dsn), 210-ft. dish antenna was U.S.’s largest fully steerable antenna and world’s largest built for research by spacecraft. Operated by jpl, $14-million antenna would be used to track future Mariners and other spacecraft to Mars, Venus, and even Pluto on the outer reaches of the solar system. Dedication ceremonies, hosted by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, included addresses by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), chairman of Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of Science and Astronautics Committee. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, also participated, (nasa Release 66-88; msc Roundup, 4/29/66)
First of series of high-altitude experiments to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be incorporated into Voyager spacecraft scheduled for unmanned soft landing on Mars in 1973 was conducted by nasa from Walker afb. The 15-ft.-diameter, 1,600-lb. disc-shaped flight unit containing packaged test parachute, instruments to record loads and parachute deployment, and ring of 12 small rockets for acceleration was carried by balloon to 120,000- to 125,000-ft. altitude then released on ground command. Acceleration rockets apparently ignited as planned, propelling unit upward at about 850 mph into arching trajectory. Parachute deployed; system descended in planned recovery area at wsmr. Test was apparent success; extensive performance analyses were being made. Balloon system had been tested July 18. Parachute project was managed by LaRC and coordinated with jpl, which managed Voyager program, (nasa Release 66-225; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/31/66)
Cosmonautics Day in U.S.S.R., celebrating fifth anniversary of first manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin, was marked by condemnations of military orientation of U.S. space efforts and predictions of Soviet space successes. Cosmonaut Gagarin, speaking in the Kremlin, said: "American scientists and cosmonauts have carried out a number of interesting experiments. This is to their credit. It is to be deeply regretted, however, that American cosmonautics is increasingly falling under the influence of the Pentagon, which regards outer space as the theater of future military operations.” Gagarin pledged "all his energies and knowledge” to help in the lunar mission and said man must make himself at home on the moon "to establish stations which will serve as points of departure for longer space voyages and also as astronomical observatories and scientific laboratories.” Cosmonaut Gherman Titov, speaking in a taped interview on Moscow television, predicted that "builders and assemblers will one day exit into space and put together various parts of space stations, assemble spaceships and stations on the moon, and build various structures.” In a Pravda article Marshal Konstantin Vershinin, head of Soviet Air Force, predicted a new manned space mission that could take several cosmonauts through the Van Allen radiation belts. He noted that biomedical data from the cosmos cx flight would "doubtlessly . . . be used in preparing new manned space flights.” In an interview published in Prague, Cosmonaut Konstantin Feok-tistov predicted that man would land on Mars and Venus between 1970 and 1980. (Pravda, 4/12/66, 2; Wash. Post, 4/11/66, A8; AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A8; upi, NYT, 4/14/66, 7; Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A14; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 4/13/66)
Data from onboard cameras and other recovered instruments had confirmed success of NASA’s first high-altitude experiment to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be used to land instrumented capsules on Mars. Launched aboard a balloon Aug. 30 from Walker afb, experiment had "provided a solid data base with which we can compare and correlate the results of later flight tests involving parachutes and flight units of different sizes and shapes,” Project Manager John C. McFall reported, (nasa Release 66-241)
System of two interconnected balloons 815-ft. long designed to test parachute deceleration system of nasa’s Voyager spacecraft—scheduled to land on Mars in 1973—was lofted by usaf from Holloman afb. Helium in small upper balloon inflated main balloon—largest ever launched— to 26-million-cu.-ft. capacity as both rose to 130,000-ft. altitude where atmosphere was believed to be as thin as that on Mars. 1,800-lb. simulated Voyager spacecraft payload was jettisoned by radio command seven hours after launch, successfully parachuted to earth, and was later recovered near Phoenix, Ariz. Main balloon rose to higher altitude and ruptured as expected. Parachute program was managed by LaRc; Voyager program by JPL. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/66; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 34)
Redeye, usa’s shoulder-fired antiaircraft missile system designed for forward-area defense against low-flying aircraft, had successfully completed Arctic phase of service testing at Ft. Greely, Alaska.. (Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release) Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, told the conference that "all technologies are sufficiently developed to make flight [to Mars] in 1986 appear possible.” Five Saturn V launch vehicles would carry the components of electrically powered Mars spacecraft and of Nerva II-powered nuclear earth-escape stage into 300-mi.-altitude earth orbit. After assembly and checkout, nuclear stage would accelerate electrically powered spacecraft to escape velocity. Flight time to Mars on a direct transfer trajectory would be 145 days; 280 days would be required to return to earth. Spacecraft would enter high earth orbit outside Van Allen radiation belt and astronauts would be brought back to earth by commuter rocket. Dr. Stuhlinger said: "Of the key developments still necessary, the electrical power system undoubtedly requires the major technological and funding effort.” Coauthors contributing to the paper presented by Stuhlinger were Joseph C. King and Dr. Russell D. Shelton of msfc Research Projects Laboratory and Gordon R. Woodcock, msfc Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-67) LRC scientist J. Reece Roth described an electric rocket life-support system that would supply interplanetary crews with meals which, when metabolized, would serve as fuel for spacecraft’s engine. According to Roth’s concept, some or all of the propellant, in the form of food, water, and oxygen, would be metabolized by crew to carbon dioxide, water, and solid wastes. C02 and water could then be used as propellant for an electric engine while solid residues would be small enough to be stored or discarded. Propellant reserve could be used for food, navigational corrections, and radiation shielding—enhancing safety of the crew. Weight savings from integrated propulsion and life-support system would be so great, Roth said, that a somewhat less efficient thruster could be used with no overall loss in performance, (lrc Release 66-12) Human experience most similar to one-to-three year space flight was life on submarine, according to Dr. S. B. Sells, Director, Institute of Behavioral Research, Texas Christian Univ. Dr. Sells presented results of NASA-sponsored study designed to formulate problems of "group organization, structure, and interpersonal interaction of crew members in the environmental circumstances of a typical space mission.” Fifty-six social system characteristics of extended space flight—such as motivation, status, background, training, and command structure of crew, as well as conditions of confinement, isolation, and environmental hazards—were compared with those of 11 other social systems. (Text) nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright said: "Thousands of dedicated people have laboriously laid . .. stepping stones to Mars. This nation is ready and able to step up the exploration of Mars, Venus, and the rest of the solar system. Just when such a program will get a go ahead depends on many factors. This coming year will be a crucial one for the decision makers. "Of one thing I am absolutely certain: comprehensive exploration of the planets is inevitable. Who will be leading this exploration seems less certain; but we can if we choose.” (Text)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded three new study contracts totaling $400,000 to investigate launch vehicle needs and best methods for sending manned spacecraft on planetary flyby trips: North American Aviation, Inc., received $100,000 to study feasibility of modifying Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) for use as an orbital injection stage; Douglas Aircraft Co., $100,000 for feasibility of using Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) as part of a planetary vehicle; and TRW Systems, Inc., $200,000 for alternate mission modes for manned Mars and Venus orbital and landing missions, (msfc Release 66-223)
Inactivity in Soviet manned space program could be explained by "strict economy” and preparations for ambitious new manned missions, Radio Prague’s Moscow correspondent reported. The new missions—"flights of much higher standards”—would include "a flight of man to the moon and the creation of a large orbiting laboratory.” Correspondent also predicted that the U.S.S.R. would launch a "group of rockets”— presumably unmanned ones—toward Mars about Jan. 4. (NYT, 12/23/66, 12) New York Times later editorialized: ". . . The possibility is raised that the Soviet strategy for a manned lunar landing may be based on a direct earth-moon trip. In that case there would be no need for the rendezvous and docking maneuvers. . . . Enormously powerful rockets would be required . . . but if Moscow has them they might make possible the spectacular achievement of a goal the Kremlin must want very much: a manned lunar landing on the moon by the fiftieth anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution next Nov. 7.” (NYT, 12/26/66, 20)
jpl had awarded $200,000 contract to Avco Corp.’s Space Div. for task work in jpl’s new $1.5 million Sterilization Assembly Development Laboratory (sadl). Starting in mid-1967, SADL would be sterilization testing headquarters for Voyager spacecraft, scheduled for Mars landing in the 1970s. (jpl Release)
mariner iv spacecraft, which took the world’s first close-up pictures of Mars July 14, 1965, was again in contact with earth, reporting on the space environment and its own operating performance after 18 mos. of flight. NASA said telemetry from mariner iv, received over a 197.5-million-mi. radio link with the Deep Space Network’s Goldstone Tracking Station, indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating properly. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, mariner iv had exceeded its design life by more than 100% and gave indications it might function until 1968. (nasa Release 66-135; jpl Release)
nasa would negotiate $1.25-million contract with Texas Instruments, Inc., for design, fabrication, and testing of telemetry subsystem for 1969 Mariner missions to Mars. Motorola, Inc., was selected for design, fabrication, and testing of command subsystem for Mariner spacecraft under $2-million contract. Both contracts would be managed by jpl. (nasa Release 66-186)
NASA had tentatively selected six experiments to be carried on two Mariner Mars spacecraft scheduled for launch by Atlas-Centaur boosters between early February and mid-April 1S69: two television cameras, infrared spectrometer, infrared radiometer, ultraviolet spectrometer, celestial mechanics experiment, and S-band occultation experiment. Experiments were selected to extend knowledge of Martian atmosphere and visible features of Martian terrain and to gather additional data to continue planning for landing instrumented capsules on the planet, jpl had project management responsibility for Mariner Mars 1969 missions. (nasa Release 66-174)
First anniversary of first close-up photos of Mars taken by nasa’s mariner iv from distance of 134 million mi. Spacecraft was launched Nov. 28, 1964. (NYT, 7/26/66, 49)
Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the U.S. was the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S JL, U.K., and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal, or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3) January 24-26: At aiaa Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 aiaa president. Dr. C. Stark Draper, chairman of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of "informetics” in modern flight systems. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell chaired a special "Space Sciences Report” plenary session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ environment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus "swingby,” according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: "Yesterday, President Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. . . . This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating resources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing commitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing commitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemployment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested. . .. "It is within this framework that the nasa program has been hammered out—not representing the sum of our program demands. However, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past weekend, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration and unmanned probes and satellites. "We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so rich in other needs. . . . "We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities are in hand instead of in the future. ". . . The program that we have laid out for nasa for the coming year will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong competition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific investigation, technological application and operational experience. It provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between the intellect of man and the unknown.” Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convocation by L/G James Doolittle (usafr) : "On the second of December 1965 the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders; aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its advancement; astronautics lost its great ambassador at home and at large and those fortunate of us—who had been privileged to know and work with him—lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. "Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person—a man who strove prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. . . . "Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and gratitude, for excellence endures.” Goddard Award, aiaa’s highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P. von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson afb, for "his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first successful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W. Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D. Lewis, Project Engineer, uac Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for "their contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket engines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his "production of two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design innovation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing techniques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S. ascendency in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for "basic research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases, and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; aiaa Release; aiaa Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
Scientists were considering "capturing an asteroid” and, through nuclear propulsion, placing it in earth orbit where it could be analyzed, reported John Wilford in the New York Times. He said "experts” believed "capture of an asteroid will be possible as soon as it is possible to send manned expeditions to the surface of Mars or Jupiter.” Astronauts would take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor to asteroid’s surface. Rocket would have to "produce long-duration burn but because of asteroid’s low gravity would not have to be very powerful to push the asteroid toward a new orbit.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, E7)
NASA’s lunar and planetary programs were discussed by NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications: "It is important to note that the Mariner IV photographs do not determine whether life exists on Mars. Even before the flight of Mariner IV, it was known that pictures taken at this resolution could not give any direct evidence of life forms. . . . "We propose to continue the exploration of Venus and Mars begun so well with Mariners II and IV, respectively, by utilizing for the 1967 Venus opportunity an appropriate modification of the spare spacecraft from the Mariner IV program. This will be launched on an Atlas-Agena vehicle.” Cortright presented prepared statement by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell summarizing comsat and sounding rocket launches: "The first launching by NASA of a satellite for the Corporation [ComSatCorp] took place on April 6, 1965, when the Early Bird satellite was placed in orbit using a thrust-augmented Delta launch vehicle. The launching was carried out under an agreement between Comsat and NASA, signed in December 1964, which detailed the services to be performed by NASA, financial arrangements, etc. . . . "Although the original agreement gave Comsat options for as many as seven additional launchings through March 1967, none of these options has been exercised. In the meantime, Comsat has inaugurated tbe HS-303A program, and has advised NASA that it will require two or three HS-303A launchings in 1966, beginning in August. The HS-303A is larger and heavier than Early Bird, and will need the capabilities of the thrust-augmented improved Delta launch vehicle. Otherwise, launch services are expected to be similar to those provided in support of the Early Bird. "The Corporation is now negotiating for development and procurement of spacecraft for the eventual global system. These spacecraft are expected to be deployed beginning in 1968.” Referring to the NASA sounding rocket program, Dr. Newell said: "Since 1959 to the present NASA has launched 668 sounding rockets for scientific investigations in space and 516 of these were for investigations in the areas of physics and astronomy.” He mentioned as significant the International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) Mobile Launch Expedition carried out in spring 1965 using an aircraft carrier as a launching platform: rockets carrying instrumented payloads were launched off west coast of South America from 5° north latitude to 60° south latitude with the greatest concentration of flights at the geomagnetic equator near Lima, Peru. 45 Nike-Cajun/Nike-Apache rockets and 32 single-stage Areas rockets were flown carrying experiments furnished by NASA, usn, usaf, universities, and industry. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 233-4, 359, 375-6)
Graduate Research Center of the Southwest president Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner addressed msc employees. Outlining postlunar landing exploration, Dr. Berkner said: "The very broad strategic objectives for the exploration of the solar system are clearly outlined in the National Academy of Sciences Summer Study that was done last summer. . . . It is urgent and imperative that this study be adopted, or something like it, as our major basic strategy beyond the moon. The first job is to adopt a national strategy. This is not just a decision of NASA; it is a decision of the administration, of the Congress, of the American people. "And second it is urgent and imperative that this study be translated by joint actions of NASA, the National Academy of Sciences and American scientists into specific tactical plans for a specific program with dollars attached to it. For example, in my opinion, it makes little sense to undertake the first Martian landing without some precedent exploratory steps. We must first orbit and map the planet and ascertain where a landing would be profitable. "To do the planetary exploration job effectively, we now need a tactical program of specific flights on specific dates with the instru-. mentation necessary to plan to accomplish those tasks. I remind you that what we are doing today was planned in 1961. And yet, when we get to our planetary program in the 1970’s, we don’t have corresponding specific plans.” He reemphasized the urgency by saying: "If we are to achieve in the planetary exploration of the future in an intelligent way, in light of the objectives of the Space Act, the time has come to get our scientists started now. Your vehicle program is already ahead of us.” Dr. Berkner said that the long-range program should meet certain specifications: "(1) step-by-step advancement of experiments in the proper order; (2) use of the right vehicles to carry out the experiments; (3) effective use of Saturn capabilities, from unmanned missions to the ultimate manned landing on Mars and perhaps Venus, and (4) proper phasing-in of smaller vehicles with the larger ones, and reasonable time/cost programming.” (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 3)
Edmond C. Buckley, nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, reviewed nasa’s tracking and data acquisition network program: "During fiscal year 1965, the network, under the management of Goddard Space Flight Center, successfully supported four Gemini missions, two of which were manned. So far in fiscal year 1966, three manned Gemini missions have been supported, including the highly successful Gemini VII/VI rendezvous in December.. . . "During 1965, an average of 32 satellites was supported at any given time. This included satellites launched in prior years which were still transmitting useful data plus new satellites which were launched during the year. In 1966, the average number of satellites to be supported is expected to increase to more than 35 including flight of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, the Biosatellite, and Applications Technology Satellite. "In 1967, the average number of satellites to be supported is estimated to exceed 40 with the spacecraft, collectively, contacting the network stations more than 650 times daily. Contributing to the extensive workload in 1967 will be the additional flights of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, Biosatellite, Applications Technology Satellite, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. . . . "During fiscal year 1965, the [Deep Space] network successfully supported the Ranger VII, VIII, and IX missions and the cruise phase of the Mariner IV mission. The precise operation of the facilities at Goldstone and the control center at Pasadena in support of the Ranger missions was essential to the accuracy achieved in impacting on the surface of the moon, and to the activation of the cameras and transmission of live television pictures of the moon’s surface. In fiscal year 1965, 85-foot antenna facilities at both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, became operational and participated in Mariner IV support.. . . "The excellent support provided the Mariner IV mission permitted the spacecraft, after a flight of 325 million miles and an elapsed time of 228 days, to pass Mars with a deviation of only 1,000 miles from the projected fly-by distance of 5,000 miles and to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The Deep Space Network continued to support the Mariner IV spacecraft after encounter and established a new twoway communications record of 191 million miles between network stations and the spacecraft. .. . On January 4, 1966, the Goldstone facility received a signal from the Mariner IV spacecraft over a distance of 216 million miles.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 608, 727-9)
NASA’s mahiner iv had completed two years in space, flown 1,025,082,830 mi., and continued to operate properly, reporting its condition to earth three times a week. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, spacecraft had completed primary mission Aug. 2, 1965, after transmitting to earth 22 pictures of Martian surface. Photos were made when it flew within 6,118 mi. of planet July 14, 1965. (nasa Release 66-304; jpl Release)
Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn, named William Hines of the Washington Evening Star recipient of the Robert S. Ball Memorial Award for excellent writing. Cited for his continuing coverage of NASA’s mariner iv Mars probe, Hines would receive a trophy and $300 at the Association’s annual meeting in New York May 24-26. (AP, NYT, 5/5/66, 6; AP, Wash. Post, 5/5/66, B2)
NASA Lewis Research Center, first Government laboratory devoted to flight propulsion in all its aspects, celebrated its 25th anniversary. Authorized by Congress in 1940, the naca facility was originally called the Aircraft Engine Research Lab.; it was renamed the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1948 in honor of Dr. George W. Lewis, former naca Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). In 1958, when naca facilities and personnel were absorbed by the newly created NASA, the facility became the Lewis Research Center. From an initial Congressional appropriation of $2 million in 1941, LRC had emerged as a major research and development laboratory valued at $200 million. Marking the anniversary, LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein said: "Man isn’t going to be held to a single conquest or success. The past decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, but we’ve just started to realize its potential. The present generation will live to fly better than 2,000 mph in commercial aircraft and to observe at close range the interplanetary exploits of U.S. astronauts. The past 25 years have witnessed truly remarkable strides in aeronautics and space activities. In 1941, man had the capability to fly 300 mph and to attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 ft. Today, he orbits the earth at 17,500 mph and in a few years will set foot on the moon and possibly later Mars.” (lrc Release 66-1; Lewis News, 1/23/66, 1-12; upi, Miami Herald, 1/24/66)
Optimistic assessment of prospects for exploring Mars during the next decade and finding some form of life there was presented by scientists at the AAS-sponsored symposium on "The Search for Extraterrestrial Life” in Anaheim, Calif. Carlos De Moraes, director of planetary program studies for Martin Co., visualized a series of space flights from 1969 to 1979 and culminating in the landing of two 3,500-lb. "space buses.” First flight, in 1969, would be of an 850-lb. spacecraft that would provide televised mapping of the Mars surface and take measurements of the atmosphere. After a series of intermediary flights, the space buses would land in 1979 and release both automated biological laboratories and roving vehicles that would explore and gather samples at points away from the immediate landing area. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of jpl noted that "any form of life, however primitive, found on Mars would be of immense scientific value.” He said that no matter how bleak the picture, the possibilities of life on Mars should be explored to the fullest because that planet appeared to be the likeliest site for life beyond the earth. GE engineers P. G. Thome and Ernest J. Merz described giant clamshell under development that would be part of a system launched by a Saturn V booster in 1973. The thick disc-shaped object would open like a giant mollusk when landed on Mars, releasing devices that would start gathering information on atmosphere, weather, soil, and life. Information would be telemetered back to earth. Disc could be powered by radioisotope-fueled generator that could keep it in operation for up to six months. (Texts) Speculating about meetings with intelligent beings from or on another planet, Harold D. Lasswell, Yale Univ. professor of law and political science, asked: "Would earthlings unite or wage interstellar war? Would we have to kow-tow to a more advanced civilization, or dominate an inferior one? Suppose they had no more, or even less, feelings of love and responsibility? Might meeting with an advanced society push man further toward creating a culture of frantic fun?” (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
Missiles and Rockets reported prediction of Japanese rocket engineer Dr. Hideo Itokawa that Japan might launch 60-lb. probes to Mars and Venus after orbiting its first satellite in 1968. Itokawa said the Mu series launch vehicle, under development by Univ. of Tokyo Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, would produce enough thrust— 400,000	lbs.—to launch interplanetary probes. (M&R, 1/3/66, 7)
Dr. Norman F. Ness of gsfc Laboratory for Space Sciences described in Science the new view of earth’s magnetic field afforded by satellite mapping. Among developments in space physics, he pointed out studies in planetary magnetism leading to comparison of earth with a "magnetic comet” and results obtained by mariners ii and iv indicating the unique strength of earth’s magnetic field, compared with those of Venus and Mars. He noted the importance of these data and other satellite measurements for paleomagnetic research. (Science, 3/4/66, 1041-52)
Solar electric propulsion of unmanned spacecraft to Mars appeared entirely possible by the mid-1970’s, reported jpl researchers John Stearns and Donald W. Ritchie at AIAA meeting in San Diego. Four 55-ft.-long folding rectangular solar-cell panels would furnish power that could be harnessed to a set of small ion-chamber engines to propel spacecraft with approximate 7,000-lb. payload toward Mars. Trip would take about 300 days and culminate in orbit around Mars. Report also envisioned 850-day mission by solar-electric-propelled spacecraft to and beyond Jupiter in late 1970’s, (jpl Release; NASA Release 66-53)
Six-week NASA-sponsored exploration trip to search for plant life in Chile’s Atacama Desert—area resembling Martian terrain because of its extreme aridity—was begun by Richard W. Davies, jpl Advanced Studies Section, and two other jpl scientists. Explorers, who planned to send back 1,000	lbs. of sandy soil for analysis, would concentrate on high plateau near Calama, 80 mi. inland and 5,000 to 8,000 ft. above sea level. Similar trip last year had yielded a microflora in top four inches of sand. (jpl Release)
nas Space Science Board issued the first in series of three reports entitled Space Research: Directions for the Future. Report, prepared at NASA’s request, outlined research objectives for planetary and lunar exploration in 1970-1985. Compiled by working group led by Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at ucla, Part I repeated nas’ 1964 recommendation that top priority in post-Apollo program be assigned to unmanned exploration of Mars. Report suggested secondary importance be divided equally between detailed investigation of lurain and unmanned exploration of Venus, and completed priority list with other major planets, comets and asteroids, Mercury, Pluto, and interplanetary dust. Major recommendations were: launching an orbiting planetary observatory, delivering a drop sonde to resolve question of high Venusian surface temperature, developing fine-pointing control, accurate to 10 sec. of arc, for rocket guidance, and considering enlargement of NASA deep-space communication capabilities beyond present plans. To support outlined scientific program, report recommended: (1) increasing manpower and facilities available to lunar and planetary science programs; (2) development by NASA of substantial program for observation of planets through ground-based telescopes; (3) early opportunities for experienced observational scientists to explore the lurain; (4) joint study by NASA ossa and omsf of early use of Saturn V for planetary exploration, with special emphasis on a Martian capsule landing in the early 1970’s; (5) increased attention by NASA to development of research and educational capabilities in theoretical sciences related to study of the solar system. Regarding funding of space research, the report said:	. . since we believe that the exploration of the solar system bears so directly on the major central scientific questions of our time, we anticipate that unmanned experiments will probably provide the most significant contribution to the program of planetary exploration ... we recommend that the percentage of support of lunar and planetary exploration be maintained over the 1965-1985 time period and be devoted predominantly to scientific objectives and that programs whose objectives are other than scientific be started only as additional resources become available.” It said there should be a gradual shift in emphasis from the moon to the planets, progressing toward nearly equivalent expenditures for lunar and planetary exploration in the 19701985 period. (Text; nas-nrc Release)
Computer technique developed by JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan and applied to 12 photos of the lunar surface transmitted by NASA’s surveyor i spacecraft revealed details as small as 1/50 of an inch and, in some cases, apparently doubled observable characteristics. Enhancement process had been used successfully to intensify photos transmitted by NASA’s three Ranger spacecraft and mariner iv Mars probe. (nasa Release 66-206; jpl Release)
Threat of contamination of Mars made search for that planet’s indigenous life, at any stage of evolution from prebiotic to extinct, an urgent undertaking, according to Biology Working Group’s section on exobiology in third and final report of nas Space Science Board Summer Study (June-July 1965) at Woods Hole, Mass. Report, Space Research: Directions for the Future, Part Three, said: ". . . the exploration of Mars, with initial emphasis on the detection and characterization of possible Martian life, should constitute the major scientific goal of the United States space program in the period following the manned lunar landing.” High priority in field of environmental biology was given to study effects of weightlessness, with particular attention to "synergistic or antagonistic effects from simultaneously imposed stresses of radiation and weightlessness.” Orbiting research facilities with six- to eight-man crews to study effects of prolonged space flight preceding extended manned missions were recommended by Medicine and Physiology Working Group. Report urged series of manned flights, ground-based studies, and biosatellite experiments to yield data for planetary exploration. Group examining NASA-university relations urged increases in training budget and facilities and research grants, plus a program providing graduate students'with flight opportunities. (Text)
Team of jpl scientists left Cal Tech on first NASA-sponsored investigation of Antarctica. Scientists would spend 2lA mos. in Wright, Victoria, Taylor, and Beacon Valleys taking samples and conducting tests that might prove valuable in future unmanned exploration of Mars. (jpl Release, 11/13/66)
New studies of Martian atmosphere had rekindled hope of finding life on Mars, Dr. Lewis D. Kaplan of Jpl reported at Western meeting of American Chemical Society in San Francisco. French scientists Drs. Pierre and Janine Connes of the Observatory of Haut-Provence, using improved spectroscopic equipment designed by Dr. Connes, had found concentration of hydrogen compounds around Mars 1,000 times greater than in earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Kaplan, who analyzed observations obtained, said the hydrogen compounds—considered necessary to life— probably included methane derivatives and perhaps methane itself. Methane appears on earth as gaseous hydrocarbon product of decomposed organic matter and is known to he produced by anaerobic bacteria not requiring the oxygen essential to most life on earth. Dr. Kaplan’s work was sponsored by NASA and by France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) and the Meudon Observatory. (AP, NYT, 10/18/66, 9)
LaRC would test parachutes for possible landing of instrumented unmanned capsules on Mars beginning in summer 1966, in support of NASA’s Voyager planetary exploration project. Parachutes would be carried by balloons and sounding rockets to 130,000-ft. altitude—where thin earth atmosphere simulates Martian atmosphere—and would then be deployed behind test units accelerated to mach 1.2 in level flight [see Aug. 30]. (nasa Release 66-90; LaRC Release)
nasa’s decision to launch Mariner E—mariner iv’s backup probe—to Venus rather than Mars was criticized by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: "As a Venus probe, just about everything conceivable is wrong with Mariner-E. Its solar panels are too big, but without them its center of gravity would be all wrong; its earth-seeking radio antenna— essential for long-distance communication—is oriented the wrong way; it is protected against cold rather than heat; its instruments are designed to explore a small planet with a thin atmosphere rather than an earth-sized object with a dense one. "Another Mariner flight to Mars promises far greater return . . . than a jury-rigged mission to Venus.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/6/66)
nasa selected Northrop Corp. for final negotiations on $5-million contract for design, development, fabrication, and testing of "engineering mechanics subsystems for Mariner Mars ’69 spacecraft.” Contract would be managed by JPL. (nasa Release 66-170)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
