Growing confidence that U.S. would accomplish a manned lunar landing by 1970 had plunged space planners into an urgent debate over post-Apollo plans, John Wilford wrote in the New York Times. Should the U.S. concentrate on unmanned and manned exploration of Mars or Venus? An expanded lunar-oriented program? Giant manned laboratories in earth orbit for research and surveillance? Networks of communications and meteorological satellites? Or a series of instrument probes to comets, asteroids, and outer planets? Such questions had opened a searching reexamination into the value of space exploration, and some critics were urging a less ambitious and costly program, with more emphasis “on the problems that confront us here on earth.” While the debate continued, nasa was said to favor concentrating on manned orbiting laboratories that would exploit present technology. Although a broad range of space goals was considered attainable in the next two decades, NASA officials said failure to define post-Apollo objectives soon could cause U.S. to find itself unprepared to achieve any major space goal before the mid-1970s. (Wilford, NYT, 1/22/67, 1)
NASA reported its space engineers at jpl’s Space Flight Operations Facility, using Goldstone dsn station, had sent commands to check Mariner IV’s camera and data storage system; spacecraft, launched Nov. 28, 1964, had now traveled about 1.5 billion miles and was circling sun between earth and Mars. Mariner IV had been commanded to take TV pictures of black space and record on magnetic tape after long space environment exposure. The spacecraft had responded perfectly. Commands also were sent to switch Mariner V’s transmitter from high gain directional to low gain omnidirectional antenna, mission of spacecraft being terminated; Mariner V, launched June 14, had completed its Venus mission and was in solar orbit between orbits of Venus and Mercury, about 74 million miles from earth and about 60 million miles from sun. NASA reported that it might be possible to recontact Mariner V in Sept. 1968, when spacecraft’s antennas would be pointed once again toward earth. Both Mariners would remain in solar orbit indefinitely; however, 'because Mariner IV’s stabilizing nitrogen gas supply was expected to run out in the next few weeks, spacecraft would drift and solar panels would no longer face the sun. Data reception would end because storage batteries would no longer receive charge, (nasa Release 67-291)
Sixty-day Sealab III experiment would be conducted 430 ft below the Pacific off San Clemente Island in winter 1967 as part of usn’s “Man-in-the-Sea” program. Underwater laboratory would be staffed by five eight-man diving teams rotating on 12-day shifts. Aquanauts would conduct experimental salvage techniques and oceanographic and marine biology research; and undergo series of physiological and human performance tests. Sealab Ill’s long-range goal was to develop capability for rescue and salvage operations under ocean’s surface and to determine how submerged continental shelf could be used militarily. In Sealab I experiment, conducted July 20-30, 1964, four divers were submerged 192 ft beneath the Atlantic; in Sealab II, Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, three teams of 10 divers alternated in spending two-week periods 205 ft beneath the Pacific off La Jolla, Calif, (dod Release 72-67) performing photosynthesis. Sullivan concluded: “Despite the perceptible swing of the pendulum toward the possibility of life on Mars, a wide disparity of views on the nature of the Martian environment was presented at the meeting. It was evident that the information is still insufficient to assess the likelihood of life on Mars or even to design experiments for landings there that would most effectively test for the existence of life. . . .” (Sullivan, NYT, 2/12/67, 12E)
Communications with NASA’s Mariner IV Mars probe, launched Nov. 28, 1964, were terminated because of greatly reduced telemetry availability. Spacecraft had responded to series of commands Oct. 25-27 and had continued operating satisfactorily until it exhausted its gas supply in the attitude control system Dec. 7 and began to pitch, roll, and yaw. On Dec. 10 and 11 Mariner IV recorded 83 micrometeoroid hits which apparently induced severe perturbations in pitch and yaw causing degraded signal strength. During its 3.06-yr lifetime, Mariner IV had traveled more than 1.5 billion mi in heliocentric orbit, taken world’s first closeup photos of Mars from 5,500-mi altitude, and returned excellent data, (nasa Proj Off; AP, B Sun, 12/23/67; W Post, 12/23/67, A5)	_
Second anniversary of Mars flyby by NASA’s Mariner IV, during which spacecraft flew within 6,118 mi of Mars, took 22 close-up photos of the planet, and transmitted scientific data on Martian atmosphere. Launched from etr Nov. 28, 1964, Mariner IV had traveled 1.3 billion mi during its 959 days of flight and had operated continuously for more than 23,000 hrs—exceeding its 6,000-hr design lifetime by more than 400%. nasa announced that satellite, which was expected to continue operating satisfactorily until early 1968, had been assigned a new mission. It would be used in an experiment to conduct simultaneous comparison of solar radiation during August 1967 “solar system line-up” involving Mariner IV, Mariner V (launched June 14), the earth, and the sun. (nasa Release 67—182)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
Francis J. Sullivan and Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Sullivan, Director of Electronics and Control Div., said that the development of technology for high-resolution, 60- to 120-in space telescopes for optical astronomy, communications, and other potential applications was a major OART effort. “Success in this research will provide the capability to study celestial objects which cannot be viewed from the ground because of atmospheric attenuation and will provide vastly improved resolution over that attainable through the earth’s atmosphere.” Sullivan said because environmental, structural, and control problems of large mirrors in space were almost insurmountable with conventional fabrication and alignment, unique approaches were being studied. One was 24-in-dia, three-segment mirror feasibility model in which distortion sensor, located in front of primary mirror, determined which segments were out of alignment and to what degree. Electronic circuitry then processed and used the alignment data to realign mirror surface segments with actuators located behind each segment. Dr. Kurzweg, Director of Research, said the jpl had developed a new mathematical approach for calculating energy requirements for Mars vehicles which provided, for the first time, a complete day-hy-day listing of the energies necessary for a round trip. Calculations had been completed for launching during the entire 1970-80 decade. “The calculated trajectories went from a circular parking orbit about the Earth to the vicinity of Mars, into a circular parking orbit about Mars for a stay time of 7 days, out of the circular parking orbit about Mars to the vicinity of the Earth, and into a circular parking orbit about the Earth. It was assumed that the one-way flight times for both the departure and return trajectories are the same.” Dr. Kurzweg said information was very important for “fast trade-off calculations for future advanced Mars missions. . . .” (Testimony)
A college which would train 2,000 pilots and technicians annually for the expanding aviation industry was proposed in report by a study group sponsored by the Economic Development Administration. Report recommended that various segments of the aviation industry join to form a nonprofit organization to operate flight training portion of the college. Academic side would be handled by Arizona State Univ. Report estimated college would cost $13-million and could be opened by 1969. (upi, NYT, 8/23/67, 73) Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported that there were about three times as many craters on Mars as preliminary photos transmitted in 1965 by Mariner IV spacecraft indicated. Citing data from two-year study of photos using new computer-enhancement technique, Dr. Leighton said pictures showed 300 clearly defined craters and more than 300 additional possible craters. Original estimate from unprocessed pictures was less than 100. Mars appeared to be about as densely pitted as the moon but its craters were smoother because of more effective erosion processes. Several photos showed a number of linear features similar to lines formed by rifts and faults on the moon. These features were not the “much-discussed” canals of Mars because they were too narrow to be visible from earth. Dr. Leighton said, but they might be related to some of the markings identified earlier as canals, (nasa Release 67—225) Dr. and Mrs. Pierre Connes of Haute Provence Observatory and Meudon Observatory, France, respectively, reported evidence that might indicate Venusian clouds are not formed by water. Observation technique which greatly increased precision with which planets’ spectra could be analyzed showed spectral lines of hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride in the light reflected from Venus. When hydrogen fluoride combines with water it creates hydrochloric acid which absorbs radar waves; yet radar waves are known to penetrate Venutian clouds, returning echoes to the surface of the earth. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/24/67) The “mysterium phenomenon”—peculiar radio emissions from the Milky Way which display almost all the characteristics of artificial interstellar communication—was the subject of a report by Dr. T. K. Menon, National Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., and a later panel discussion. Dr. Menon said most recent observations of the emissions in the nearby part of the galaxy had been made simultaneously from California, Massachusetts, and U.K., using almost the entire width of earth as a baseline for measurement. They had identified sources of emissions which were smaller than the smallest star as seen by the human eye and discovered some of these emissions were fluctuating on time scales measured in hours or even less. Panel raised the possibility that emissions might be from stars in the process of formation. They were being transmitted at four closely spaced wavelengths associated with hydroxyl, a molecule formed of a single oxygen and hydrogen atom, and were being given off when such molecules shed energy. Emissions also appeared to have various properties associated with a maser—man-made device in which a radio or light wave is beamed through certain atoms whose energy has been raised, enormously amplifying original wave and, if wave is confined to a single axis, producing a beam of extreme intensity. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/26/67, 1, 10; 8/28/67, 22) Lunar Committee postponed naming of surface features on moon’s far side pending the results of Lunar Orbiter V mission. A list of 228 names for approximately 500 major features had been submitted by Soviet scientists, but U.S. delegates cited errors in their designations and asked that features be assigned numbers until a more definitive map could be prepared using Lunar Orbiter V photos. Commission agreed to interim number designations and accepted U.S. map temporarily, assigning study group to report on specific names at next assembly. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/25/67, 13; nas-nrc-nae News Report, 10/67, 6-7) IAU president Dr. Pol Swings of Belgium confirmed an observation made by two obscure Irish astronomers in 1882. Astronomers Lohse and Copeland had observed a comet during the day, apparently with a handheld spectroscope, and reported that it glowed strongly with spectral lines of iron as it passed the sun. All earlier observations of light emitted from comets as they neared the sun indicated they were composed of very light materials, and the idea that they were rich in iron was viewed skeptically. However, photos and electric recordings taken of the comet Ikeya-Seki as it passed the sun in 1966 showed unmistakable spectral lines of iron, Dr. Swings said. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/27/67, 51) Dr. Gordon H. Pettengill, mit’s Lincoln Laboratory, said that results from an experiment which studied Martian terrain by bouncing radar signals off the planet indicated: (1) Mars was roughly as mountainous as earth; (2) there were no large bodies of water on Mars; and (3) there was no clear correlation between height of land and presence of dark areas on Mars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15) Dr. Bradford A. Smith, New Mexico State Univ., confirmed report by French astronomer Pierre Guerin that atmosphere of Venus was moving around the planet in a clockwise direction at a remarkable rate of speed. Conclusion was based on photos of Venusian atmosphere taken successively both at night and during the day, which recorded changes in wavelengths of ultraviolet light. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15)
238,154 airmen certificates—a new annual record and a 32% increase over 1965 total—were issued by faa in 1966. (faa Release 67-18) nuclear rocket—it could be used for continued exploration of the moon after first Apollo landings. “Using a non-nuclear Saturn 5, astronauts are restricted to landing areas in a narrow strip along the moon’s equator. A nuclear upper stage would permit a manned spacecraft to land anywhere on the surface of the moon.” Other possible uses included manned flyby missions to Mars and Venus; unmanned flights of large payloads to Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury, or within a few million miles of sun; and manned orbital flights to Mars and Venus. (Hines, W Star, 3/6/67,1; 3/7/67)
Laser applications in industry and space were rapidly increasing, William Smith noted in the New York Times. A solar-powered laser was being developed for communication across the 50 million mi between earth and Mars, and Dr. Henry Lewis, director of rca’s David Sarnoff Research Center, predicted the laser would also play a very important role in tracking space vehicles. Said Dr. Lewis: “The laser fits the bill with greater accuracy than radar is capable of obtaining.” (Smith, NYT, 1/15/67, FI)	.	.	„
Jonathan Spivak in Wall Street Journal commented on congressional cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Plans to launch unmanned satellites to Mars or Venus in 1971 and 1973 and conduct extended exploration of the moon by astronauts face probable abandonment because of a lack of funds. There will also be sharp curtailment of proposals for long-duration manned flights in orbit about the earth to enhance the nation’s space technology and exploit practical and scientific applications of space. Thus, say space officials, the present outlook is that only a limited national space program will continue in the 1970s after the lunar landing.” (Spivak, WSJ, 10/11/67, 24)
Soviet failure to launch probe toward Mars during January Mars “window” supported reports that U.S.S.R. space program had “run into budget troubles,” Newsweek reported. (Newsweek, 2/13/67)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
The Washington Post commented on NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Exploration of the moon. Giant orbiting space stations, with as many as a dozen men living and working in them for as long as a year. Unmanned landings on Mars. “These are the goals the United States has set for itself in outer space in the 1970s. With a budget request for fiscal 1968 of $5.05 billion, more than $500 million of it for dramatic new programs to carry us beyond a manned landing on the moon, President Johnson has made it clear that the United States is in space to stay, no matter what the Soviet Union does or does not do. ...” (W Post, 1/25/67, A18)
Conclusion in Mar. 24 Science article by Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech and his associates about probable contamination of Mars and Venus by U.S.S.R.’s Zond 11 and Venus III received comment from Dr. Richard W. Porter, member of International Relations Committee of NRc’s Space Science Board, and from Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell. Murray and associates had presented information: tracking data from Jodrell Bank Experimental Station had indicated that Zond II, launched Nov. 30, 1964, had been on collision course with Mars, terminating Aug. 6, 1965; Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had said Zond II would pass within 1,448 km (900 mi) of Mars; Venus III, launched Nov. 12, 1965, may have crashlanded on Venus’ surface Mar. 1, 1966; radio communications had been maintained with Venus III throughout the flight hut were lost as the probe approached Venus; no telemetric data were received in final moments before impact. In a letter to editor of Science, Porter wrote: “Their conclusion with respect to Venus is based largely on what was not said by the Soviets about sterilization of the flyby bus and on the authors’ assumption that the capsule separation and bus deflection maneuvers were not made automatically, even after loss of radio contact.” Porter said authors’ conclusion about Mars was also based on insufficient evidence and noted that in discussions with “highly placed” Soviet scientists during spring 1965, he had received impression that Zond II’s miss distance was likely to be much greater than 900 mi. In his letter to editor of Science regarding Murray and associates’ statements on probable contamination of Mars and Venus, Sir Bernard Lovell noted that Zond II’s signals were so strong that there should have been no difficulty in tracking the probe at Mars encounter; also, miss distance of 1,500 km (932 mi) was within the accuracy of Jodrell Bank calculations. Sir Bernard Lovell would “prefer to accept the statement of the President of the [Soviet] Academy [of Sciences (Keldysh) ] about the miss distance. . . .” (Science, 3/24/67, 1505-11; 8/4/67, 487-8)
Cosmos, Minn.—a community of 560—had given all its streets astronomical names such as Mars, Jupiter, Pegasus, and Comet. (AP, NYT, 5/22/67)
A 2,000-mph usaf SR—71 reconnaissance aircraft on routine training flight from Beale afb, Calif., crashed near Lovelock, Nev. Its two crew members ejected safely. Aircraft, built for usaf by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. as successor to the TJ—2, was third SR-71 to crash on routine flight; others had crashed Jan. 25, 1966, and April 13, 1967. (AP, NYT, 10/27/67, 41)	_ JPL scientists were “delighted” with the firing of midcourse guidance engine, and with transmission of pictures of Mars taken by Mariner IV more than two years ago. Scientists reported “a flawless burn . . . [which] proved we can restart engines in space years after we’ve put them there.” Future spacecraft, exploiting this success, could be launched to distant planets where they could take close-up photographs, swing back toward earth, and, on command, transmit pictures. Mariner IV had taken pictures of Mars from an altitude of 5,500 mi; 21 frames had been exposed and recorded on magnetic tape to be telemetered to earth over a 10-day period. As of 8:00 pm edt Oct. 27, Mariner IV was in its 1,062nd day of flight, 35,604,255 mi (57,299,604 km) from earth, and traveling at 3.91 mps (6.29 kps) relative to earth. (NASA Proj Off; O’Toole, W Post, 10/27/67, A3)
St. Louis Univ. scientists Drs. F. C. Bates and Albert Pallman were studying structure and circulation of the lower Martian atmosphere to aid nasa in deciding whether to use a hard- or soft-landing spacecraft on first Mars mission, (upi, NYT, 8/17/67,24)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell wrote to the Editor of Aerospace Technology: “In 1973, NASA proposes to conduct the first of the Voyager series of missions to Mars, using the Saturn launch vehicle. We wish to call the attention of the scientific community to the opportunity of proposing experiments for this initial flight_ “. . . Regardless of the level of funding support obtained for Voyager this fiscal year, it is our plan to begin evaluating scientific proposals on Nov. 1, 1967, and to select scientists for participation in the planning and development steps by Feb. 1968....” (Aero Tech, 8/28/67, 8)
Glennan Space Engineering Building in Cleveland at Case Institute of Technology was dedicated, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We need more men like nasa’s first administrator . . . Dr. Keith Glennan . .. men who are willing ... to seek out new facts, new concepts of reality as to the current human situation and [who] have the courage to base new and untried political, professional, industrial and technological ventures on information they test and learn to trust.” Recognizing the value of institutions who provide graduate education, he said: “There is little further room to doubt that a high level of basic research, an intellectual activity that must be closely associated with graduate education, is indispensable to an advancing front of scientific knowledge. . . .” Webb referred to a June 1957 speech of J. S. McDonnell of St. Louis who had made predictions to graduating students at Rolla’s Missouri School of Mines. Prediction No. 1 had a satellite circling earth and moon in 12 years. Webb said accomplishment was completed in three months for earth and in two years for moon. Prediction No. 2 had a satellite circling earth and Mars in 23 years. Webb said this was accomplished in seven years. Prediction No. 3 had manned space flight in earth orbit in 33 years. Webb pointed out this was done in four years. Webb continued: “If we look backward, we can easily see that it took 37 years to conquer the earth’s oceans ... by the Caravelle sailing vessel [and] after that 37 years, the mind of man was never the same again. Control of the earth’s ocean avenues by England through the maintenance of a favorable balance of ocean technology was a predominant force for stability in the affairs of men for over 400 years [but] no clear favorable balance of air technology was held by any one nation long enough to create world stability. It was, in fact, a predominant force in the affairs of men for less than 60 years. Space technology will be a dominant force far longer than was the case for those of ocean and air. Not limited as was the ship to the water or the airplane to the air, or by international boundaries, or to the fuel that its tanks can carry, spacecraft are today unlimited tools to explore and measure the environment within which the earth itself moves and has its being.” (Text)
NASA had awarded Electro Optical Systems, Inc., a $2-million contract for design, fabrication, and testing of the power subsystem for the 1969 Mariner Mars mission, (nasa Release 67—17)
Mass meeting in U.S.S.R.’s Palace of Congresses inside the Kremlin Wall heard l/c Aleksei A. Leonov recall heritage of fellow pioneers; he had been an associate of Col. Komarov who had been killed on Apr. 24 in the first flight of third-generation Soyuz I spacecraft. Cosmonaut Leonov said: “We cannot help recall our friend, test pilot Vladimir Mikhailovic Komarov. Grateful mankind will always preserve the memory of these wonderful people in its heart.” The mass meeting was the highlight of Soviet celebration of the 10th anniversary of Sputnik 7’s launching [see Oct. 4]. In the Soviet press on the same day, scientist Konstantin P. Feoktisov, veteran of three-orbit flight in 1964, listed a manned laboratory in orbit as first among coming space developments, then a moon landing, then a “starting to Venus and Mars.” (upi, AP, NYT, 10/5/67, C20)
Vexing problem of the direction and period of Venus’ rotation had acquired a new dimension in recent ultraviolet photographs, according to an article in Science by Bradford A. Smith of the New Mexico State Univ. Observatory. Smith recounted the history of 60 yrs of visual and spectroscopic observation of Venus that produced inconclusive evidence. Radar observation begun in 1961 by 1967 had produced what was considered firm evidence that the solid globe of Venus in 244 days rotated once in a direction retrograde to that of its planetary neighbors earth and Mars. Recent ultraviolet photos taken at the New Mexico State Univ. Observatory with a new 61-cm reflector indicated that ultraviolet clouds of the Venusian atmosphere rotated retrograde in five days. This large discrepancy between movement of the globe and atmosphere of Venus could be explained only by the existence in the Venusian atmosphere of a persistent and widespread planetary wind system blowing at more than 180 mph, Smith said. Although earth’s jet stream reached such speeds, it was narrow and zonal, in contrast to the massive system that would have to exist on Venus if these observations were correct. {Science, 10/6/67, 114r-6)
jpl scientists Robert J. Parks and Jack N. James were awarded Franklin Institute’s Stuart Ballantine Medal for 1967 by Institute President Wynn L.	LePage. Parks and James were cited for excellence in systems engineering and extraordinary skill in applying techniques of electromagnetic communications to first successful reconnaissance on Mars by Mariner IV. The Ballantine Medal was awarded for outstanding achievement in the fields of communication and reconnaissance which employed electromagnetic radiation, (jpl Lab-Oratory, 11/67, 3)
Mariner IV, launched Nov. 28, 1964, survived apparent micrometeoroid shower. Spacecraft’s cosmic dust detector registered 17 hits within 15 min, while Mariner IV traveled between orbits of earth and Mars. Spacecraft was 29.6 million miles from earth and had traveled about 1.4 billion miles in its 1,020 days of flight. Micrometeoroid shower had caused temporary change in spacecraft’s attitude but no loss of power. Scientists concluded, from one-degree temperature drop inside spacecraft, that only the thermal shield was damaged. Within about a week, spacecraft was operating without any apparent effect from incident. Since photographing Mars in July 1965, Mariner IV had been used for engineering experiments and acquisition of scientific data. (O’Toole, W Post, 9/16/67, A7; NASA Proj Off)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), releasing testimony earlier submitted to Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee, urged that $427 million be cut from NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). “We have to establish our priorities, and when it comes to parceling out money the space program stands far below defense, education and many other vital programs.” Specifically, Proxmire recommended: (1) temporarily delaying initiation of programs that would commit U.S. to a manned Mars mission and other deep-space probes; (2) cutting aa funds; and (3) cutting advanced missions funds. (Text)
William C. Schneider, formerly Mission Director for NASA’s Apollo Applications (aa) program, was named Apollo Mission Director and Apollo Program Deputy Director for Missions, omsf. Schneider would be responsible for management, direction, and coordination of mission and flight plans, schedules, and associated activities, (nasa Release 67-206) During July: Editorial comment on proposed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills [see June 28]: Science: “The political atmosphere surrounding the U.S. space program is today murkier and less hospitable than at any time since 1961 when President Kennedy'decided to send men to the moon. This does not necessarily mean that nasa is in any danger of falling off its $5-billion-a-year budgetary plateau . . . [but] it is clear that, where Congress is concerned, the agency has lost much of its innocence and therefore its plans are to be reviewed with caution and skepticism. “Some members of Congress are remarkably frank in indicating that their principal interest in the space program lies in the economic benefits it brings their districts. . . . Indeed, one might be justified in predicting that the major budgetary struggles of the future will be less concerned with how much money nasa gets than with how NASA spends the money it does get.” (Carter, Science, 7/14/67, 170-3) Washington Evening Star: “If continuity and momentum are to be maintained in the space program . . . the [congressional] conferees must act with special wisdom this year. “Two . . . items in the House bill should be embodied in one final version. . . . One would establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and the other would require . . . [nasa] to keep Congress ‘fully and currently informed’ of problem areas in the space effort. “Both proposals were strongly opposed by administration spokesmen on grounds that seem shallow and legalistic. It would be well to embody both in the final 1968 authorization bill, if only to put NASA on firm notice that it is time to shape up.” (W Star, 7/7/67, A16) New York Times: “To read the record of the Congressional debate on NASA’s budget is a melancholy experience. . . . Behind the rhetoric it was easy to see the pressure of the many corporations and communities now sharing in nasa’s largeness and fearful of the impact of any maj or cut in this flow of golden manna. . . . “A rational 1968 space budget would have been substantially lower than either the House or Senate version, and would have cut particularly severely at the Apollo project. ... It would have changed the present emphasis ... to lay greater stress on the exploration of the cosmos with relatively cheap, unmanned rockets. Instead, the enormously expensive manned lunar landing effort is left virtually intact, while the highly promising program for sending unmanned Voyagers to Mars and other planets could be entirely eliminated. “The lobbyists can rejoice, but the nation’s real interests have been dealt a severe setback.” (NYT, 7/3/67,10)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, defended the Mariner/Mars 1971 mission in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Responding to criticism by Committee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) that information from the mission would arrive too late to contribute to the design of the 1973 Voyager spacecraft, Dr. Newell said: “. . . it is very important to recognize . . . that there are three areas of design involved. One is the hardware design. Two is software design, and three is design of the scientific mission. . . . The Mars 71 probe will be fully in time for us to use in the software design, in other words, setting the profile of the mission to get the spacecraft into the atmosphere and onto the surface, and will be fully involved in continuing design of the scientific experiments and observations. . . .” (Transcript, 433-5)
JPL announced development of double vacuum chamber, designed by jpl’s James B. Stephens, to simulate extreme effects of interplanetary space on spacecraft. Called Molsink (molecular sink of outer space), chamber was expected to determine what happened to paint, components, and even microorganisms on spacecraft. The eight-foot-dia chamber would be capable of capturing 99.97% of all condensable molecules emanating from test item by freezing the molecules to the walls at — 400° F with super-cold helium gas. Conventional vacuum chambers had not been able to pump, or capture, more than half of gas molecules flying off test item. Space scientists believed Molsink chamber would provide reliable tool to measure and counteract problem of spacecraft out-gassing. In testing, long periods would simulate actual flight time of spacecraft to planets—four months to Venus, seven months to Mars, for example. The chamber was expected to be fully operational early in 1968, when testing would be stepped up for nasa’s Mariner Mars 1969 exploration program. ( jpl Release 459) Local sunset for second lunar day occurred on Oct. 23. Spacecraft operating time from turn-on command until second sunset was 232 hrs. Total of 1,043 TV pictures were obtained. By sunset Surveyor V had been configured for hibernating through second lunar night. Estimates were that engineering interrogations and compartment heating would be discontinued Oct. 31. (NASA Proj Off; upi, W Post, 10/16/67, A3; AP, NYT, 10/17/67, 9)
NASA’s Mariner V being weigbt-tested at Cape Kennedy before its successful launch on a four-month mission to perform a close flyby of the planet Venus. Mariner V, fifth in a series of interplanetary probes, had originally been built as a Mars probe to back up Mariner IV but was remodeled to accomplish Venus ’67 mission. Primary mission for the 540-lb spacecraft was to fly by Venus to obtain scientific data which would complement and extend data obtained by Mariner II pertaining to the origin and nature of Venus and its environment. Spacecraft’s secondary mission was to obtain data on interplanetary environment during a period of increased solar activity and provide engineering experience in converting and operating spacecraft designed for flight to Mars into one flown to Venus. Mariner V carried automatic sensing devices to record data for derivation of radiation levels, temperatures, pressures, magnetic fields, and atmospheric density near Venus. First Venus probe, Mariner I, was destroyed during launch July 22, 1962; second, Mariner II, was successfully launched Aug. 27, 1962, and flew within 21,600 mi of Venus Dee. 14, 1962. Mariner III, a Mars probe launched Nov. 4, 1964, failed to achieve desired orbit when shroud remained attached to spacecraft. Mariner IV was successfully launched Nov. 28, 1964, and transmitted first close-up photos of Mars in July 1965. Mariner program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management and responsibility for spacecraft, mission operations, and tracking and data acquisition were assigned to JPL; and Atlas-Agena launch vehicle was managed by Lewis Research Center, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-124)
JPL issued RFp’s to industry on contracts for preliminary design and definition studies of an unmanned Voyager landing capsule. Two identical Voyager spacecraft would be launched by a single Saturn V booster in 1973 and 1975 to conduct scientific studies of Mars and search for extraterrestrial life. From the industrial proposals, due in March, two to four contractors would be chosen. (NASA Release 67-15) * U.S.S.R. was definitely trying to achieve the first manned lunar landing, concluded a 920-page report on the Soviet space program prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences:	. . materials gathered from Soviet sources on future lunar missions reveal this pattern of complete unanimity: the lunar mission is desirable and necessary; it must be a manned mission; it is certain to succeed. . . Report characterized Soviet space program as “well-planned, orderly, and vigorously pursued with concentration on specific, limited objectives, each achieving a marked advance beyond the one preceding.” There was said to be no evidence “of either Soviet disenchantment with the program or a desire ... to cut it back. On the contrary, space specialists have underscored the durability of the Soviet commitment to space exploration. . . .” Report was entitled: Soviet Space Programs, 1962-65; Goals and Purposes, Achievements, Plans, and International Implications. (Text)
U.S. space program was a sound investment which would pay “handsome dividends” to all Americans and to humanity in general, UCLA professor of chemistry Dr. Willard F. Libby told aas meeting in Denver. Winner of the 1960 Nobel Prize in chemistry and discoverer of radio-carbon dating, Dr. Libby suggested that space program opponents “quit grumbling about going-to-the-moon extravagance with taxpayers’ money” and realize that large expenditures were necessary to maintain U.S. world leadership in space.	• “And we can’t stop at the moon. . . . Once we’ve ventured that far, we should establish a base there for manned takeoffs to Mars and Venus. “Now Congress is debating the merits of authorizing space exploration beyond the moon in the early ’70s. They have dpty to debate such a venture, costing more than $2 billion. But what . . . would Congress do with that money if it weren’t spent on future space research?” Space research had already made great contributions to medicine, microelectronics, worldwide communications, and many other fields, he said, and could continue to achieve much mote “for the good of humanity and the expansion of frontiers of human knowledge.” (Lindbergh, Denver Post, 7/16/67)	_
oar’s afcrl would launch four 812-ft-long balloon systems from Walker afb in summer 1967 to complete series of five launches conducted by nasa to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program [see May 9], oar Commander m/g Ernest A. Pinson announced. Scheduled for June 27, July 20, Aug. 9 and 24, flights would evaluate performance of different types of parachutes at pressures and velocities equivalent to a descent through the Martian atmosphere. Each balloon would carry, for release at high altitude, a simulated Voyager capsule and a parachute designed to softland the capsule on Mars. Five cameras—two on the capsule and three on the parachute—would be used to evaluate each test. First flight in the series was conducted Aug. 30, 1966.	(oar Release 67-17; AP, NYT, 6/8/67, 3)
Senate Appropriations Committee ordered favorably reported, with amendments, nasa FY 1968 appropriation bill (H.R. 12474). Action restored $96 million of $516 million cut by House [see Aug. 22]. Two projects— Voyager Mars and nerva ii—were restored by increased funding in Senate move; as approved, bill totaled $4.7 billion. Bill moved to floor of Senate, (nasa lar VI/104; O’Toole, W Post, 10/4/67, A2)
jpl had selected TRW Systems, Inc., for negotiations on a $1-million contract for design, modification, fabrication, and testing of the propulsion subsystem for the 1969 Mariner Mars mission, (nasa Release 67—4)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXIV into orbit with 39,750-km (24,699mi) apogee, 500-km (311-mi) perigee, 715-min period, and 64.5° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/67) During August: “Despite the rancor and doubt of the moment [about U.S. space program], the evidence is persuasive that the nation has been well served indeed,” Fortune magazine said in an article reviewing NASA problems, shortcomings, and accomplishments. The article, “Jim Webb’s Earthy Management of Space,” said: “Webb . . . has developed a managerial doctrine as extraordinary as the space mission itself. Essentially it is a bold extension of the systems-management principle first applied in the Pentagon for weapon development. This approach means that the Pentagon tries to relate design and procurement plans to the weapon system’s maximum potential, to other weapon systems, to cost effectiveness, to foreseeable strategic situations, and to other special considerations. In NASA’s case, the ‘system’ is usually an exotic research objective, like landing a package of instruments on Mars. Such an undertaking, of course, requires management consideration of costs and engineering feasibility, but NASA also tries to relate it to the social, economic, and even political impact the new knowledge may have on some of the most basic mysteries of human life. In one sense, the system becomes an exercise in applied philosophy. To master such massively complex and extensive problems, the agency has mobilized some 20,000 individual firms, more than 400,000 workers, and 200 colleges and universities in a combine of the most advanced resources of American civilization.” (Mecklin, Fortune, 8/67)
Acting Under Secretary of Commerce Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, in testimony before Senate Commerce Committee and Committee on Public Works’ Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution, recommended against direct Federal support of an electric car “at this time.” He urged instead a program to reward the “best designs of low-pollutant vehicles by basing Government purchase on performance competition. ... If electric vehicles can compete successfully ... a market could be made available on which production facilities and schedules could be based. . . .” (Testimony, 9, 11) Arthur C. Clarke, author and past president of British Interplanetary Society, chided critics of space program expenditures because “ ‘there is so much to do on earth.’ . . . There was plenty to do in Europe when Columbus left—there’s still plenty to do there. But the opening up of the new world did more to revive the stagnant European culture and economy than an internal action could possibly have done. “. . . I welcome the so-called space race, despite the multiplication of cost and human effort that it involves. If we weren’t racing, we wouldn’t be moving quickly enough. . . .” (Text) Mariner spacecraft would be increasingly useful in returning scientific data from the planets, JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering predicted. He noted launch opportunities during 1970’s in which Mariner-type spacecraft could be flown to more than one planet in series of gravity-assist missions and said 1970-6 period offered several favorable opportunities for closeup study of the comets by Mariner-type spacecraft carrying up to 150 lbs of scientific instruments. (Text) GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark, discussing possible first mission configuration for a Galactic Jupiter probe, said an initial flight could probably be launched during a 20-day launch window centered on first week of March 1972. Planetary encounter would occur between 17 and 20 mos after launch. (Text) Sterilization of lander and surface laboratory constituted “the most difficult technological task” of NASA’s Voyager program to explore Mars and Venus with automated spacecraft during 1970’s, Edgar M. Cort-right, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the meeting. The most difficult scientific task vas developing an effective integrated set of biological experiments. (Text) Exploration of the planets would contribute to, not detract from, man’s ability to meet problems on earth, Dr. Charles Sheldon II, Library of Congress, suggested. “Also one has the right to hope that even if elements of past history repeat in new forms, mankind with a shrinking world and shrinking solar system, and with a greater awareness of his place within the scheme of things will divert his restless energies and struggles to overcoming the space frontiers rather than wasting his talents and his treasures in fratricidal war. . . .” (Text) U.S. had achieved world leadership in the technology of space exploration, but that leadership was relative and by no means conclusive, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) asserted. “The challenge is no less great now than it was in 1957 when Sputnik I jolted us out of the narcosis of complacency. To our peril, we cannot allow the transient pressures and strains of American life to vitiate our determination to maintain that leadership. At the same time we cannot ignore or overlook any opportunity to reach a rapport and an understanding with Russia that will be of material assistance in making the exploration of space for peaceful purposes truly a monumental achievement of all mankind.” (Text) March 15: NASA and West Germany’s Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) signed Memorandum of Understanding for study of electric fields in the upper atmosphere. NASA would furnish five Nike-Apache sounding rockets for launch from esro facilities at Kiruna, Sweden, beginning in April. Rockets would release barium clouds, particularly in the auroras, to be observed from the ground, bmwf would provide chemical payloads and ground observation equipment and would conduct launchings in cooperation with esro and Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) . Both NASA and bmwf would bear cost of their respective responsibilities. Results would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 67-57)
Increased appropriations for riot-torn cities should take precedence over NASA’s request for funds to finance unmanned exploration of the planets, Washington Daily News suggested in an editorial. “James E. Webb . . . is concerned over cuts in the agency’s $5 billion budget including reduction in money for unmanned exploration of Venus and Mars. Russia, he says, is about to send up the biggest . . . rocket you ever saw. In the present state of domestic affairs, we’d say let ’em! “From all appearances our scientists already have more and more exact information about conditions on Venus and Mars than our police and war-on-poverty experts have on Los Angeles and Cleveland-----” (W News, 7/28/67, 16)
NASA successfully conducted sixth of 10 planned rocket-launched flight experiments to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected 40-ft cross-type parachute, one of three designs being studied, at 130,000-ft altitude where earth atmosphere resembles that of Mars. Parachute descended to earth carrying 200-lb payload. Test was part of LaRC’s Planetary Entry Parachute Program, (nasa Release 67-162)
NASA successfully conducted fifth test of a rocket-launched parachute as part of an advanced technology effort to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected ringsail parachute at 130,000-ft altitude, where earth atmosphere resembles that of Mars. Parachute descended to earth with 200-lb payload carrying camera and instruments to record deployment of parachute and its characteristics in flight. Test was part of LaRc’s planetary entry parachute program. (NASA Release 67-120)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
NASA successfully conducted at WSMR second of five balloon-launched parachute tests to determine effectiveness of parachutes as decelerators in soft-landing unmanned instrumented capsules on Mars. On ground command, 815-ft-long balloon released disc-shaped flight unit containing parachute, eight acceleration rockets, and 500-lb payload at 129,000ft altitude, where earth atmosphere is as thin as that of Mars. Rockets then propelled unit to 140,000-ft altitude; parachute deployed and descended with payload into planned recovery area. Test was part of LaRC’s Planetary Entry Parachute Program to investigate parachute landing systems for Voyager program, (nasa Release 67-170; Roswell Daily Record, 7/28/67; AP, NYT, 7/29/67, 7)
