Preliminary “pathfinder” flights could delay U.S.S.R.’s first manned lunar and planetary flights, according to Soviet scientist Vasili Parin in Sovetskaya Rossiya. “Experiments with animals,” preceding interplanetary flight, he said, “will take many months and perhaps many years.” (upi, NYT, 5/4/68, 66)
NASA announced it had authorized JPL to proceed with construction of two Mariner spacecraft for 1971 Mars orbit with funds allocated under approved FY 1969 NASA appropriations bill. In combined mission to assist in establishing touchdown sites for 1973 Mars lander mission, spacecraft would be launched by Adas-Centaur boosters into orbit around Mars to examine Mars polar cap, provide high-resolution coverage of selected areas, and permit oblique views of broad areas of Mars’ surface and, possibly, its moons, Phobos and Deimos. Each spacecraft would complete trip from earth to Mars in six months, with May 1971 launch and November 1971 arrival, and would orbit Mars for three months or more, (nasa Release 68—196; B Sun, 11/14/68, A10; W Post, 11/14/68, D16)
In Science Dr. J. C. G. Walker, Yale Univ. geologist and geophysicist, and N. W. Spencer, Chief of GSFc’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Biological Sciences, said thermosphere probe experiments had provided largest body of rocket mass-spectrometer data obtained. Tests had been conducted jointly by scientists at gsfc and Space Physics Research Lab. at Univ. of Michigan to determine temperatures of earth’s upper atmosphere. Since 1962, concentration and temperature of molecular nitrogen in upper atmosphere had been measured in 22 successful flights under varying conditions of solar activity, from launch sites at Fort Churchill, Manitoba, Wallops Island, Va., and Vega Baja, Puerto Rico. Scientists had concluded that upper atmosphere consisted of mixture of gases—electrons, ions, and neutral particles—each of which had distinct temperature. Multiplicity of temperatures could be expected in upper atmosphere of planets, though differences between planetary atmospheres must be more striking than similarities because of differences in atmospheric composition and in distance from sun. It was likely that absence of permanent magnetic field on either Mars or Venus caused further substantial differences between upper atmospheres of these planets and upper atmosphere of earth. (Science, 12/27/68, 1437—'11)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from WSMR carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 108-mi (173.8-km) altitude to measure height profile of nitric oxide and nitrogen and test Mariner Mars UV spectrometer. UV spectrometer measured earth’s day-glow and daylight between 1,100 A and 4,300 A. Inertial ACS successfully maneuvered payload until scat eye took control and caused instrument to scan through 10°. Experiment’s measurements and tests were successful. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented NASA FY 1969 interim operating plan to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Although President Johnson had not yet signed appropriations bill, Bureau of the Budget had indicated nasa’s share of $6 billion .expenditure reduction might amount to $350 million. This meant limitation of use of FY 1969 appropriations to $3.85 billion, Dr. Paine said. “Our actions also have had to be constrained by our current instructions within the Executive Branch to hold expenditures to a minimum in 1970 as well as in 1969, and to be prepared for the eventuality of budgetary limitations in FY 1970 even more restrictive than those in FY 1969. I am personally convinced that the nation’s space program requires an increase in funding in FY 1970 and I am hopeful ... we will succeed in establishing the need for a significant increase. Until this decision is made ... we have no alternative but to proceed with an interim operating plan . . . which, where possible, holds open options we can exercise in FY 1970 if the budget is higher but which does not overcommit us if the FY 1970 budget is lower.” Plan retained $2,025 billion authorized for Apollo program—$14 million below budget request. It reduced authorized $253.2 million for Apollo Applications to $150 million, amount “required to work toward the important but sharply limited and deferred Apollo Applications program we now propose.” This would include cessation of Saturn IB launch vehicle production after completion of 14th (Saturn 214) and discontinuation of Saturn V at completion of first 15 vehicles. Single Saturn I workshop and single Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) would be launched in early 1970s. Authorized $5 million for advanced missions would be cut to $2.5 million, for continued studies related to manned earth-orbital and lunar missions. Authorized $136.9 million would be reduced to $132.1 million for physics and astronomy, with level of effort in supporting research and technology and data analysis approximately 10% lower than in FY 1968. The $92.3 million authorized for lunar and planetary exploration would be cut to $75.8 million, with $6.8 million for lunar and $69 million for planetary—to support Mariner-Mars 1969 mission, reacquisition of telemetry from Mariner V, and Mariner-Mars 1971 mission. Plan also supported in FY 1969, at reduced funding level, capability to conduct Mars mission during 1973 opportunity in keeping with NAS recommendation [see Sept. 19]. Overall scope of mission would be reduced and schedule compressed. Operating plan provided for construction of two 210-ft antennas for Mars and other missions during 1970s. Launch vehicle procurement authorization of $115.7 million would be cut to $100.2 million and bioscience from $33 million to $32,7 million, which was $15 million below budget request and required slip of 6—12 mo in 21-day Biosatellite missions. Space applications authorization of $98.7 million would be retained; program change necessitated by May 18 destruction of Nimbus B would result in launch of replacement, Nimbus B2, in spring 1969. Aeronautics r&d budget would remain at authorized $74.9 million, while FY 1969 effort in nuclear rockets would be limited and nerva development deferred until 1970, when $7.5 million withheld in FY 1969 could be added to allow total of $39.5 million. Interim plan.would provide $178.4 million for basic research, space vehicle systems, electronics systems, human factor systems, space power and electric propulsion systems, and chemical propulsion—at reduction of $21.5 million from NASA’s budget request. Work in long-endurance life-support-equipment technologies would proceed as planned but in other areas research and technical development would be reduced, especially efforts in support of advanced space missions. Tracking and data acquisition budget would be reduced from $289.8 million authorized to $280 million, providing full Apollo schedule support but limiting support for spacecraft aloft and on future missions. Construction of facilities funds had been reduced from $39.6 million authorized to $21.8 million appropriated. Operating plan would increase figure to $35.7 million by transferring funds from R&D appropriation. Facility planning and design funds were reduced from $3 million requested to $1 million. Interim operating plan anticipated transfer of $20.1 million from R&D to administrative operations, bringing total to $623.3 million instead of $603.2 million in authorization and appropriations acts and $648.2 million requested by NASA in budget. Dr. Paine emphasized that administrative operations appropriation did not cover only “administrative” expenses; it covered direct costs of operating NASA laboratories, research centers, development centers, and launch centers. nasa Administrator James E. Webb told Committee: “. . . when you use words such as ‘Congress consistently has supported the Apollo program,’ you must add ‘at a minimum level.’ We have clearly indicated in every budget that the basis on which we were going forward with this support by Congress was one that did not take into account unusual risks and happenings and was, in effect, based on success in all these efforts.” Webb said NASA Apollo funding was related to success on various operations and did not include “a return to test flight on the Saturn IB should we not be able to make the shift to the big rocket after this next flight.” From 1961 to 1969, Webb said, “we have not had the funds to proceed except in a manner that would permit us, within the total budget, to do this lunar landing within this decade and on an all-up systems test basis. So the excruciatingly painful period of all-up testing on the Saturn V is yet ahead of us.” (Testimony; Transcript)
Tenth anniversary of Explorer I [see Jan. 31] was commemorated by JPL and Cal Tech with two-day program including symposium on First and Second Decades of Space Research and JPL open house. JPL Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, leader of first Explorer scientific task force, was chairman. Speakers included Dr. James A. Van Allen of State Univ. of Iowa, who had verified radiation belts bearing his name; l/g Austin W. Betts (usa), Army Chief of Research and Development; Dr. John W. Findlay, NASA Lunar and Planetary Missions Advisory Board Chairman; and Dr. Joseph Kaplan of ucla, U.S. Chairman of igy when Explorer I was launched Jan. 31,1958. In next 10 yr, “as an increasingly important area of scientific and technical research a balanced program in space must certainly be part of the activities of our Nation,” Dr. Kaplan said. “No more noble and useful service can be conceived than one which gives strength to . . . cooperation among the nations of the earth. Space certainly qualifies for such a role.” Dr. Findlay outlined possible missions “of strong scientific interest” to Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in next decade. Gen. Betts voiced concern about attitudes toward exploratory efforts; he was “not convinced that we remember, the lesson” of Sputnik /. “Only some two weeks” after its launch, numerous programs were proposed for U.S. satellite—possible only because “far-sighted technical people had been planning for various applications of space for some time, and even though firm military requirements were not available.” (jpl Releases, 1/22/68, 1/31/68; Texts; Wilford, NYT, 2/2/68, 4; SBD, 1/26/68, 38)
JPL soil sciences group, headed by Dr. Roy E. Cameron, reported tests and cultures of Antarctic soil samples in JPL’s walk-in freezer laboratory to determine what micro-organisms lived in extreme cold and to help determine whether life existed on Mars. Samples had come from high, dry valleys in Victorialand near U.S. base at McMurdo, Antarctica. Scientists discovered bacteria, yeasts, molds, and algae, which began to grow within two weeks when Antarctic soil kept laboratory-frozen for over one year was subjected to temperature 68° F or above. Studies were sponsored by nasa and nsf. (nasa Release 68—73)
NASA announced “interim operating plan” for FY 1969 designed to achieve $3.85-billion budget. Agency would reduce staff by 1,600 and contract employees by 2,000. Purchase or construction of four Saturn boosters had been canceled [see Aug. 2], plans for 1973 instrument payloads on Mars had been substantially reduced, lunar exploration programs had been halted, and development of nerva nuclear rocket engine would be put back until next fiscal year, at least. Apollo Applications program would be reduced $300 million from budget request of $440 million and would include only two spacecraft—Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount—with boosters and backup equipment. “Work toward post-Apollo lunar exploration and toward Saturn V Workshop will be limited to studies.” (nasa Release 68—141)
NASA announced plans to use Titan III—D/Centaur in dual launches of 6,000-lb spacecraft consisting of Surveyor-type soft landers mated to Mariner 1971 class Mars orbiters in mid-1973, in Project Viking, to obtain scientific information on life on Mars. Launched 10 days apart, spacecraft would arrive about seven months later, when orbiter propulsion systems would place orbiters and landers in Mars orbit. After reconnaissance, landers would be detached and softland on Mars. (NASA Release 68—207; Pasadena Independent, 12/6/68)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists John W. Salisbury and Graham R. Hunt reported in Science they had found hypothesis of particle-size control of albedo incompatible with hypothesis of abundant limonite on Mars. Their observations indicated that proposal that polarimetric, spectrometric, color, and albedo measurements of light and dark areas on Mars proved limonite was major soil constituent was irreconcilable with proposal that variations in size of particle could be responsible for albedo difference between light and dark areas. They showed relative albedo was reversed from blue to red for limonite samples with different-sized particles. Observations of Mars revealed no blue-red albedo reversal between areas. Although evidence was insufficient for choice between hypotheses, they believed Mars soil was most likely, for geological reasons, to be composed of silicates stained or coated with ferric oxides. (Science, 7/26/68, 365—6)
JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan, who had devised method using computers to improve spacecraft photos of moon and Mars, planned to link computers with electron microscopes to photograph single atom. Within six months much of connection work should he done, he said, and “with luck, we could be taking pictures of atoms in a year or so.” (Dighton, Glendale News-Press, 7/5/68, 1)
Food, land, and raw material shortages might compel man to establish mining operations on other planets and to grow food in space stations, according to Dr. K. A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. He said farms growing food in chemicals could be established in earth-orbiting stations fertilized by chemicals produced on Mars and other planets. (AP, NYT, 7/15/68, 6)
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy called for prompt DOD action to revive work on quiet electric-drive nuclear submarine halted in May by DOD order when it decided to proceed with new high-speed nuclear submarine [see July 24]. (Transcript; Greene, NY News, 9/20/68, 8) characteristics of outer space near moon. Research mission had been completed and spacecraft was continuing to relay information to space stations. Zond V’s reentry and splashdown in Indian Ocean Sept. 21 was recorded by U.S., U.K., and West German space scientists, but U.S.S.R. made no official announcement until Sept 22. Tass then said Zond V had circled moon, explored space near moon, reentered at 11,000 mi per sec, softlanded by parachute in predetermined area, and was recovered by Soviet recovery ship—becoming first circumlunar spacecraft recovered on earth. “During the flight the station’s systems and aggregates for maneuvering on the trajectory and for returning to the Earth were tested. Flight control systems of the station and the radio-engineering means for measuring the parameters of its trajectory ensured the successful execution of the programme. “The successful flight of the ‘Zond—5’ automatic station over the Earth-Moon-Earth route, and its return to the predetermined area are an outstanding achievement of Soviet science and engineering. Another scientific-engineering problem has been solved, and broad prospects have been opened up for further research of outer space and planets of the solar system by automatic space stations which bring back research data to the Earth.” Tass announcement that atmosphere and pressure “remained within the limits of their present range” supported earlier speculation that Zond V carried prototype passenger cabin with atmosphere of artificial helium mixture which would be used by cosmonauts on future flights. Later Tass report quoted Soviet Prof. Leonid I. Sedov as saying spacecraft had special heat shield and was slowed down during reentry by “air resistance” and, “at a comparatively small height,” by parachute. Zond V was fifth spacecraft in Zond series and first Soviet spacecraft to land in water. Zond I (launched April 2, 1964) had failed in attempt to reach Venus and Zond II (launched Nov. 30, 1964) had suffered communications failure enroute to Mars. Zond III (launched July 18, 1965) had obtained photos of far side of moon; Zond IV (launched March 2, 1968) apparently had reached apogee comparable to lunar altitude and had burned in earth’s atmosphere on reentry, (gsfc SSR, 9/15/68; 9/30/68; W Post, 9/16/68, A17; 9/19/68, A25; 9/23/68, Al; NYT, 9/16/68, 29; 9/21-23/68, 1; Moscow News, 10/5-12/68, 3)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V could be precursor to next step in flying complex unmanned missions to Venus or Mars as well as to carrying men to moon, rand Corp. Scientist Merton E. Davies and Cal Tech scientist Bruce C. Murray wrote in Science. Soviet descriptions of Zond V suggested U.S.S.R. might plan to send pair of spacecraft to Mars in late February or early March. One might land on Mars and cast off satellite to orbit it and relay signals to earth; other might fly by Mars and return to earth with film of Mars surface. Speculations were based on Pravda and Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) articles by Soviet Prof. A. Dmitriyev, which said “information from space” must be delivered “directly to the scientists’ laboratory” free of “encumbrances and distortions of radioed signals.” He said Zond V had successfully completed assignment of developing means and methods for returning space devices. Also, U.S.S.R. had previously sent pair of spacecraft on planetary mission and might repeat mission to take advantage of favorable Mars or Venus positions for flyby or landing attempts. (Science, 10/11/68, 245-6; Cohn, W Post, 10/11/68, A9)
President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget was presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. At $4.37 billion, authorization request was $700 million below FY 1968 request, almost $500 million less than FY 1968 authorization, and $200 million below FY 1968 appropriation. Webb stated: “nasa’s expenditures for FY 1969 will be down $230 million from this year, $850 million below last year, and $1.3 billion less than in FY 1966. The nasa program has been cut. I hope you will decide it has been cut enough and will approve the full amount recommended by the President. “The FY 1969 request does not meet at all our Nation’s needs in aeronautics and space. It is a compromise—one which I fully support— between needed work toward advances in aeronautics and space which we can and should make, and other overriding requirements. . . . During this period when we are reducing our effort by one-third the U.S.S.R. is still increasing its effort. ... In terms of scientific advance and in applications of immediate economic use, such as meteorological and communications systems, our program has contributed more than theirs. But in terms of the use of large launch vehicles and in the rate of which future greater capabilities are being developed they are and will remain ahead, at our 1969 budget level. The hard fact we now face is that just as we have begun to catch up in large-scale booster operations ... we are cutting back our program while they continue to advance.” He listed guidelines within “necessary fiscal constraints,” which determined decisions on FY 1969 program and budget estimates. NASA would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using all-up test concept for Saturn V and Apollo. Complete success in all remaining eight Saturn V flights would be needed for manned lunar landing by “end of 1969.” nasa would reduce numbers of Saturn IB and V and work out with dod future requirements for large launch vehicles under “sharply limited” launch program. Launch of Saturn I Workshop in 1970 would be interim step toward Saturn V Workshop and would be coordinated with later launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. “Practically all” programs had been stretched out, and a number of projects would be phased out. Scope of new starts would be reduced, with nerva i replacing larger nerva n and “less costly Mariner class spacecraft” replacing Voyager mission. Urgent activities would be expanded in aeronautics and in space applications; for example, noise reduction, vtol and stol, aircraft for remote measurement of earth resources, and Nimbus D for charting atmosphere parameters. nasa Centers would be reorganized “to retain . . . after reductions [in work force] are made, a limited but strong and well-balanced team of scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” Webb responded to questions: “There are no signs that the Soviets are cutting back as we are. New test and launch facilities are steadily added . . . and a number of spaceflight systems more advanced than any heretofore used are nearing completion.” Webb forecast Soviet booster with thrust greater than that of Saturn V, resumption of manned space flights, and landing of Soviet instrument packages on Mars in 1969 and 1971. Budget reductions in FY 1968 had compelled revisions, reductions, delays and cancellations in NASA programs. “We can conduct a viable and useful program at these lower levels, hut it will be a sharply reduced one.” Despite reductions allowing almost no flexibility to work around problems, “we still have the possibility of making the lunar landing before 1970.” (CR, 2/7/68, H926-7 ; 2/12/68, E708-9)
Model of wheel-shaped planetary landing craft, sterilized by heat and dropped from 250-ft altitude by Jet Propulsion Laboratory, operated successfully after impacting dry lake in Mojave Desert at 80 mph—major step in demonstrating feasibility of sending lightweight scientific landing capsule to Mars. Craft’s radio transmitter turned on 30 sec after craft struck surface and operated 20 min. Anemometer deployed automatically 3 min after impact, to measure wind velocity. Following mission profile identical to projected Mars surface operations, radio turned on again 22 hr after initial transmission (when earth would again be in view). Signals from three-watt transmitter were received for another 40 min to conclude test. Craft was powered by 12-cell, silver-zinc battery, first known to survive both heat sterilization and high-velocity impact, (nasa Release 68-69; jpl Release 473; jpl pio)
NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Oran W. Nicks described applications of Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter techniques to Mars exploration before aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Two 1971 Mariner Orbiter missions would provide new tools for survey of dynamic Mars, arriving when most striking seasonal changes were evident in Southern Hemisphere. Their combined orbits and life expectancies would allow observations of dynamic changes in clouds and surface features over several months. In 1973, two additional orbit-ers would survey Mars from different orbits during different seasons, with support of landing mission as prime requirement. Also planned for 1973 was survivable landing spacecraft to make local measurements of environment, photograph surface and topography, and analyze soil. “Burning question of immediate concern to you and me will be addressed by use of our new tools,” Nicks said: “Is there life elsewhere? Has life existed on nearby planets and disappeared for any reason? Can nearby planets be made suitable for life?’ Together, orbiters and landers form a powerful team for the study of Mars and for seeking answers to these questions. Together, they will continue to extend our capabilities in what is probably the most challenging, open-ended arena for expansion of science and technology in the decade ahead.” (Text)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, addressed International Meeting of American Nuclear Society in Washington, D.C. In past decade NASA had developed “impressive capability” in “competent and creative people who make up our government-university-industry team.” It was “prepared to accomplish any goal in space exploration which the new administration may establish.” NASA future included “broad, balanced, Planetary Program” emphasizing Mars but examining other planets like Mercury and Jupiter; major lunar exploration program in 1970’s; astronomy program covering optical astronomy, x-ray and gamma ray fields, and low-frequency radio astronomy; and increased emphasis on space applications programs, with maj or efforts toward surveying earth’s resources from space and continuing developments in meteorology and communications. (Text)
May 28: In second Mars lander experiment [see April 23] NASA concluded JPL B&D program demonstrating feasibility of sending lightweight scientific capsules to Mars by successful 250-ft free-fall drop of 63-lb heat-sterilized planetary landing craft from hovering helicopter onto asphalt pavement at Goldstone Tracking Station. Capsule, which struck at 80 mph, or impact of 2,500 g, was powered by 12-cell silver-zinc battery which produced sufficient electricity after impact to extend wind gauge and to operate radio transmitter and timer aboard Mars lander. Battery was believed to be toughest yet developed, (nasa Release 68— 152; W Star, 9/8/68, A17; Pasadena Independent Star-News, 9/8/68; NYT, 10/15/68, 34; jpl Lab-Oratory 7/68, 8)
First recording of pulsar signals at short wavelengths, 2293 me, was made by Drs. Alan MofEet, Ronald D. Ekers, and Richard M. Goldstein of Cal Tech, using 210-ft Mars dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station operated by JPX. for NASA. Signals’ energy indicated origin from natural source such as white dwarf stars or neutron stars. CP—1919, one of three pulsars observed, was weakest source ever recorded. At 2293 me, signal was one-hundredth that of other two, though at longer wavelengths signal was one of two strongest of four known pulsars. (“CP” referred to Cambridge pulsar list; number indicated location.) Dr. Moffet placed pulsars 100 to 10,000 light years from earth, in Milky Way Galaxy. Although signal strengths varied, periods remained constant. (Cal Tech Release; Pasadena Independent, 5/15/68)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, addressing National Capital Area Chapter of American Society for Public Administration, praised U.S. space program for “unequaled competence and unlimited opportunity.” After 10 yr in space, he noted, U.S. had launched 514 spacecraft into earth orbit and 28 to moon and other planets. “The moon has been completely mapped, the composition and texture of its soil analyzed, and sites . . . selected for manned lunar landings. Our scientific knowledge of Mars and Venus . . . has been advanced tremendously by . . . unmanned, instrumented probes. . . . American astronauts, who have a total of almost 2,000 hours in space to their credit in the Mercury and Gemini Projects, will begin the third phase of manned space flight this year with the first manned launches in Project Apollo. These achievements in space, fruits of the advanced science and technology of our times, mark the first decade of the Space Age as one of the finest periods in American history. And they are forerunners of even greater discoveries and widespread applications to come during our second decade in space.” Dr. von Braun credited nasa Administrator James Webb’s direction with adaptation of systems approach to space research without which “we would never be able to go to the moon.” Approach, Dr. von Braun believed, could also be tested on river pollution and satellite communications. (Text; W Post, 3/21/68, H14)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech associate prefessor of planetary science, told Space Science and Applications Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics it would be tragic if U.S. were to “ignore the challenge and the opportunity” of planetary exploration. He urged sustained exploration program competitive with U.S.S.R. “We need not always be first, but we must not always be second.” He saw “real possibility of Soviet Mars lander attempts as early as 1969” and other attempts at planetary firsts, (nasa Auth Hearings; Randal, W Star, 3/7/68, A12)
USAF awarded contracts totaling $28.8 million to Fairchild Hiller Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. for contract definition for ZF—15A advanced air superiority fighter aircraft. (dod Release 1147—68) During December: NASA issued Objectives and Goals in Space Science and Applications—1968. NASA Office of Space Science and Applications had participated in 1968 agency-wide planning to detail program objectives and options from which program could be built. Many tools required for future space program had already been developed and many future ventures would require only modest improvements. Spacecraft pointing accuracies and stability would improve, and their lifetimes would increase. More powerful transmitters would communicate data across ever-widening expanses. Spacecraft weight would increase and man would have increasing capability to work and navigate in space. Advances in chemical propulsion, introduction of nuclear and electric propulsion, and new combinations of existing stages, would permit growth of launch vehicle capability to meet mission demands. FY 1969 support of program recognized need for austerity and provided for continuance of existing programs at economical level and initiation of only “projects of great merit, including those where a unique opportunity might be lost.” Future emphasis would be on applications of space and space technology for benefit of man: surveying earth’s resources, TV broadcast from space, and weather forecasting. Knowledge of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, and other outer planets would be expanded. Introduction of larger, more accurate telescopes would provide man perhaps with “his greatest step in understanding the nature of his universe.” (Text)
nas published report of NASA-sponsored two-year study of planetary astronomy by nas-nrc Space Science Board’s 16-scientist panel headed by Dr. John S. Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Ariz. Planetary Astronomy: An Appraisal of Ground-Based Opportunities recommended assignment of high priority to erection of 60-in optical telescope in mountains of northern Chile, where atmospheric conditions permitted favorable view of Mars, in time to observe planet’s closest approach to earth in almost 50 yr, August 1971. Also recommended were construction of large dish antenna in U.S. for planetary radar astronomy; two large radiotelescope arrays in California and West Virginia, plus third planetary radio facility to pick up signals at short wavelengths; and 120-in infrared telescope in desert region where vapor would be less likely to interfere with infrared radiation. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 9/20/68, 29)
Soviet Prof. Georgy I. Petrov in Izvestia said successful recovery of Zond VI opened way “for creation of spacecraft able to get to the moon, Mars, Venus, and other planets and return to earth.” Such experiments, he said, “will allow us in the near future to create long-lasting orbital stations, moon laboratories manned by scientific personnel. . . . The passenger ships will differ from the present spacecraft, but now we are witnessing their birth.” In another dispatch Tass said basic problem of reentry by spacecraft at “second cosmic speed,” about 25,000 mph, had been solved by Zond VI. (upi, W Star, 11/20/68, Bll)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines said NASA announcement of plans for 1974 Mars landing marked revival “of a project that was sacrificed last year on the altar of the great God Apollo whose manned moon program was gobbling up all the funds at NASA’s disposal. It also marked the first positive action by NASA in two years directed to starting rather than terminating activities.” Its timing, one month after presidential election, seemed “to provide a tantalizing clue to the Nixonian philosophy about space.” Hines said it was likely new administration would heed post-Apollo views of NAS which had recommended more attention to scientific exploration of space with instruments. (W Star, 12/15/68, F4)
Tass reported Moscow scientist had compared “spectrometric analysis” of cactus growing in cold areas with spectrographs of “dark areas” of Mars and concluded areas on Mars were covered with cactus-like vegetation. Other tests on cactus, scientists said, proved it could stand extremes of temperature and other conditions similar to those on Mars. (upi, W Star, 4/28/68, A3)
Iowa State Univ. scientist Dr. James A. Van Allen said that although he was not outright opponent of manned space flight, so far man had done nothing in space but survive—although “that is not unimportant.” He advocated Jupiter exploration using unmanned flyby, which he said could be accomplished in 1972. He felt there was little chance Jupiter could have life forms of any sort, but he wanted this large planet (10 times diameter of earth) “put on an equal footing with Mars and Venus in U.S. exploration.” His opposition to man in space was based on dominance of manned flight in national funding to detriment of unmanned missions that could have returned major scientific benefits. (Miles, LA Times, 2/29/68)
nasa announced it would launch two Mariner spacecraft, F and G, on flyby missions to Mars in 1969. Project responsibility was assigned to JPL; LeRC would be responsible for launch vehicle. Deep Space Network stations would provide tracking and communications during launch period scheduled between mid-February and mid-April. Spacecraft would reach Mars between end of July and mid-August. Arrival dates of two spacecraft would not be less than five days apart. Atlas-Centaur combination would for first time be used as launch vehicle for planetary exploration. Spacecraft would weigh approximately 900 lb. Mariner III (Nov. 5, 1964) weighed 575 lb. (nasa Special Release)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Zond IV automatic research station, Tass announced. Station was placed in planned flight from parking orbit of artificial satellite and was flying on trajectory close to calculated one to study “outlying regions of near-earth space.” Heinz Kaminski, Director of Institute for Satellite and Space Research at Bochum, West Germany, said mission “must be regarded as a preliminary phase for a planned flight to the moon.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said he had “hunch” Zond IV was not intended to fly around moon. Apparently station made no attempt to orbit moon. One source said that after journey of about Sl/2 days, station reached “apogee . . . comparable to lunar altitude.” Zond I, launched April 2, 1964, failed in attempt to reach Venus, and Zond II, launched Nov. 30, 1964, suffered communications failure on route to Mars. Zond III, launched July 18, 1965, obtained photos of far side of moon. (W Post, 3/3/68, A17; 3/4/68, A14; 3/8/68, A12; AP, W Star, 3/4/68, A3)
President Johnson sent message to Congress on FY 1969 budget. Praising effectiveness of NASA’s cost reduction efforts, he noted that NASA by utilizing idle, excess, and surplus Government property had avoided expenditures of over $22 million for new equipment and facilities and had saved over $16 million by improving procurement practices. However, to meet urgent national needs in other areas, further reductions still had to be made. “New obligational authority requested for [nasa] ... is about $220 million below the 1968 amount. Expenditures will be $230 million below 1968, $850 million below 1967, and over $1.3 billion less than in 1966. This reduction reflects our progress beyond the costly research and development phases of the manned lunar mission, as well as the immediate need to postpone spending for new projects wherever possible. “Based on a careful examination of priorities, the 1969 budget provides increases in some areas to prepare for important advances in future years, while deferring other less urgent, new projects. The production of our large Saturn-class space boosters is continued but at a reduced rate. The development of a nuclear rocket engine to increase the capability of our Saturn V launch vehicle is also continued, but at a smaller size and thrust than originally planned, to reduce development cost.” Planetary exploration would be continued with development of “a new spacecraft for launch in 1973 to orbit and land on Mars. This new Mars mission will cost much less than half the Voyager program included in last year’s budget. Although the scientific result of this new mission will be less than that of the Voyager, it will still provide extremely valuable data and serve as a building block for planetary exploration systems of the future.” Request for dod, increased “to assure that our defense capabilities remain equal to any challenge or threat,” included funds to: (1) maintain strategic deterrent by converting from Minuteman II to Poseidon missiles with multiple warheads and modernizing manned bomber force with additional F—111B aircraft and improved short-range attack missiles; (2) proceed with procurement of Sentinel missile defense system for defense against possible Communist Chinese threat and revamp air defense; (3) augment firepower, mobility, and readiness of general-purpose forces by improving air defenses with new fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters, and weapon systems; (4) improve airlift-sealift capability by purchasing additional C-5A aircraft and procuring fast deployment logistics ship; and (5) continue vigorous R&D effort. (The Budget of the United States Government, FY 1969, 26-9)
President Johnson submitted $186.1-billion FY 1969 budget request to Congress, including $6.76-billion total space budget. Of this sum, NASA would receive $4.37 billion, smallest amount since 1963; dod space efforts, $2,216 billion; AEC space applications, $143 million; and ESSA satellite system, $30.6 million.	: NASA FY 1969 budget, $218 million less than for FY 1968, provided for $3,677 billion to be spent for R&D (down $233 million from FY 1968	and $557 million from FY 1967); $45 million for construction of facilities; and $648 million for administrative operations. Project Apollo would be kept on schedule, development of NERVA I would be continued, and launch plans would be made for two pioneer flights toward Jupiter and one Sunblazer probe. Research on Earth Resources Observation Satellite would continue, but development would be postponed, ogo program would be phased out after OGO—f. NASA’s $2.5-billion Voyager program would be replaced with a $500-million, four-mission Mars orbiter project. Although NASA’s $2.039-billion Apollo budget request accounted for 47% of total NASA budget, amount for Apollo was $517 million less than for FY 1968, reflecting declining expenditures as program neared its completion. Requested $439.6 million for Apollo Applications (aa) program was less than half of amount originally sought and necessitated cancellation of planned 14-day AAP—1A flight. Some $76.9 million—a $10.1-million increase over FY 1968—was allotted for NASA’s aeronautics program, with most of increase attributed to additional supporting research in subsonic aircraft technology. XB—70 and X—15 research programs would be phased out by December 1968. Space science and applications were allotted $538.2 million, with 18 major NASA launches and 13 non-NASA launches scheduled for 1968. Major portions of DOD space budget would be spent on mol—$600 million, compared with $431 million requested for FY 1968., Some $60.4 million was allocated for defense and tactical satellite communications programs, and $10.5 million for Vela nuclear test detection satellite program. AEC space budget—$11 million higher than for FY 1968—included $72 million for Project Rover, with $39 million for nerva system. Most of essa’s funds would be used for development of sensors and satellite system in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for warning services, faa’s request included $351 million for SST development, $251 million increase over FY 1968 and one of largest increases given to any domestic program. It was principal item in dot’s $449-million request for r&d. (Text; dod Budget Summary; W Post, 1/16/68, A5; AP, B Sun, 1/16/68, A3; McNamara Statement; dod Background Briefing; NASA Release, 1/29/68; W Star, 1/29/68, A7; Clark, NYT, 1/30/68, 16; Aero Tech, 2/12/68, 17-35) '
