Results of preliminary qualitative study of Mariner VI photos were summarized in Science by Dr. Robert B. Leighton, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, Dr. Bruce C. Murray, and Dr. Robert P. Sharp of Cal Tech; Alan G. Herriman and Dr. Andrew T. Young of JPL; Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ.; Merton E. Davies of rand Corp.; and Conway B. Leovy of Univ. of Washington: Surface of Mars “appears similar to that of the Moon, but there are significant differences; some features seen from Earth are characterized; the ‘blue haze’ hypothesis is disproved; and new phenomena associated with the polar cap aTe discovered.” Mars resembled moon in abundance, form, arrangement, and size of craters, but there appeared to be break in size-distribution curve of craters in some parts of Mars not characteristic of moon—apparently because Mars had more effective weathering and transportation process than moon. Similarities between Martian and lunar surfaces included craters with slump blocks, terrace, and radial dry-debris avalanche chutes on steep inner surfaces; central peaks, polygonal outlines, blocky ejecta rims, and irregular ejecta; and irregularly sinuous ridges. Differences included more subdued relief of many Martian craters, flatter floors, fewer central peaks, more subdued debris blankets, absence of obvious secondary craters and rays, and greater abundance of “ghost” craters. Photos showed no sinuous rifles and no distinctive earth-like phenomena such as mountain ranges, tectonic basins, stream-cut topographs, dune fields, playa flats, or other arid-region features. (Science, 8/15/69, 685—90)
U.S. and Spain exchanged notes in Madrid confirming 10-yr extension— to Jan. 29, 1984—of 1964 agreement establishing NASA space tracking and acquisition facility near Madrid. Since June 1965, facility had supported all Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter flights to moon, four Mariner flights to Mars and Venus, four Pioneer interplanetary probes, and all manned Apollo flights. It would support Apollo 11 and passage of Mariners VI and VII near Mars during summer; 210-ft-dia parabolic antenna for tracking and communication in interplanetary space would be built during next three years. (NASA Release 69—97)
In speech before Chicago Executive Club in Chicago, 111., Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said operation of military systems in space “to enhance the national defense” must be one objective of U.S. future space program to ensure “there will be no hlind reliance on good faith.” Vice President Agnew was also Chairman of nasc and of President’s Space Task Group. Two questions dominated speculation over national space policy, he said: Why space? And Why Mars? “Mars holds the greatest promise of a capability to sustain human life. It is a potential resource and reserve. More important for the present is the fact that the mind of America functions better when it focuses upon a clear target. Manned exploration of the Solar System is too nebulous to capture the public’s attention. A manned landing on Mars is as understandable a challenge to the citizen as it is to the scientist. It is a test that can be put in a time frame and its anticipation can be appreciated by all.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
jpl radar readings which showed 8.3-mi altitude variation in Mars’ north equatorial zone and included corrected figures for Mars’ ephem-eris, or orbital path, were expected to ensure accuracy of TV cameras aboard Mariners VI and VII, NASA said. Experimenters hoped to obtain photos identifying objects 900 ft across at close approach and pictures were expected to be 500 times better than those taken to date by earth-based telescope cameras. Readings were obtained at NASA’s Goldstone Tracking Station in California by team directed by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein during planet’s closest approach to earth (Mars had been within 45 million mi of earth June 9). They would be of great interest to astronomers because they showed that areas which appeared light to telescopes might be either high or low in elevation. Optically dark areas appeared to be of medium elevation to radar-scanners. (nasa Release 69—111; jpl Release 530)
NASA Associate Administrator, Dr. Homer E. Newell, and Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop presented paper “Planning Space Technology for the 1970’s” to National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C. Technology readiness for manned missions beyond the moon depended “very heavily upon (1) carrying the technology through proof-of-concept or prototype phase in order to assure long-life, reliable flight equipment and operations, and (2) precursor missions, particularly an Earth orbiting laboratory and lunar exploration that provide an opportunity to obtain the needed technology.” Technology needed for manned Mars exploration “represents capabilities that are very useful in many space missions and for some non-space applications as well, particularly with regard to long-life equipment and man’s performance under stress.” (Text)
Since “any contamination of the earth from the moon would affect all men and all nations,” said New York Times, protective arrangements “should be approved by an international group, preferably by a formal United Nations committee. In the future men will go to Mars and other parts of the solar system where the prospects of finding living organisms are much greater than they are on the moon. If Americans now monopolize the key decisions regarding protection of the earth’s environment, they will have no grounds for objecting later on if Russians, Chinese, Germans, Japanese, Brazilians or others monopolize similar decisions affecting human beings returning from more distant celestial bodies.” (NYT, 6/7/69, 32)
Results of four radio occultation measurements of Mars’ atmosphere, ionosphere, and surface configuration by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by jpl’s Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore, Dr. Gunnar Fjeldbo, and Boris L. Seidel and Goddard Institute for Space Studies’ Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool. Measurements had provided refractivity data in Mars atmosphere at four points above its surface. For atmosphere consisting predominantly of carbon dioxide, surface pressures between 6 and 7 millibars at three points of measurement and 3.8 at fourth, indicated elevation of 3.1—3.7 mi (5—6 km). Temperature profile measured by Mariner VI near equator in daytime indicated temperatures in stratosphere about 100°K warmer than those predicted by theory. Measurements by Mariner VI taken at 79°N at beginning of polar night indicated conditions were favorable for condensation of carbon dioxide at almost all altitudes. Mariner VII measurements taken at 58°S in daytime and 38°N at night also showed carbon dioxide condensation was possible at altitudes above about 15.5 mi (25 km). Measurements of electron density in ionosphere showed upper atmosphere was substantially warmer than in 1965, possibly because of increased solar activity and proximity to sun. (Science, 12/12/69, 1393—7)
Press conference on Mariner VI preliminary results was held at JPL. Scientists reported experiments had revealed that recurring white blob seen in previous Mars pictures was 300-mi wide crater with peak in center; linear features known as canals were actually large, irregular, low-contrast splotches without specific detail; temperature in equatorial area ranged from 75°F to —100°F; atmosphere was almost nonexistent; Mars had no sharply defined borders separating light and dark areas; and Martian surface was more heavily cratered than previously believed. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado said any life on Mars would be very different from life on earth, perhaps form that used carbon dioxide. He said uv spectrometer had found atomic carbon and carbon monoxide, but no traces of nitrogen—essential to life on earth. Dr. George C. Pimentel of Univ. of California at Berkeley said infrared spectrometer had detected presence of unknown compound related to methane, building block of life on earth. He also reported detection of super-thin layer of water ice hanging in atmosphere above Mars equator. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/3/69, A3; Lannan, W Star, 8/3/69, A5)
New direct value for sun’s thermal radiation of 125.7 w per sq ft, obtained from Mariner VI and VII en route to Mars, was nearly twice as accurate as old value of 129.5 w per sq ft, NASA announced. JPL Mariner project engineer Joseph A. Plamondon said change in probable error in new measurement was one-half that of old figure. Results of inflight measurements obtained with temperature-control flux monitors (tcfm) monitoring solar radiation since Mariners’ launch Feb. 24 and March 27 would be compared with preflight predictions of solar radiation and spacecraft temperature variations in flight, to establish new standard for temperature-control design and testing. Data from TCFM agreed with data obtained by NASA from high-altitude experiments on Convair 990. research aircraft and X-15. (NASA Release 69—69; jpl Release 518)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Associate and Deputy Administrator, delivered 1969 Minta Martin Lecture at MIT as 1968—69 Jerome Hunsaker Professor of Aeronau-• tical Engineering. Describing origins and development of U.S. space program as well as decision-making and implementation in commitment to manned lunar landing, paper would be presented also at Univ. of Maryland March 20 and at LeRC April 24. Citing need for set of national goals, Dr. Seamans defined national agenda for allocation of R&D that might be acceptable to man in street: understanding, forecasting, and controlling environment; supplying basic resources of food, fuel, minerals, and water; improving quality of life; improving transportation; improving communications; encouraging economic growth; and assisting international development and providing national security. Space program contributed to all categories. Studies of sun’s transmissions, of Mars and Venus atmospheres, of moon’s origin, and of earth itself contributed to understanding of environment for practical use of man. Space R&D might aid search for alternative basic resources; it could establish facilities for detecting available resources and speed communications to meet problems. Biological and medical investigations in space program held greatest promise in study of reactions of biological specimens, animals, and man. Impact on education had been cited by some as greatest value of space exploration. Program had required in-depth investigation of waste management, fire prevention, materials development, and microminiaturization. Space technology influenced new vehicles being tested for transportation—hydrofoil ships, surface-effect and air-cushion vehicles, high-speed trains, electric cars, vtol and v/stol aircraft, jumbo subsonic aircraft, and supersonic aircraft. Communications satellites, already in commercial use, ultimately could broadcast directly to home receivers. In international cooperation, NASA was working with 64 nations in space activity. Returns from NASA’s scientific satellites and communications satellites, development of manned space flight capability, and tracking facilities contributed to national defense. (Text)
William Hines said in Washington Evening Star: “It now seems entirely . possible that NASA may sneak into a Mars program without a specific go-ahead of the type given for the moon adventure in 1961. A case can be made that exploration of the planets is but a logical extension of exploration of the moon; that once the space frontier is crossed in 1969 everything else is evolutionary, not revolutionary. This sort of gradualism, which is analogous to a girl’s becoming a little bit pregnant, is just as effective in the long run as the flamboyant setting of spectacular goals, and probably a good bit more feasible in a time when there is already much grumbling about pre-occupation with other worlds when our own is in such a sorry state.” (W Star, 4/27/69, G4)
U.S. newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 12 landing on moon: Washington Post: “The sheer joy of these two astronauts . . . shines out over everything else. They are obviously moon-struck. Conrad sounded like the most eager and happiest young geology student in the universe as he hummed and laughed his way from rock to rock, grabbing one after the other and complaining that he couldn’t get enough. And who would have thought that one of these highly skilled men would resort, as Bean did, to bonking the television camera with a hammer in an effort to make it work? Unfortunately, the failure of the camera did deprive us of seeing this frolic. . . . There was much to be learned from it about the moon and about the men who combine such cool technical competence with such zest for a serious and dangerous job.” (W Post, 11/20/69) Detroit News: “To travel 230,000 miles and hit the target on the button is almost unbelievable except that NASA, its crews and its machines are making believers of us all. But there’s a lesson to be taken to heart in the camera’s freak failure. Conrad and Bean tried to remedy the defect. . . . But they had to drop that to get on with more essential scientific exploratory experiments. Conrad’s oxygen limit was four hours. He hadn’t time to spare. . . . that should be warning to those euphoric advocates of setting a target date for a trip to Mars. An astronaut limited to four hours work on the moon is a reminder of the vast project ahead in confounding the elements in this untapped lunar mystery. Prophecies of colonizing the moon should be set against that four-hour limit, even though we no doubt will improve on it.” (D News, 11/20/69) Atlanta Constitution: “This second landing, more than 900 miles from where the pioneers of Apollo 11 put down last July, notably extends our knowledge. New landing techniques, a longer lunar stay, nuclear-powered experiments—they all serve to push back a fantastic frontier which only a few short years ago was regarded as a most implausible province of man.” (Atlanta Constitution, 11/20/69) Houstin Chronicle: “Our admiration for the coolness and the skill of astronauts Conrad, Bean and Richard F. Gordon, Jr.—the latter still in lonely orbit around the Moon—is boundless. The astronauts continue to perform, one mission after the other, in story-book perfection. We marvel, too, at the ability of the technicians on the ground to quickly respond to unexpected eventualities, like the electrical difficulty just after the launch, and to enable the mission to proceed unimpaired. These achievements inspire all men. They lift our sights for the future.” (.H Chron, 11/20/69, 2 Sec, 5) Birmingham, News: “The flight has been so predictably on schedule that its very success is certain to help push moon travel back into the ho-hum recesses of blase mankind’s mind, as each success in the Mercury and Gemini and early Apollo series made earth orbital spaceflight seem routine.” (B News, 11/20/69)
Astronautics & Aeronautics magazine published special issue containing “1973 Viking Voyage to Mars” by NASA Viking project management. Two orbiters would release two softlanders to search for life, map Martian surface from orbit, monitor Martian weather, study atmosphere, and take three-dimensional color photos from ground. Flight directors on earth would probably choose landing site from orbiter reconnaissance photos taken at arrival. A science satellite in its own right, the orbiter would also relay a record volume of interplanetary data from the lander to earth. Nuclear-powered instrument platform based on Surveyor would push evolution of automation step further during mission. (A&A, 11/69, 30—59)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told House: “. . . I do not at this time wish to commit ourselves to a specific time period for setting sail for Mars. I believe that there are many tasks that can be accomplished that will ultimately provide that capability, but will be less costly and will be necessary in meeting short term objectives.” He urged priority attention to intermediate steps and balanced program “that fully exploits the great potential of unmanned spacecraft, while at the same time maintaining a vigorous manned flight program.” He advocated continuation of lunar exploration to obtain “experience of operating a base for science and exploration on another heavenly body”; manned earth-orbital operations leading to long-term space station supported by low-cost shuttle rocket; greater emphasis on applications satellites that “have the greatest potential for economic return in the near term”; larger funding for unmanned planetary exploration, “an area in which the U.S. may soon be overshadowed by the Soviet Union”; continued nerva development because “improved propulsion is a key to space leadership”; and “special emphasis on ers satellites, “which promise to yield so much ... to agriculture and industry.” (Text; CR, 8/11/69, H7251-4)
In interview released by United Press International Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said he knew of nothing which could feasibly send man to the stars in the predictable future, nerva prototype, only working model of new-generation engine in U.S., was too bulky for flight. Refined version, scheduled for test flight in mid-1970s, was expected to land man on Mars. Beyond that all was conjecture. “There is no design concept and even the basic idea of a controlled thermonuclear reaction has not been demonstrated.” It was not known what thrust could be generated by fusion engine. U.S.S.R. had announced development of plasma-jet or ion-thrust engine which, as designed, would not be useful in deep space or close to earth. U.S. scientists had been working on plasma-jet theory and electric propulsion machine. Science fiction concept of space distortion or warp through which spacecraft could travel in “null space” where distances were shorter and speeds faster had some basis according to Einstein’s theory of relativity. In Univ. of Maryland experiments “presence of gravitational radiation has been tentatively discovered . . . [and] can be interpreted as the interaction of such a warp with the sensor used in the experiment.” Despite this, “there does not appear to be any possibility of utilizing such interactions as a space propulsion system.” (W Star, 12/1/69, A5)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 14 briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget at which Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, said $3,878-billion budget approved by President Johnson had been developed “to maintain an austere but balanced NASA aeronautics and space program aimed at major program goals of high national priority.” Goals were continuing advances in space applications, including initiation of experimental earth resources technology satellites and slightly decelerated research on space environment; achieving manned lunar landing and additional Apollo moon missions, with limited provision for studies—not for development—of equipment to achieve longer lunar stay-times and mobility for future exploration; proceeding with Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount; proceeding with Viking Project to land instruments on Mars in 1973; initiating in FY 1970 Mariner flyby in 1973 of Venus and Mercury; producing family of small planetary Explorers for orbiting Mars and Venus; making preliminary observations of Jupiter with previously approved Pioneer spacecraft; continuing work on unmanned orbiting astronomical observatories; continuing advanced aerospace technology work at about current levels; emphasizing noise reduction, with construction of special noise research laboratory; developing full potential of civil and military aeronautics; and undertaking NERVA project for development of flight-weight nuclear engine. Dr. Paine noted FY 1970 budget, as approved by President Johnson, “would halt a four-year downward trend in NASA budget.” It was “austere and does not make full use of the aerospace capabilities that the nation has developed. . . .” But it permitted “a balanced program of useful work in critical areas.” Budget left “the major new program decisions, especially in the manned flight area, for the next Administration,” and was “ ‘holding budget’ that provides for progress, but defers critical program and funding decisions to the new Administration.” (Transcript)
In Cape Kennedy interview before Apollo 11 launch, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said, “It is my individual feeling that we should articulate a simple, ambitious, optimistic goal of a manned flight to Mars by the end of this century. Whether we say it or not, someone’s going to do it.” After liftoff, Vice President told NASA launching team, “. . . all the time I was out there I couldn’t help thinking of you, the people in here and all over NASA who have done such a brilliant job in putting together the combined effort behind those three gentlemen who are off on this historic mission. ... I bit the bullet for you today as far as Mars is concerned. But on the other hand ... I may be a voice in the wilderness.” In Washington, D.C., Senate Majority Leader Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) told press, “I think we have a lot of problems here on earth that we must face up to and when we settle those we ought to consider future space ventures.” Senate Majority Whip Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said, “The Apollo program is for landing a man on the moon and exploration and should take another one to two years. I think after that the space program ought to fit into our other national priorities.” (Witkin, NYT, 7/17/69, 1; Transcript, Agnew statement to NASA launch crew; Unna, W Post, 7/17/69, Al)
National Assn, of Government Employees President Kenneth T. Lyons told House Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee landing on moon would soon be safer than landing at most U.S. airports. “Do we have to have NASA take over from the FAA in order to get a little sense into our airport and aircraft traffic management jumble?” (Bentley, B Sun, 7/29/69, A5)	, As spacecraft neared and swung around Mars it took 24 close-up pictures from about 2,000 mi at closest point. Pictures were so sharply defined and detailed that they were shown live on TV instead of being refined and released later in photographic prints as originally planned. Pictures—enhanced by computers at JPL to clear out static, highlight images, adjust contrast and brightness, and exaggerate features—were spectacular. They showed that Mars was heavily cratered and looked very much like moon. One photo showed 11-mi-dia crater closely resembling moon’s Copernicus crater and diagonal ditch resembling lunar rifle. During closest approach, onboard TV cameras took 12 high-resolution and 12 medium-resolution pictures, stored some on board for later playback, and transmitted some immediately to ground stations for conversion to images at JPL. Three of four onboard experiments—TV to take pictures, uv spectrometer to identify and measure gases in upper atmosphere, and infrared radiometer to measure planet’s temperature—functioned satisfactorily. Only anomaly was failure in cooling of one channel on infrared spectrometer, designed to identify gases in lower Martian atmosphere, which prevented proper acquisition of data. JPL controllers temporarily lost contact with second Mariner, Mariner VII, en route to Mars, at 6:00 pm EDT July 30. Engineers speculated that spacecraft had been thrown out of alignment when struck by micrometeoroid traveling at 40 mps and had locked on planet Jupiter or another bright object. Contact with Mariner VII was regained seven hours later by switching from one antenna to another and proper attitude was restored by rolling spacecraft around until it locked on star Canopus. Although some of data being transmitted appeared to be abnormal, flyby mission was still expected to succeed. Mariner VI would continue taking pictures and play back recorded near-encounter data during final phase of mission. Data would be compared with data from Mariner VII (launched March 27), which would fly past Mars polar region Aug. 4. (nasa Release 69—26A; Sullivan, NYT, 8/1/69, 1; Auerbach, W Post, 8/1/69, Al; Lannan, W Star, 7/31/69, A5; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
NASA’s Mariner VI spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) was 21,731,091 mi from earth and would fly past Mars July 30. Mariner VII (launched March 27) was 19,526,893 mi from earth and would fly past Mars Aug. 4. Both spacecraft were operating normally. (JPL Release 521)
Dissatisfaction with substandard performance in other parts of society was “something worthwhile that the Space Program is contributing to the United States,” NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, said in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C. “I hope we have spurred our society and our people to . . . demand higher performance, to set bolder goals, and then to have the gumption to stand up before the whole world and demonstrate whether or not the goals are achieved.” Space program had also taught “need for broadly enlisting not only American capability, but the best people from around the world willing to throw their competence and a portion of their careers into challenging endeavors.” It had “unleashed in the 1960’s the talents and energies of a technological generation.” U.S. must continue “to put together bold programs that will release the creative energies of our people in productive channels.” Dr. Paine thought history would record as “the great contribution of our generation” astronauts’ blazing of “trail for all future generations of men who want to . . . conquer new worlds. . . . Through man’s brains, energy and resources life can—and life will—extend itself through the solar system. . . . The 1980’s are very clearly the decade in which both we and the Soviet Union, with reasonable-sized space programs in the 1970’s, will develop a technological capability for landing on Mars.” In response to questions, Dr. Paine said: “It seems clear to me that there are increasing opportunities for all nations to work together in space exploration and application. Certainly we and the Russians can and should cooperate more closely in space science so our two programs can produce greater results than the simple sum of their outputs.” (Transcript)
Selection of investigators and investigation areas for .1973 Viking mission to Mars was announced by NASA. LaRC would manage overall project and be responsible for lander portion of spacecraft. jpl would manage orbiter portion and be responsible for tracking and data acquisition. Viking, follow-on to 1964—1965, 1969, and 1971 Mariner Mars flights, would consist of two instrumented spacecraft in Mars orbit, each of which would detach landing capsule for softlanding on Mars. Mission objectives included detection of life if it existed. (nasa Release 69—166)
In letter advocating postponement of decision on manned Mars landing [see Aug. 20] former Secretary of State Dean Rusk had “gone to the heart of what is bound to become a critical national decision,” Richard Wilson said in Washington Evening Star. “Now that we know we can and will do this thing does it make any difference in the eons of time yet to come when we do it? Fifty years from now might we not have developed far cheaper and more efficient' ways to do it? Mars will still be there. . . . The space men have shown us not only the moon, but what a beautiful planet we have in what may otherwise be a wholly desolate solar system—a beautiful planet that needs loving care to preserve it.” (W Star, 8/22/69, A15)
LaRC announced award of $313,620,000 cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for construction of lander portions of two Viking spacecraft scheduled to softland on Mars in summer 1973 and for project integration services. (LaRC Release)
Man’s knowledge of Venus, Mars, and moon had been enormously enhanced by unmanned Mariner missions, New York Times editorial said. They were relatively inexpensive and did not risk human lives. “Nevertheless, American political leadership has been so obsessed with sending a man to the moon that unmanned probes of the planets became the stepchildren of the national space program. There were times when even the continued existence of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—the center for these unmanned flights—seemed in doubt. Now, in the new phase of American space exploration begun in the wake of Apollo IPs historic achievement, the major cost-benefit advantages of Mariner type unmanned flights need to he more fully appreciated by Washington policy makers, and even more intensively exploited than in the past, even as the manned exploration of the moon continues.” (NYT, 7/31/69, 32) During July: NASA-appointed Astronomy Missions Board recommended long-range program in space astronomy to NASA. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director, had been appointed in 1967 to propose programs for 1970s. NASA published Board’s report in November [see Nov. 9]. (Text; NASA Release 69—149; NASA ossa)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 11 and Mariner VI and VII: “The unprecedented advances in the study both of the moon and of Mars during the past few weeks have produced a stunning crop of surprises about both celestial bodies. On the closest examination yet, these neighbors in space have proved far more complex and strange than previous theories have led men to believe. And the magnificent, lifeless desolation of the lunar and Martian surfaces emphasizes more than ever how wonderful it is and how little science understands why it is that this third planet from the sun is so uniquely green, vibrant and overrunning with life.” (NYT, 9/16/69, 40)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star criticized NASA’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory and plans to protect U.S. from lunar contamination: “. . . there is ample doubt that (1) the quarantine will really be air-tight and (2) it will make very much difference if the contamination shield leaks a little.” He also commented that, earlier, “great lip service was paid to the necessity for avoiding contamination of the moon and other celestial bodies by lifeforms from Earth. The rationale was pragmatic, not moral, and purely anthropocentric: If we contaminate the surface we won’t be able to say with certainty whether the lifeforms we eventually find are native or imported. This line is still being hewed to—after a fashion—in the case of Mars, but for the moon the game has proved too costly to be played with strict attention to rules.” (W Star, 6/8/69, C4)
LaRC issued Rfps for design and financial proposals for planetary lander and project integration portions of NASA’s Viking project. Viking spacecraft—consisting of lander and orbiter—were to be procured for two planned flights to Mars to search for scientific data in 1973. (nasa Release 69-36)
In U.S.’s Annual Review of National and Co-Operative International Space Activities, Soviet Government report said Soviet scientists had paid “great attention” to developing methods of detecting signs of life on other planets. “With the development of space research, the problem of detecting life on the celestial bodies closest to the earth by means of space craft is becoming a priority matter. The considerable difference between conditions on the surface of the moon, Venus and Mars and those in which terrestrial life exists makes it necessary for us to extend our knowledge of the limits within which terrestrial life and life in general can exist. In this connexion Soviet scientists are investigating the possible limits of the existence of life. The absence of systematic processes for the movement of matter on the moon obviously makes active life on its surface impossible. On Mars, where free liquid water is probably absent, life is possible using matter transfer by frost, ice in the soil, water vapour and the wind. Examination of the temperature limits for the existence of life gives rise to a number of considerations which allow us not to exclude the possibility of the existence of life, in for example, the polar regions of Venus.” (Text)
London Economist editorial: “When Europe drew pride and status from its colonies, the Americans had none: the tables are turned now. While the United States rings July 21st red on its calendar, Europe faces the probability that when the planets are opened up we Europeans will have no part in doing it. The idea, at this late stage, of a European manned space programme is nonsense. The policy that would make more sense would be to approach the United States to see if the Administration will accept some foreign collaboration in the hugely expensive next years of its space programme. If the next American objective is Mars, a sensible Administration may welcome help and participation—especially if this excludes pressure to co-operate with the Russians. . . . There will be no opportunity in this generation that it would cost us more to miss.” {CSM, 8/1/69)
Scientific data provided by two spacecraft included more than 2,000 uv spectra and more than 400 infrared spectra of atmosphere and surface. Infrared radiometer returned more than 800 near-encounter and 100,000 far-encounter surface and atmospheric measurements. TV cameras produced 198 high-quality analog pictures of Martian surface. Tracking data provided measurements of mass and ephemeris of Mars, but degree of success of celestial mechanics experiment was yet to be determined. S-band occultation experiment determined electron and temperature profile of-ionosphere and temperature and pressure profile of lower atmosphere. (NASA Proj Off)
Space Task Group presented report The Post-Apollo Space Program: Directions for the Future to President Nixon at White House. It recommended basic goal of balanced manned and unmanned space program conducted for all mankind, with emphasis on increased utilization of space capabilities for services to man through expanded space applications program; enhancement of U.S. defense posture for world peace and security through exploitation of space techniques for military missions; continuing strong program of lunar and planetary exploration, astronomy, physics, and earth and life sciences; development of new systems and technology for space operations, emphasizing commonality, reusability, and economy through development of new space transportation capability and space station modules; and promotion of world community through program of broad international participation and cooperation. As focus for development of new capability, Task Group recommended U.S. accept long-range goal of manned planetary exploration with manned Mars mission before end of century. Activities leading to goal should include initial concentration on exploiting existing capability and developing new one while maintaining program balance within available resources; operational phase using new systems and capabilities in earth-moon space, with men living and working in that environment for extended periods; and manned exploration missions out of earth-moon space, using experience of earlier two phases. Schedule and budgetary implications of phases were subject to Presidential choice, with detailed program to be determined in normal annual budget and program review. Report outlined three possible NASA programs for manned Mars landing before century’s end. Option I would launch manned mission in mid-1980s and would establish orbiting lunar station, 50-man earthorbiting space base, and lunar surface base. Funding would rise from current $4-billion level to $8- to $10-billion level in 1980. Decision to proceed with development of space station, earth-to-orbit shuttle, and space tug would be required in FY 1971. Option II would include Mars mission launch in 1986, allowing for evaluation of unmanned Mars mission results before final designation of landing date and require about $8-billion maximum annual expenditure in early 1980s. Option III would include initial development of space station and reusable shuttles, as in Options I and II, but would defer decision on manned Mars landing date while maintaining goal of after 1980 but before close of century. Concurrent development of space transportation system and modular space stations would require rise in 1976 annual expenditures to $5.7 billion, while their development in series would entail $4- to $5-billion funding level. Recommended DOD options were: (A) program of full military space capability in case of overt threat to national security, (B) development of efforts to counter known and accepted projections of security threat and increase in development activities if threat increased, and (C) program of lower level system deployment with technology and support effort necessary for contingency planning on assumption that lessening of world tensions would reduce emphasis on national defense. At White House briefing following presentation, press secretary Ronald L. Ziegler said President Nixon had concurred in Task Group’s rejection of two other, extreme space programs, one to land men on Mars as soon as possible, regardless of cost, and one to eliminate manned flight program after completion of Apollo. He did not know when President would make decision on course to follow, but budgetary considerations would be major factor. (Text; PD, 9/22/69, 1291; NYT, 9/16/69, 1)
Washington Post editorial: “There was a certain logic in playing down the purely scientific aspects of the Apollo program in the past since the effort was to land men on the moon before the Russians did. But that day is past. The scientists of space, as contrasted with its engineers and technicians, have been forced into the back seat of the manned space program. It is time now to make them the navigators. The choice of missions—for future flights to the moon and for future operations that will lead some day to a trip to Mars and eventually other planets— should be largely in their hands. They, far better than the men who created the hardware and the knowledge necessary to make space travel possible, know the areas most appropriate for exploration in terms of gaining knowledge.” (W Post, 8/8/69) Pac (Package Attitude Control) system, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 340-mi (547.1-km) apogee, 300mi (482.7-km) perigee, 94.2-min period, and 32.9° inclination. Primary objective was to flight-test long-life, low-power, three-axis Pac earth-stabilized control system for Delta 2nd stage and to demonstrate feasibility of using stage as experimental platform. Oso VI was spin-stabilized, weighed 640 lbs, carried seven experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. It was similar to previous osos but had unique capability which enabled two sun-pointing telescopes to study in detail uv and x-ray spectra at any point on solar disc and would provide greater knowledge of solar atmosphere (chromosphere) as well as outermost layer (corona) visible only through special instruments or during total solar eclipse. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by Harvard College Observatory, Naval Research Laboratory, Rutgers Univ., Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories, Univ. of New Mexico, Univ. of Bologna, and University College (London). Both tape recorders were operating at liftoff and were still operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft stabilized and acquired sun as scheduled shortly after entering orbit. By Aug. 15 all experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Two minor anomalies— higher than planned use of current by motor that provided fine elevation pointing and lower than expected spacecraft operating temperature —were not expected to affect spacecraft operation adversely. Oso VI was seventh in series of eight oso spacecraft designed to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and together provided more than 8,600 hrs of scientific information, oso—c (launched Aug. 25, 1965) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily. Oso V (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit, oso program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Releases 69—112, 69—112A, 69—123; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
NASA’s Mariner VII, launched from ETR March 27, successfully executed midcourse maneuver in response to radio commands from Woo-mera, Australia, tracking station. Spacecraft, more than 2.5-million mi from earth, would fly within 2,000 mi of Mars Aug. 5. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/9/69, A5; Reuters, W Post, 4/9/69, A7)
Richmond, Va., News-Leader editorial approved Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s calling for flight to Mars by end of century [see July 16]: “One day, man will go beyond the planets, to other solar systems; right now . . . that is not within our technological reach. But Mars is, and so are the other planets. The moon is in earth’s, and man’s, own crib. Plans and commitments should be made—now—for man to take grown-up strides in the real world of space.” (R News-Leader, 7/18/69)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: “During the entire spectrum of our second and third decades in space, manned space flight has not merely been emphasized, but has literally cannibalized any hope for major scientific planetary, interplanetary, communications, meteorological, oceanographic (in cooperation with satellites), earth resources satellite programs, etc.! I must conclude . . . that the only valid justification for early development of the [space] shuttle is to supply the newborn 50—100 crew manned space stations and the manned exploration of Mars.” From 1958 to 1969 U.S. had launched approximately 750 spacecraft, Karth said: usaf, 380; NASA, 241; usn, 91; and joint usaf—USN, 37. (Text)
Los Angeles Times editorial observed space industry employment drop from 400,000 in mid-1960s to current 200,000—at which rate it would sink to 50,000 by 1972. “. . . the pool of scientific and technical expertise which has been brought together in the manned space program is disintegrating. If the President wants to save what is really an invaluable national resource, he and Congress cannot wait much longer to assign new projects to the space agency. . . . “A sound space program deserves a high place on the scale of priorities. And, both economic and military considerations dictate that the emphasis should be heavily on activities in the space near earth rather than on esoteric exploration of such deep planets as Mars and Venus. The proposal for construction in earth orbit of a large, permanent scientific laboratory . . . seems to deserve serious consideration as the major space project of the 1970s.” (LA Times, 3/14/69)
Washington Post editorial: “It is not often that the public has a chance to share in the day to day unraveling of scientific mysteries. The men and women who engage in basic research prefer to work quietly in laboratories and eventually announce their findings in the atmosphere of scholarly meetings or academic publications. But at Houston and Pasadena [msc and JPl] these days, the public has become a silent observer of the plodding work that goes into basic research. Regardless of the drama that is involved, the study of the rocks brought back by Apollo 11 from the moon and of the pictures being transmitted back by Mariners 6 and 7 as they fly past Mars is simply basic research. Although results are trickling out each day, the dimensions of each discovery are hard to measure and an understanding of their cumulative impact is likely to be long in coming.” (W Post, 8/2/69, A12)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and other top NASA officials testified on future space programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Introducing programs, Dr. Paine said: “The decade of the 1970’s and 1980’s should have a program as bold in concept and as productive as we have had in the decade of the 1960’s. ... we need to have clear objectives to focus our work and a commitment, subject ... to annual review, as to what these achievements will be. Our general goal area should be the continued exploration of the solar system while deriving the maximum scientific and practical benefits here on earth from the space program. There is no question that, at some future time, we will have the capability for manned planetary exploration and we need to face now some of the decisions that will not bear fruition for more than a decade. Although I do not believe that we will see manned exploration of the planets in the 1970’s in the United States ... I do think this could come in the 1980’s. It is by no means clear that for the Soviet Union the decision may not be made to mount a crash program and bring this in before the end of the decade of the 1970’s.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, described possible 1981— 1982, 12-man, 2-ship expedition to Mars [see Aug. 1]. Each spacecraft would weigh 1.6 million lbs at departure from earth orbit and would be 270 ft long, “smaller than what we are flying already to the moon.” nasa was using “concept of reusability” in planning, to improve and reduce cost of operating in space, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Committee. Reusability could be achieved “through the reuse of launch and space vehicles and . . . through the reuse of a mission module such as a space station” put into orbit and used over 10-yr or even 20-yr period. Space shuttles would be designed to run 100 or more flights. Modules and vehicles would be designed for multiple applications in earth, lunar, and synchronous orbits. Space tug would permit travel from space station to other spacecraft and back again—“general purpose . . . equipment.” In earth orbital operations, “it permits us to fly off from the space station over to ... an oao, orbiting astronomical observatory, either to repair or check the oao, or to bring it back to a space station where it can then be loaded on the space shuttle for return to earth and then brought back into orbit after repairs.” (Transcript)
Press in U.S. and around the world underscored Apollo IPs landing on moon and man’s first steps on another planet. St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “There is no doubt that the United States should continue to support a substantial spacefaring program. Anything else would be a denial of the scientific spirit of the century and the qualities that have made America what it is. But its scope should be measured by findings and probabilities—and one other factor. Future spacefaring ought to be a co-operative effort of all nations able to participate, with the benefits to be shared by all.” (St. Louis P—D, 7/20/69) Washington Sunday Star: “A creature that can stand where Armstrong and Aldrin stand tonight—that can, in the future, move among the spheres and literally explore new worlds ... is unlikely to give up on the hard task of perfecting himself and his life in his natural environment on earth. The God who brought him thus far from a blob of squirming protoplasm ... is unlikely ... to let man blow it all now. Here . . . must be the answer to the national debate as to whether we go ahead in space, or whether we tend to our knitting at home. We are bound to do both. . . . The progressive expansion of the physical and spiritual domain of man inevitably will intensify our determination and ability, in concert with other nations, to build a home world where hunger, fear and violence no longer have a place.” (W Star, 7/20/69, Gl) William Hines in Washington Sunday Star: “One cannot question the majesty of conception or magnitude of effort that made Apollo 11 possible.” But one could ask, “Is this trip really necessary?” One saw in Apollo “that fundamental failing called hubris, which got so many protagonists into hot water in the old Greek mythology. Hubris in English is usually taken to mean prideful arrogance; in ancient Greek the word meant simple insolence. The Apollo enthusiast rejects the concept of hubris; he says we go to the moon not because we are arrogant, but because we are driven, and thereby implicitly rejects the concept of free will and substitutes sappiness for sassiness. The majority asks, ‘But if we didn’t go, what?’ and the minority responds, ‘If we didn’t go, so what?’” (W Star, 7/20/69, G2) Humorist Art Buchwald in Washington Post: “Sometimes one gets the feeling that the right hand germs in the Government don’t know what the left hand germs are doing. This was brought home to me . . . when I read about the millions of dollars that were being spent to see that the astronauts did not bring back a single germ from the moon. Unfortunately, across the page from that story was another that the Army was going ahead with open air testing of nerve gases and germ warfare.” (W Post, 7/20/69, B6) Los Angeles Herald-Examiner: “America’s moon program has benefited all mankind. It has brought better color television, water purification at less cost, new paints and plastics, improved weather forecasting, medicine, respirators, walkers for the handicapped, laser surgery, world-wide communications, new transportation systems, earthquake prediction system and solar power. . . . The Mars goal should bring benefits to all mankind even greater than the tremendous contributions of the moon program.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/20/69) Baltimore Sun: “. . . it is still almost incredible that in the afternoon of a Sunday on earth two humans found themselves within a vehicle resting on the surface of the moon. Nothing could quite prepare one’s mind for that, or for the subsequent moment of climax, the actual setting of a human foot on the substance of our barren satellite. One of the mysteries that had engaged the infinitely inquisitive mind of man is now made tangible. Others remain beyond our planet and upon it.” (B Sun, 7/21/69, A16) Chicago Daily News: “These have been moments to savor—moments in which uncounted millions have shared the immediacy of a turning point in history. This time there was no lapse of weeks or months, waiting for the event to be confirmed. We were all there, bound together by the miracle of communication that intertwined all the other miracles of technology that marked man’s first step on a celestial body.” (C Daily News, 7/21/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Superlatives pale before the magnificence of the achievement. . . . but how many years before the astounding performance of Armstrong and Aldrin will seem as primitive as the pioneering work of the Wright brothers?” (MJ, 7/21/69, 14) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Man’s store of scientific knowledge will be vastly enriched by the landing on the moon. In no other single event in history has there been greater opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the universe.” (Plain Dealer, 7/21/69) London Daily Sketch: “America’s moon triumph offers this old world’s bickering and jealous people a parable of hope.” (B Sun, 7/22/69, Al) Montreal Star: “The deepest hope for a world starved for some form of symbolism, of an attempt at harmony in place of selfishness and narrow nationalism, came from the astronauts,” CFOX Radio, Montreal, broadcast. “Eliminate war? Yes! Eliminate poverty? Yes! But the exploration of space will help us, not impede us, in reaching these goals.” (Am Consul, Montreal) Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden (principal organ of Social Democratic Party): “No Soviet politician has ever before used such conciliatory tones toward the U.S.A. as did Foreign Minister Gromyko recently in his speech before the Supreme Soviet. . . . This Russian position seems generally to be based on fears of a confrontation with China. . . . One of the side effects can be increased Russian interest in broader scientific cooperation in space research. Nothing else could be better designed for global cooperation, since nothing else gives us clearer testimony that we live in one world.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Classical astronomical data on figures of moon and terrestrial planets were being supplemented by new information from Lunar Orbiter program. Comparable future planetary probes would provide fundamental . data from simple experiments, Cornell Univ. radiophysicists Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Dr. Malcolm J. Campbell, and Dr. Carl Sagan said in Science. Lunar Orbiter results had revealed lunar mascons’ nonuniform surface distribution that could explain lunar dynamical asymmetries “and perhaps similar asymmetries for Mars and Mercury.” {Science, 8/15/69, 651—7)
There was no question that manned Mars mission could be “organized, equipped and flown, possibly by 1985 or 1986,” William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. “But the cost of such a flight would be tremendous.” Apollo had cost $25 billion over eight years. Project Mars “would cost four times as much over a period twice as long.” Taxpayers and legislators “should listen to the professional pitchmen of space with a dubious ear, demanding facts instead of the sort of rhetoric Dr. George E. Mueller delivered on Apollo 11 splashdown day.” (W Star, 8/3/69, C4) across in Martian summer and increased to 3,500 mi across in winter. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/5/69, Al)
In NASA-funded project U.S. Bureau of Mines was seeking way to get water and air from lunar rocks, build underground lunar shelters like mines, weld and melt lunar materials, and mine planets like Mars and Venus which might bear substances more valuable than those on moon, Associated Press said. First lunar mining would occur during Apollo 13 mission in March. Astronaut would bore 10-ft hole in lunar crust to determine what lay beneath and to test drill designed for NASA by Martin Corp. Scientists at U.S. Bureau of Mines research center in Bruceton, Pa., and at six other locations had been studying since 1965 possible use of lunar materials to build and support manned lunar station. Project Director Thomas C. H. Hutchinson had said, “Even if we found pure platinum on the moon, it would cost too much to bring it back.” Goal was to establish manufacturing processes on moon to speed exploration of planets. (AP, W Post, 11/20/69, A78)
NASA announced selection of 38 scientists organized into eight teams to assist in design and development of Martian softlander for 1973 Viking missions. Teams would participate in early instrument development, designing softlander, and planning missions. Final selection of investigations and participating scientists for both landers and orbiters making up 1973 Viking missions would be made December 1969, when initial results of Mariner flybys of Mars in summer 1969 would be available. Planetary Programs Directorate would have management responsibility for Viking Mars 1973 mission; LaRC had been assigned overall project management and direct responsibility for managing planetary iander portion; jpl had management responsibility for orbiter spacecraft, (nasa Release 69—31)
First pictures of Mars taken by NASA’s Mariner VI, launched Feb. 24 to fly by Mars equator, were received at JPL. Full-disc photos, taken between 771,500 and 450,000 mi from Mars, were flashed on screen every five minutes. They showed Mars as dull, gray, egg-shaped body with crack in surface and bright spot—southern polar cap—with ragged edge. Better pictures were expected as spacecraft traveled closer to Mars. (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69, Al; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/69, A3)
Proximity of probable date of lunar landing to date of arrival of Mariner VI and VII cameras near Mars surface would provide U.S. TV viewers with “double space feature,” NASA said. Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, credited feat to advances in electronics through which streams of signals could be returned from moon and from Mars into tracking centers and switching points on earth, thence via comsats into TV networks throughout globe. Apollo 11 mission would include eight color telecasts from spacecraft. Lunar telecasts would be black and white since lm would lack power for color TV. Mars telecasts from Mariner VI would produce 50 photos; Mariner VII would deliver 91. Best resolution from closeup would be 900 ft; it had been 2 mi in 1965 Mariner IV photos and was 100 mi by best optical means from earth, (nasa Release 69-831)
LaRC and JPL announced formation of management teams to direct Viking Mars 1973 program to send two instrumented lander-and-orbiter spacecraft to Mars in 1973. LaRC had responsibility for overall project management and for lander portion of spacecraft. JPL would manage orbiter portion and tracking and data acquisition. James S. Martin, Jr., was LaRC project manager, with Henry W. Norris named Viking orbiter manager at jpl. (nasa Release 69-54; jpl Release 512)
NASA announced release of The Book of Mars, one-volume digest of facts and theories about Mars by Dr. Samuel Glasstone, illustrated with photos taken during Mariner IV mission 1964—65, when spacecraft flew within 6,000 mi of Mars surface. Book traced history of man’s acquisition of Mars data and compared Mars with other planets. (nasa Special Release)
New York Times editorial: “On that eventful day when the first men walk on the surface of Mars, they will find much ‘magnificent desolation’ akin to that seen by Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin when they strolled on the moon last month. That virtual certainty emerges from the brilliantly successful exploration of the red planet just completed by Mariners 6 and 7. Their expedition lacked the human drama of Apollo 11, but the scientific information they returned may well qualify the two Mariners as the most scientifically productive enterprise men have yet carried out in space.” (NYT, 8/11/69)
At LeRC technical conference on plasmas and magnetic fields, LeRC Electromagnetic Propulsion Div. Chief Wolfgang E. Moeckel said, “Man has reached the Moon and there is now some talk about going to the stars, but we are not yet ready with propulsion systems that are suitable for exploring our own solar system.” Manned flights to distant planets would become reasonable only with advanced nuclear propulsion systems. Thermonuclear fusion rocket, if feasible, could reduce manned Mars mission to four to five months and journey to Jupiter or Saturn to under three years. Solar electric rockets looked promising for unmanned probes to planets as remote as Jupiter. (LeRC Release 69-58; LeRC pao)
Washington Daily Neivs editorial commented on Condon Report on UFOs: “Dedicated disciples of the little green men from Mars school no doubt will find the Condon report represents another diabolical plot to suppress truth. But most Americans will find the report something less than a surprise. Apart from wasting time, continuing study would waste taxpayer money.” (W News, 1/18/69)
There is a good chance there is some form of life on Mars,” Los Angeles Herald-Examiner quoted Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, as saying in interview. “The planet has a thin atmosphere, the climate is tough but not completely unreasonable.” Changes of colors on Mars eould be vegetation. Mars’ seasons were like earth’s but twice as long. Its days were same length as earth’s. (Smith, LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69)
At White House dinner for West German Chancellor Kurt G. Kiesinger, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, told press putting man on Mars by 1982 posed less risk than putting man on moon because most technical problems had been solved. In time space travel would become commonplace, with spacecraft carrying passengers. On Martian surface man could move from home to car or office in completely controlled environment. (Shelton, W Post, 8/8/69, D2)
jpl astronomer Dr. Ronald Schorn announced “definite and conclusive” evidence of water on Mars had been found in five-year study with Stephen Little of Univ. of Texas and jpl scientist Dr. C. B. Farmer at McDonald Observatory in Ft. Davis, Tex. Noting Mars generally should be compared with driest deserts of earth, he said: “If you took all the water we found and laid it out over the whole planet, it would be only 1,000th of an inch thick. Mars may still not be a great place to live, but there’s a chance of life there.” Photos to be taken by Mariner VI and Mariner VII spacecraft, Dr. Schorn said, would help solve question of whether enough water existed to sustain life on Mars. New spectra, superior to any previously available, were made possible by NASA-supported improvements in McDonald 82-in Struve reflecting telescope and its large spectrograph. Observations of Mars were beginning with more powerful, 107-in reflecting telescope at McDonald, constructed with funds from NASA, nsf, and Univ. of Texas, (nasa Release 69—48; AP, W Post, 3/25/69, A5)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified in FY 1970 authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that he believed “the greatest significance” of President Nixon’s decision to include in budget amendment amounts for continued lunar exploration after first Apollo landings and for continued Saturn V production was “that it recognizes the fundamental fact that the United States should not and does not plan to stop its further development and use of manned space flight.” Early manned lunar landing would allow additional savings of perhaps as much as $39 million in amended Apollo budget. Budget included funds for improved scientific equipment for more advanced missions to moon and for limited Apollo Applications program. Fund cuts would mean some program reorientation as well as delay in Workshop, previously scheduled for mid-1971. Amended budget supported continuation of plans for 1971 and 1973 Mars missions and first mission to Mercury in 1973, with Venus swing-by. In space applications, “where we are placing special emphasis,” Earth Resources Technology Satellite program would enable NASA, with other agencies, to test practical use of space to gather information on water levels, crops, forests, and other resources. “Despite the sizable overall reduction ... we have not reduced the earth resources project.” Budget included funds to proceed with nerva development and continued to give “high priority to our work in aeronautics.” New construction would include Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory at LaRC, “unique national facility for studying the fundamentals of noise generation and reduction.” U.S.S.R. was continuing vigorous program in both aeronautics and space. “The Soviet commitment represents . . . the application of resources at about the same rate as that we have averaged in recent years,” with “significantly higher percentage of the gross national product.” Soviets were “proceeding in manned space flight programs directed both at sending men to the moon and at substantially enlarged and extended manned operations in earth orbit. . . . Automatic rendezvous and docking flights with Cosmos 186—188 and 212—213 and the manned Soyuz 4—5 mission in January, with manned docking and crew transfer, demonstrated the increasing Soviet capability. . . . They appear to be pointed to a future capability for assembly in earth orbit of large space stations and of manned spacecraft to send to the moon and beyond.” U.S.S.R. had “made attempts to launch one or more spacecraft to the planets at almost every opportunity—three or four times the number of attempts we have been able to make.” (Testimony)
History of Jet Propulsion Laboratory from 1936, “when the ‘crazy scientists’ under . . . Dr. Theodore von Karman lit off one of their rockets in the dry gulch called the Arroyo Seco,” to current time, when “jpl’s sights are set a little higher—and farther out,” was traced by John Lannan in Washington Sunday Star, jpl controlled NASA Deep Space Network with jurisdiction over space efforts 10,000 mi from earth and beyond, though its Goldstone facility also had participated with gsfc in support of Apollo 11. Its space flight operation facility was “actual directorate” for handling cosmic penetration flights. It was currently gearing for Martian orbiter series in 1971 and for 1973 Viking landers. Future held possibilities of developing and directing missions leading to Grand Tour of planets. JPL was owned by Federal Government and staffed and operated by Cal Tech. (W Star, 8/10/69, G3)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from Wallops Station. Nike-Tomahawk carried gsfc payload to 141.1-mi (227.0-km) altitude to test neutral-mass spectrometer system with unique sample-flow and test-leak subsystem necessary for making high-pressure neutral-constituent measurements on planned Mars and Venus missions and to demonstrate capability of sterilized-mass-spectrometer electronics in , flight environment for first time. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and complete data were obtained. Nike-Tomahawk carried gsfc and Univ. of Michigan payload to 197.6-mi (318.0-km) altitude to measure nitrogen density and temperature. Secondary objectives were to evaluate Omegatron system designed for San Marco-C satellite, measure density and temperature of nitrogen simultaneously, compare Pitot-static-probe and thermosphere-probe density in 74.6-mi (120.0-km) region, and validate mass spectrometer nitrogen measurement and electrostatic-probe electron temperature data. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and complete data were obtained. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 124.3-mi (200.0-km) altitude to measure neutral atmospheric density by Pitot technique in 18.4- to 74.6-mi (30.0- to 120.0-km) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and all atmospheric measurements made by Pitot probe were excellent, (nasa Rpts SRL)
NASA’s Mariner VII televised two good test pictures before start of its first series of 34 approach shots more than 1 million mi from Mars. (AP, W Star, 8/2/69, A3; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
jpl engineers sent signals to Mariner VI to turn on TV camera and scientific experiments that would measure Mars surface characteristics and atmosphere. Spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) began tracking Mars and would begin taking first of 33 far-encounter pictures 771,500 mi from Mars early July 29. Full-disc photos would be received at jpl July 29. (AP, B Sun, 7/29/69, A5)
President Nixon arrived in Belgium at start of eight-day goodwill visit to heads of state in Brussels, London, Bonn, West Berlin, Rome, Paris, and the Vatican. In welcoming speech at Brussels National Airport, King Baudouin said: “During this year, which will perhaps be that of man’s first landing on the moon, we are more than ever conscious of the gulf between the wonderful possibilities open to us and the obligations which burden the world because of war, want, injustice, and inequality. May your journey and your interviews provide an opportunity for friendly nations better to combine their efforts to solve their problems on which the very future of mankind depends.” (PD, 3/3/69, 310) Primary mission objective was equatorial flyby mission for exploratory investigations of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary objective spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 840-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mission offered first opportunity to make scientific measurements on night side of Mars. Two onboard TV cameras would take pictures of Mars disc during approach with 15-mi optimum resolution and of surface during flyby with 900-ft optimum resolution. Infrared spectrometer and uv spectrometer would probe Mars atmosphere, and oc-cultation experiment would obtain data on atmospheric pressures and densities. Infrared radiometer would measure surface temperatures on both light and dark sides of Mars; celestial mechanics experiment would use tracking information to refine astronomical data. Sharp increase in data returns would be achieved over 1964 Mariner missions. Mariner VI TV pictures would contain 3.9-million bits of information; Mariner IV contained 240,000 bits in 1965. Mariner VI would transmit science data at basic rate of 270 bps and high rate of 16,200 bps before flyby; Mariner IV transmitted at 8 % bps. Mariner VI was follow-on to 1964 Mariner/Mars missions and precursor to 1971 orbital and 1973 landing missions. First Mars probe, Mariner III (launched Nov. 4, 1964), had failed to achieve desired orbit when shroud remained attached to spacecraft. Mariner IV (launched Nov. 28, 1964) had transmitted first close-up photos of Mars in July 1965. Mariner VII (Mariner G) would be launched
First measurement of Mars uv dayglow, made during Mariner VI Mars flyby July 31, was reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado astrogeophysicists C. A. Barth, C. W. Hord, J. B. Pearce, K. K. Kelly, A. I. Stewart, G. E. Thomas, and G. P. Anderson; Johns Hopkins physicist W. G. Fastie; and JPL’s 0. F. Raper. Emission features from ionized carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide were measured in 1,900 A to 4,300 A spectral region. Lyman alpha 1,216 A line of atomic hydrogen and 1,304 A, 1,356 A, and 2,972 A lines of atomic oxygen were observed. Prime objective of experiment was to search for nitrogen in Martian atmosphere. First analysis had shown no evidence of nitrogen emissions in uv spectrum of upper atmosphere (Science, 9/5/69, 1004-5)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
NAS—NRC Space Science Board released Physiology in the Space Environment, Vol. 1, Circulation, prepared at NASA request. Report found systematic program of ground-based and inflight biomedical experimentation was essential for planning of long-duration manned space missions, such as to Mars. Knowledge of circulatory system and effects of space flight must be greatly expanded. It recommended experimentation with animals, man, simulations, laboratory investigations, comprehensive literature studies, and physiological measurement before, after, and during flight to obtain all possible data from ground-based work. Flight experiments should be limited to those requiring weightlessness and other conditions not reproducible on ground. (Text; nas Release)
JPL engineers reported Mariner VII, en route to Mars, had suffered sudden change in velocity—possibly because of gas leak from pressure can in infrared spectrometer—that could throw off its approach to Mars. Also, 20 of 92 telemetry channels, including one that aimed TV camera platform toward Mars, had not operated properly after controllers lost contact with spacecraft July 30. When engineers turned on TV cameras, however, they began taking pictures that appeared to be of Mars. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/2/69, A4; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
NASA selected Martin Marietta Corp. for $280,000,000 costplusincentivefee/ award-fee contract for Viking lander system and technical integration of project to send two instrumented spacecraft to Mars during summer of 1973. (nasa Release 69—82)
Scientists at JPL presented conflicting opinions to newsmen on preliminary data from Mariner VI and Mariner VII flybys of Mars. Dr. George C. Pimentel and Dr. Kenneth C. Herr of Univ. of California at Berkeley said data from infrared spectrometer indicated presence of gaseous ammonia and methane in Martian atmosphere. “We are confident that we have detected solid carbon dioxide that is not on the surface; that is, it is suspended as a cloud above the polar cap. Our data are consistent with and suggest that the polar cap is composed of water ice and probably not solid carbon dioxide near the polar cap edge.” If life did exist on Mars, they said, it could be in region near edge of polar icecap where “polar ice provides a reservoir of water” and solid carbon dioxide cloud “provides protection from ultraviolet radiation.” Dr. Gerry Neugebauer of Cal Tech said temperature of Mars was “strong circumstantial evidence that the polar caps are in fact predominantly made of carbon dioxide.” Infrared radiometer experiment, which measured temperatures on Martian surface, indicated that temperature of south polar cap was close to —253 °F, temperature at which carbon dioxide would solidify in thin Martian atmosphere. uv spectrometer experiment had found large amount of uv radiation reflected from south polar icecap, indicating that uv light from sun was penetrating thin Martian atmosphere and reaching surface. Dr. Charles W. Hord of Univ. of Colorado said strong uv radiation reaching surface “would destroy many of the important molecular bonds of organic compounds.” If life did exist on Mars, he said, it “must be pretty strong stuff,” or it must have some means of protection against uv rays. Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech said one of most striking results of Mariner photos was indication of dynamic process occurring on Martian surface. Unlike rest of Martian surface, which was heavily cratered and closely resembled moon, Hellas area appeared to be smooth and free of craters. “Hellas is the first non-lunar-like feature” discovered by Mariner VII, he said. Apparently there was “activity in that region . . . obliterating craters as fast as they are being formed.” (Bishop, WSJ, 8/8/69; Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/69, 1; Lannan, W Star, 8/8/69, A4)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 11 lunar landing and Mariner VI Mars mission: “Future generations may well regard the last two weeks of July 1969 as the most revolutionary and significant fortnight of the entire twentieth century. Not for 300 years has any comparable quantum leap in man’s knowledge of the cosmos taken place in so brief a time.” (NYT, 8/2/69, 10)	,
jpl press conference reported new information on Mars from the Mariner VI flyby. The far-encounter photo above, taken 463f2S0 miles from Mars July 29, showed Meridiani Sinus and Sabacus Sinus as a dark feature near the equator. The bright area at the top was Cydonia. The south polar cap showed at the bottom of the planet. i UVS'. NARROW-ANGIE TV use compatible with airport locations, and to analyze feasibility of compatible land development in high-noise areas, (dot Release 18369) ■ Apollo 8 commemorative medallions containing metal carried on mission were being distributed to NASA employees “as a token of appreciation for each individual’s efforts in making the United States lunar program possible,” NASA Hq. Weekly Bulletin said, (NASA Hq WB, 8/4/69, 1) August 4—5: NASA’s Mariner VII transmitted first closeup photos of Mars south pole as it flew within 2,100 mi of planet. Dr. Robert P, Sharp, geologist at Cal Tech, said 31 photos might look like “baby pictures of Earth. This is what the Earth might have looked like some four billion years ago before it developed an atmosphere and oceans to weather its surface and nurture life.” Photos taken on pass Aug. 4 were transmitted to JPL Aug. 5. Polar cap, which had appeared gleaming white in more distant photos, looked dull gray in closeups. Pictures showed south polar cap with snow-like substance-—possibly frozen carbon dioxide—piled up in vast dunes; pocked with deep, steeply walled craters; and much darker than desert to north. Floor of bright circular Hellas desert area, believed to be shallow crater or collapsed area, was strangely free of meteorite impact craters. Mariner VII (launched March 27) with Mariner VI (launched Feb. 24) had provided most detailed information to date on Mars, including 198 photos covering 20% of planet and detailed scientific data from onboard experiments. Data indicated: thin Martian atmosphere had no detectable nitrogen; south polar cap, which appeared white and smoothly circular in telescope pictures, was ragged with dark splotch in center; surface temperatures ranged from 75°F to —100°F; some of narrower thin dark lines called canals might be segments of rubbled rims of craters up to 300 mi across; and Martian surface, though heavily pocked, was not as rugged as lunar surface. (AP, B Sun, 8/6/69, Al; AP, W Star, 8/6/69, A7; Auerbach, W Post, 8/6/69, A3)
Mars’ reddish color might be attributed to carbon suboxide, Univ. of Massachusetts physicists William T. Plummer and Robert K. Carson reported in Science. They had found reflection spectrum of Mars could be well matched from 0.2 p through 1.6 p and farther by polymers of carbon suboxide. (Science, 11/28/69, 1141—2)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said: “. . . man’s flight to the moon and beyond could be the only means he has left of renewing his dwindling spirits. . . . The voyage of Apollo 8 around the moon last Christmas did more than any other single event last year to restore man’s faith in himself-—and that flight will pale beside an actual moon landing when it comes. ... It could just be that when man walks the moon for the first time it will be felt round the world as such a triumph of the human heart that its beat shall go on for a million years.” (W Post, 3/26/69, A27) March 27—April 8: NASA’s Mariner VII (Mariner G) spacecraft was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-19) booster on four-month, 193-million-mi, direct-ascent trajectory toward Mars—NASA’s second mission to fly past Mars during 1969 launch window. Launch vehicle performance was nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its four solar panels, and locked its sensors on sun and star Vega. Because of several minor spacecraft anomalies during launch, spacecraft was kept in sun-Vega cruise while performance was evaluated. Star-lock override command was transmitted to spacecraft April 1; Canopus was acquired as planned initially and Mariner VII entered stable cruise mode. Midcourse maneuver was conducted April 8 to ensure that spacecraft would fly within 1,900 mi (3,057.7 km) of Mars Aug- 5. Primary mission objective was to fly by southern hemisphere and polar regions of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary mission spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 900-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mariner March 27-April 8: has* latmcked Mariner VII on an Atlas-Centaur booster as the second of two spacecraft in the Mariner Mars 1969 mission to take photograpks and collect data about [he surface and atmosphere of Mars. Mariner IV (oris launched Feb. 24. An April 8 maneuver ensured that Mariner VII would pass Mars Aug. 5. VII mission, except for flyby area, was almost identical to mission of Mariner VI launched Feb. 24 for investigation of equatorial region and scheduled to arrive at Mars July 31. (NASA Proi Off; NASA Releases 69-26, 69-12)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator-designate, discussed possibility of integrated European space program alongside that of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in Thomas A. Edison Memorial Lecture at Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. “The space-age challenge to Europe in my view is to find new ways of organizing and managing the great wealth of that continent to overtake, if you like, major American and Soviet space and other programs. This is the space-age challenge to Europe: not the ‘technology gap’ but the ‘management gap.’ ” Dr. Paine also said, if 1969, 1971, and 1973 space probes should find “very exciting things about Mars, it is possible that we or the Russians might want to move a manned interplanetary expedition to a higher order of national priority. At the present time, the best guess is that this would not take place until the mid 1980’s but new priorities might lengthen or shorten this period.” In reply to question on man-in-space justification, he said: “For almost any simple specific experiment ... an automated probe can be developed to do it at lower cost. The basic question here is the difference between short-range research projects to achieve simple specific objectives, and complex research aimed at developing general exploratory capability and broad technological positions which will let you do things in the future which you can’t yet fully foresee. For the latter you will need men.” Dr. Paine expected U.S.S.R. “very likely” would put space station into orbit before U.S. In lunar exploration, he expected U.S. to stay ahead a while. In planetary probes, he expected U.S.S.R. to stay ahead. In earth applications, he expected U.S. to stay ahead. (Text)
Apollo 11 astronauts discussed possible manned Mars landing by 1982 on CBS TV program “Face the Nation.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said, “I am quite certain that goals of the Mars variety are within our range, should we choose . . . that investment of our national resources.” First exploratory flights could be combined with earthorbiting spacecraft to develop long-term capability with same kind of spacecraft. It was “well within our capability” to be prepared for Mars launch in 1981. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said he was “not so sure . . . this is the time that we can accurately set a date like 1981.” Setting goal was worthwhile but as intermediate goals were reached “I believe we will be able to better define exactly what our longer term goals are in terms of ten years from now.” Astronaut Michael Collins said, “I don’t think 1981 is too soon. I think it is well within our capabality to do so.” Long-duration trip “requires careful design and testing of the equipment, which could easily be done in Earth orbit with a number of ancillary benefits.” He defended Bible reading in space and announced he would not fly in space again, because he found it increasingly difficult “to keep up year after year” with rigorous training required. (SBD, 8/19/69, 159; W Post, 8/18/69, A2; NYT, 8/18/69, 33)
Washington Post published results of July 26—28 Gallup survey, which found public lukewarm about Government funding of manned Mars landing. While majority of young adults favored idea, majority of those 30 or over opposed it. Generally, 39% of those polled favored attempt to land man on Mars, 53% opposed, and 8% had no opinion. Blacks opposed by 3-to-l ratio. (W Post, 8/7/69, F4)
New York Times commented on Soviet decision to participate in February intelsat conference [see Jan. 22] and on Soviet coverage of Apollo 8 which was “treated more generously in the Soviet press than any earlier American space accomplishment.” Editorial said: “These indications of a positive shift in Kremlin thinking seem to enhance hopes that President Nixon will have an opportunity for creative diplomacy and action of the kind he envisaged in his Inaugural Address. Thought might be given, for example, to inviting Moscow to designate a Soviet astronaut to participate in an Apollo flight late this year or early next year. Or Washington might suggest that the United States and the Soviet Union coordinate their programs of planetary exploration with one nation, say, having primary responsibility for studying Venus and the other Mars. With the landing of men on the moon now probably only months away it is certainly not too early for the two nations that have pioneered most actively in space to discuss concrete means for involving the United Nations directly in the future exploration and exploitation of the moon, as well as of the planets when men reach them.” (NYT, 1/24/69, 46)
Hot firing of twin RL-10 Centaur engines marked first use of LeRC’s new Spacecraft Propulsion Research Facility, B—2 stand, at Plum Brook Station, Ohio [see Oct. 7], and first Centaur tests at Plum Brook since structural tests in mid-1960s. Since then, Centaur, configured with 1st-stage Atlas, had launched seven Surveyor spacecraft to moon, two Mariner spacecraft to Mars, one oao, and one ATS. (LeRC Release 69-76)
International team of scientists might man first U.S. permanent space laboratory, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at London news conference. Work on project would begin about 1975 and additional sections would be added each year for decade, eventually producing laboratory for about 50 scientists. Dr. Paine, on his way to Paris Air Show, said it was too early to say if there would be permanent U.S. lunar space station or to predict if man would land on Mars. He had no information to support rumors of imminent Soviet moon landing. (Reuters, W Post, 6/5/69, E5)
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
In American Aviation, Eric Bramley called 1969 year of “cautious optimism” for air transport industry. Deliveries of new aircraft to U.S. carriers would drop from 478 in 1968 to 309. Trunk traffic was expected to grow at same 14% rate as 1968, with available seat-mile increase of 17%. CAB-approved fare increases would add $194 million to revenues with profit level and rate of return expected to improve. (Amer Av, 5/12/69, 40-1) nas—nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1968. “Although the principal concern of the space science program in the United States continues to be with the Earth, its environment, the Sun, interactions of solar and terrestrial phenomena, the Moon and planets, and the biological effects of weightlessness and radiation, there is a trend toward increasing emphasis on the use of space vehicles for stellar and galactic astronomy, especially in areas of the electromagnetic spectrum for which the atmosphere is essentially opaque. The successful operation of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory satellite and the rapid development of improved instruments and techniques for ultraviolet and x-ray astronomy . . . are examples of this trend.” In interview with press, nas-nrc Space Science Board member Dr. Richard W. Porter said U.S. would probably have to review its expensive prophylactic measures in planned Mars landings if U.S.S.R. landed there first with same techniques and precautions used in Venus shots. Outgoing contamination of planets might well be bigger problem than contamination of incoming spacecraft. There was little likelihood of spacecraft landing on Mars and Venus and returning for at least 10 yrs, Dr. Porter said, and risk from lunar bacteriological contamination was infinitesimal. But contamination of planets was serious problem because it could spoil man’s first chances to make a pure investigation of biological evolution elsewhere in the solar system. (Text; W Post, 5/23/69, A15)
Plans for launch of first of two Jupiter probes from ksc between Feb. 26 and March 15, 1972, were outlined by Charles F. Hall, manager of Pioneer F and G projects at arc, during meeting of scientists, engineers, and contractors at Mountain View, Calif. Launched by Atlas-Centaur booster, Pioneer F would take 610—770 days to reach Jupiter on voyage through planet’s heavy radiation belt to within 90,000 mi of Jupiter surface. It would carry 60 lbs of instruments and photographic equipment to conduct 13 experiments to measure solar wind and space dust and analyze Jupiter’s radiation and atmosphere. Probe would be first to travel to asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter and eventually would leave solar system. Pioneer G Jupiter probe would be launched in early 1973. (upi, P Bull, 11/5/69)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong stood to inherit 100,000-franc fortune of Mme. Anna E. Guzman, widow of French industrialist, which had been held in trust by Academy of Science of Institute of France since her 1891 death, according to article Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) inserted in Congressional Record. Legacy—once worth $20,000 but currently decreased in value to $290 exclusive of interest—was to be awarded to first scientist to make personal contact with heavenly body other than Mars. (CR, 8/13/69, E7023)
Paul G. Dembling, NASA General Counsel since January 1967, became NASA Deputy Associate Administrator. Dembling, who had joined naca in 1945, had been principal drafter of bill which became National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and had received NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1968 for contributions to development of legal framework of U.S. aeronautical and space activities. (NASA Release 69-131) Study of lunar samples was “bringing to light as many mysteries as it unravels,” New York Times editorial said. Theorists were cautious, with evidence from one small area, Tranquility Base. “It is likely that the picture will become still more complex when a representative collection of samples becomes available from ten, twenty or thirty areas spread over the entire lunar surface. But even the limitations of the present data suggest strongly that the moon is very different from earth, and therefore has much to teach human science about the origin and evolution of the solar system. The case for intensive scientific study of the moon—conducted in part by geologists and other scientists sent there for on-the-spot investigation-—is strong.” (NYT, 9/10/69, 40) September 11: Press conference on results of Mariner VI (launched Feb. 24) and Mariner VII (launched March 27) was held at NASA Hq. Some 200 TV pictures of Mars were taken by two Mariners, including 57 high- and medium-resolution views of selected Martian surface areas from altitude of only few hundred miles. Spacecraft measured Martian atmospheric temperature, pressure, and chemical constituency and measured surface temperatures in effort to correlate thermal characteristics with features observed in TV pictures. Data indicated Mars was heavily cratered, bleak, cold, dry, nearly airless, and generally hostile to any earth-style life forms. Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech said: “We got nine times the number of far encounter pictures that were originally proposed [few years ago], 20 per cent more near encounter pictures than were proposed, and 1,100 digital pictures which were entirely impossible according to schemes at the time of the proposal. . . . After Mariner 4 Mars seemed to be like the moon. At last Mariners 6 and 7 have shown Mars to be like Mars and have brought out Mars’ own characteristic features, some of them unknown and unrecognized elsewhere in the solar system.” Dr. Robert P. Sharp of Cal Tech said Martian terrain could be divided into three types—crater, featureless, and. chaotic. Cratered terrain was widespread and common on Mars and resembled moon. Featureless terrain was represented by Hellas area, which appeared to be upland area, 150-mi-wide zone that gently sloped into flat featureless floor. Chaotic terrain had series of “short ridges, little valleys, and irregular, jumbled topography.” Chaotic and featureless terrain appeared to be distinctly Martian, suggesting “that on Mars we have either a difference in processes that are operating on the surface or within the crust or we have a difference of material from one place to another on Mars and different than on the moon, or, more likely, a combination of both. ... We also have good reason for believing that the evolutionary history has been somewhat different. Again, there are scars on the face of Mars that we do not see on the face of the moon. And there have perhaps been episodic events in Martian history that are unique to the planet Mars. We end up with the conclusion that Mars is its own planet.” Dr. George C. Pimentel of Univ. of California at Berkeley said reevaluation of initial data from infrared spectrometer had shown infrared spectral features earlier ascribed to methane and ammonia were actually due to previously undiscovered absorptions of solid carbon dioxide. Reflection peak recorded three times in atmosphere off Mars’ bright limb showed presence of solid carbon dioxide at high altitudes and at latitudes north of polar cap. Broad absorption near 9 p. recorded on bright limb was ascribed to solid silica or silicate material and broad absorptions near 12 p. recorded near dark limb were tentatively ascribed in part to solid carbon dioxide above ground. Further experimental work was in progress to refine thermal map. Initial results of uv spectrometer experiment were detection of ionized carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, atomic hydrogen, and oxygen. Nitrogen and nitric oxide were not detected and no evidence was found of clouds, blue haze, or any appreciable atmospheric absorption of uv radiation. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado said important point “is that the atmosphere of Mars is different than the atmosphere of the earth. If I showed you a spectrum taken the same way from the upper atmosphere of the earth, we would see a plentiful number of nitrogen bands. We could see emissions from nitric oxide. We could see emissions from atomic nitrogen. None of those features is present in the atmosphere of Mars. . . .” Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of jpl presented biological implications of Mariner 1969 results. “There is nothing in the new data that encourages the belief that Mars is a body of life. But the results don’t exclude this possibility. . . . The Mariner 6 and 7 data strengthen the previous conclusion that the scarcity of water on Mars is the most serious limiting factor for life. . . . Mars is a cold desert by terrestrial standards. If there is life on Mars, it must be a form of life that can utilize water in the form of water vapor or ice.” (Transcript; NASA News Release)
New determination of abundance of water in Mars atmosphere was reported in Science by Illinois Institute of Technology astronomers Tobias Owen and Harold P. Mason. New spectrograms of planet had been obtained in region of water-vapor band at 8,200 A during February and March 1969. Amount of precipitable water was found to be about 15 /x. Abundance reaffirmed that some water was present at current epoch but otherwise had little bearing on evolution of Martian atmosphere. Water vapor did not imply liquid water existed on Martian surface. (Science, 8/29/69, 893—5)
nasa selected General Electric Co. to receive three-year, $4-million, costplus-award-fee contract with two-year option to provide engineering and mission-related support to LaRC for Viking Project—series of planetary probes which would begin softlanding on Mars in 1973. (nasa Release 69—128)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, addressed Independence Day celebration at Dearborn, Mich.: “For untold millions of years the human animal was chained to the earth. Sixty years ago he found a way of soaring into its atmosphere. Ten years ago he learned to break the chains of gravity and to soar out into space. This month the first man will set foot on another world. Later this month two spacecraft will reach Mars and send back new information about that Planet. Americans will have no reason to be ashamed of their nation on those days. Is it worth while? Is it worth while to lift the spirits of millions of human beings? If not, what else is worth while?” . Developing lunar landing technology was relatively easy. “The laws of nature which made it possible have been well known for a long time. The engineering skills required . . . were available and were brilliantly organized. Hundreds of thousands of Americans worked together to make this dream come true. They had faith and they had hope. “The problems of our cities and the other social problems which beset us are not all that easy. In this area human beings are not working together but are in conflict. We find that we do not yet know the cause • of these troubles nor do we yet have the mechanisms for curing them. Hence we must study, we must experiment, we must try and we will often fail. . . . And we shall learn from our failures.” (Text; CR, 1/29/69, E6415-7)
NASA’s Mariner VII Mars probe (launched March 27) obeyed radio command to lock its sensors on star Canopus. Spacecraft would fly past Mars night of Aug. 4. Command was radioed from NASA tracking station in Woomera, Australia. (AP, W Post, 4/2/69; UPl, C Trib, 4/3/69)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole traced NASA plans for planetary exploration from May 1971 launch of two Mariner spacecraft for Mars to Grand Tours of planets beginning in 1977 and 1979. “What comes after the two Grand Tours? Nobody really knows, but the space agency’s dreamers about unmanned missions have a plot already written and it reads a little better than most science fiction does.” Spacecraft would circulate through asteroid belt for year, making asteroid counts and photographing larger asteroids. Beyond that, scientists would like to rendezvous with a comet and investigate Saturn’s rings. (W Post, 11/2/69, B3)
