Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.—in Lucerne, Switzerland, on European goodwill tour—visited Swiss Transport Museum and Longines Planetarium. They were shown representation of view of earth from Mars. (nasa Hist Off)
Christian Science Monitorsditorial said nasa had postponed manned Mars mission because of budget cutback but “it is keeping its space shuttle program pretty much on schedule.” Reusable space vehicle was “guarantee that space progress won’t be wholly shunted aside by budget stringencies.” It would “help to keep alive the interest of the big rocket and airframe contractors, and the enthusiasm of the thousands of researchers and scientists who have hoped to make space exploration their life work.” (CSM, 2/12/70)
Use of range and Doppler tracking data to determine earth-moon mass ratio and mass of Mars was described in Science by jpl astronomers John D. Anderson, Leonard Efron, and S. Kuen Wong. Accurate navigation of Mariner VI and VII to Mars had required use of twoway, phase-coherent range and Doppler tracking data from nasa-jPLDeep Space Network. Coverage of both Mariners from launch to encounter with Mars, closest approach to Mars, and beyond had provided new information on ratio of mass of earth to that of moon; Mars gravity field, particularly planet’s mass; and ephemerides of Mars and earth. Data complemented Doppler data from Mariner IV with exception of inconsistency of about 0.0004% in values for mass of moon determined from lunar trajectories. Determinations of mass of Mars by Mariner IV and V/ were in agreement. (Science, 1/16/70, 277-9)
In Space/Aeronautics Frank Leary commented on NASA plans for manned Mars mission: “A commitment to placing human footprints on the red planet will spark an arduous and enormously expensive effort. And it will rankle those critics who want the money spent on earthly ills. Technologically and politically, the manned Mars mission is no piece of cake. But, like Apollo, it is virtually inevitable.” (S/A, 2/70, 28-38)
VictorC. Clarke, Jr., jplengineer, received 1970 award from Gravity Research Foundation of New Boston, N.H., for essay “The Application and Principle of Gravity-Assist Trajectories for Space Flight.” Clarke, mission analysis and engineering manager for 1973 Mariner Venus-Mercury project, had first demonstrated possibility of bouncing spacecraft from planet to planet in 1961. He had received 1969 NASA Exceptional Service Medal for contribution to Mariner Mars 1969 mission design. (NASA Release 70-112; jplpio) June 2-19: U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX, carrying Cosmonauts Andrian G. Ni-kolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, was launched from Baykonurat 12:09 am Baykonur time into orbit with 249-km (154.7-mi) apogee, 236-km (146.6-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass said cosmonauts would conduct extensive program of scientific and technical research in “solitary orbital flight,” including medical and biological research on effects of space flight on man, studies of earth’s geography and atmosphere, research into “physical processes in near-earth space,” and checkout of spacecraft systems. Launch and pictures of crew in spacecraft were televised in Moscow about one hour after liftoff. Five hours after liftoff Tass reported cosmonauts were “coping well with conditions of weightlessness and carrying out the flight program.” Only anomaly had been dirtying of windows from engine fired for midcourse maneuver after fifth orbit, Tass said. Systems were functioning normally and Nikolayev had begun “experiments linked with the investigation of human peculiarities as an element of the control system in different dynamic operations.” Tass issued daily bulletins that described routine of space flight chores and experiments: “While one cosmonaut runs a vacuum cleaner, the other brews coffee or shaves.” Cosmonauts performed strenuous physical exercises each day in special “load suits,” practiced manual maneuvers of spacecraft, and photographed earth and sun. By June 8 Soyuz IX had completed 100 orbits and 147 hrs of flight—record for man-hours in space in Soviet space program— with all systems functioning satisfactorily and with crew demonstrating it could “withstand well the complex impact of the factors of space flight and retain high efficiency.” Insomnia, only problem reported by crew, had been overcome. On June 19 Tass announced Soyuz IX had softlanded 76 km (47 mi) west of Karaganda, Kazakhstan, after orbiting in space for 17 days 16 hrs 59 min and setting new world record for manned space flight endurance. Tass said that crew had “fully fulfilled its programs of research” and that preliminary medical examination showed cosmonauts “had withstood the prolonged space flight well.” Most important part of program, Tass said, was medical-biological experiments on effects of prolonged flight on man. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/2/70, 152; Mills, B Sun, 6/2/70, Al; 6/20/70, A1;AP, NYT, 6/3/70, 18; UPI.W Star, 6/7-8/70; 6/12/70)
Quincy (Mass.) Patriot Ledger editorial noted President’s space goal message had not included Mars mission as major goal at this point. “More important is the consolidation and mastery of the space environment closer to earth, as well as greater application of space research to human problems. Fortunately, this is the emphasis of Mr. Nixon’s new program.” (Q Patriot Ledger, 3/10/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, addressed American Newspaper Publishers Assn, in New York: “Our mental concepts and life habits are Earth-oriented. The ability to go the Moon or Mars is regarded as something less than important, and this is only natural. But I am firmly convinced that the space program will prove to be one of the most important, creative, and beneficial to mankind ever undertaken by the United States. ... I think we must clearly establish in this new decade our goals and objectives as an agency first, and then define the hardware needed only after we know exactly where we are headed.” Hardware “on hand or that would be fine to develop” should not “tell us where we’re going.” (Text) U.S. detection in 1950s of Soviet radar three times size of football field was described before Association by Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering: “It was so big that when we first found out about it we were hesitant even to identify it as a radar. Much later we learned that it was far too powerful for most of the applications we could imagine. Assuming it was a radar, many argued that it made sense only as part of a detection, tracking and control network for satellites. The non-radar proponents even tried to make it into such things as a space communications system. The location of the first such radar argued that. . .this equipment probably would form part of an abm system.” (Text)
Milton Klein, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “During the past year, the aec program to provide technology for space nuclear power has furnished operational systems for an earth satellite and the surface of the Moon, and in the near future will provide nuclear power for a new navigational satellite and probes of Jupiter and Mars. Moreover, nuclear power will be imperative for the deep space unmanned planetary missions, the space station/space base and a variety of other missions planned for the new decade and beyond.” Basic technology program had demonstrated “nuclear rocket technology is ready to fulfill this vital role in space and forms the basis for the development of the flight rated nerva.” (Testimony)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
Analysis of photo of Phobos, largest of two Martian moons, taken 138 000 km (86 000 mi) from Mars by Mariner VII was discussed in Science by New Mexico State Univ. astronomer and Mariner project scientist Bradford A. Smith, jpl photo-enhancement techniques had indicated Phobos was nonspherical and was larger and had darker surface than previously thought. Satellite’s limb profile measured 18 by 22 km (11.2 by 13.7 mi) and was elongated along orbital plane. Phobos had average visual geometric albedo of 0.065, lower than that known for any other body in solar system. It seemed probable Phobos had not formed by accretion around primordial Mars, but was captured at some later time. (Science, 5/15/70, 828-30; NASA Release 70-66)
The Wartime Journals of Charles A. Lindbergh were reviewed by Eric F.	Goldman in New York Times Book Review: Journals covered 1937-1945, “when the celebrated flyer was in Europe surveying military aviation; the battle between President Franklin Roosevelt and the isolationists, during which Lindbergh stumped the United States as the star speaker of the anti-interventionists. . .; war years when, denied an Air Corps commission, he served as a civilian aeronautical expert in private industry and in the Pacific, also managing to work in 50 combat missions; and the weeks just after the Nazi surrender, which found him again in Europe, attached to a Naval Mission studying wartime developments in plane design and missiles.” Journals snowed Lindbergh as “a first-rate mind who was widely informed yet retained certain key areas of na'ivet6, an instinctive tinkerer with a passion for science as an idea and a gifted scientist who worried over the ‘narrow-mindedness’ of the pursuit, a man who read Plato the night before inspecting aviation factories and Dostoevsky in between speeches before roaring crowds, a hard-hitting bombadier screeching down over Japanese installations while he contemplated the beauty of God’s nature and the dignity of man.” (NYT Book Review, 9/20/70,1,42) Owen S. Merrill of JPL Nuclear Power Sources Group outlined progress of radioisotopic thermoelectric generator (rtg)being developed by aec for NASA and jpl. RTG was only known source considered capable of producing 500 w of power over 9- to 12-yr period required for NASA Grand Tour missions to outer planets. Melvin Swerdling, jpl spacecraft power systems specialist, described improved nickel-cadmium batteries with increased discharge-charge cycle capability, designed by jpl for nasa Mariner Mars 1971 spacecraft, (jpl Release 563)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
Soviet press and radio underlined importance of Luna XVI mission. Tass carried interview with unidentified deputy chief designer of spacecraft, who demonstrated prototype of drill used to obtain lunar samples and said similar device “will bring one day rock samples from Venus, Mars, and other planets of our solar system to earth. Man will go to other planets sometime in the future, but before this is possible, these planets will have to be explored for a long time by automatic stations. At present, an apparatus of a radically new type has been designed in principle. In the long run it will be modified to suit specific tasks. .. .A flight to Mars will require somewhat different technical solutions than a flight to the moon. But the main complex elements of Luna 16—its ability to take off in the directon of a desired celestial body, make a soft-landing on the surface of the planet, operate on it and then start off in the direction of the earth or the planet from which it started—will remain unshakable.” In Izvestia Georgy I. Petrov, head of Soviet Institute for Space Research, said man would still play a role in lunar research, but only in limited way. He said short visits by man appeared useful but he proposed manned orbiting moon stations equipped with automatic spacecraft capable of descending to moon, moving over surface, conducting scientific research, and returning to orbiting station. (Gwertzman, NYT, 9/23/70, 11)
At NASA Hq. news conference on future NASA plans Julian Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, announced that 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite recovered Jan. 9 near Lost City, Okla., had come from orbit which took it outside Mars’ orbit at planet’s farthest point from sun. (Transcript)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1971 budget to Congress said: “Man has ventured to the moon and returned—an awesome achievement. In determining the proper pace for future space activities, we must carefully weigh the potential benefits of: scientific research by unmanned spacecraft; continued exploration of the solar system, including manned exploration of the planets; and the application of space and aeronautics technology to the direct benefit of mankind. “I have reviewed many exciting alternatives for the future. Consistent with other national priorities, we shall seek to extend our capabilities in space—both manned and unmanned. I intend to do this within total space outlays 12% smaller than in 1970. In our current efforts, we will continue to stress additional uses of space technology. Our actions will make it possible to begin plans for a manned expedition to Mars.” President said national budget, first for which he bore full responsibility, fulfilled pledge to submit balanced FY 1971 budget. “This anti-inflationary budget begins the necessary process of reordering our national priorities. For the first time in two full decades, the Federal Government will spend more money on human resource programs than on national defense.” About 41% of estimated outlays would be devoted to spending for education and manpower, health, income security, and veterans benefits and services. Pollution control, crime reduction, transportation, and housing programs were “planned to grow substantially in the years ahead.” {PD, 2/9/ 70, 106-19)
NASA Hq. briefing on FY 1971 budget, held Jan. 31, was released. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had said: “We are putting into motion with this budget a program which does not advance toward a single climactic event. It follows the recommendations of the Space Task Group Report’s Option II, although at a reduced pace. The budget to implement the recommendations, however, is austere and, as a result, does not take full advantage of our total capability. But the new program has the flexibility to accommodate this reduced budget in FY 1971.” Lowest NASA budget since FY 1962 “means substantial cutbacks and deferrals in a number of programs. Our best current estimate is that the total nationwide employment on NASA work—which was once 420,000 people—will decline from current level by another 45,000, to about 144,000 people by the end of fiscal year 1971. The impact will be felt in many sections of the country. This is regrettable, but the Administration has faced the hard fact that these steps must be taken to achieve a fiscally responsible balanced budget in this time of inflation. .. .this budget level, which we hope will be NASA’s lowest level, is strongly oriented to the future. The necessary reductions.. .have not been made ‘across the board.’ We have made careful selections and decisions.” NASA would preserve strong future capability centered on development of economical, reusable space transportation system including shuttle, space station, and reusable nuclear rocket; continue efforts on practical applications of space technology for early practical benefits on earth; continue lunar exploration with Apollo vehicles and Apollo Applications earth orbital workshop flights with hardware previously under procurement; continue, “but with stretchouts and deferrals,” balanced program of planetary exploration and scientific investigations in space focused on potentially exciting discoveries; continue increasing emphasis on aeronautics; and maintain “essential cadre of NASA’s technical, operational, and management capabilities on which the continuing and future position of the United States in space depends.” [See Jan. 13.] Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly during briefing had replied to question that planned fund request for space station and shuttle had been for $250 million to $260 million— supporting Task Group’s Option II, to provide operational systems in 1977—but request had been cut to final $110 million. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said program should give CY 1978 operational date. Dates for Mars mission were not yet planned. Michoud Assembly Facility and Mississippi Test Facility were among NASA installations to be affected by budgetary action, Lilly had said. Plans on Michoud would be to “complete the last of 15 Saturn 5’s in 1970; then we will be carrying on activities for the storage, repairing and refurbishing of the 1-B and the Saturn 5 stages, providing the engineering and support necessary for the flights through 1974, and maintaining the capability to restart or reinitiate the production of Saturn 5’s; maintaining the capability to accept new work.. .and. . .attempting to find other, users of that facility in New Orleans.” At mtf, Saturn V static test firings would be completed. “Then, the plans in our budget are to mothball the facilities. Personnel will be phased down.. .to essentially a mothball or caretaker mode.” NASA was working with other agencies to seek other uses for that location. (Transcript)
Models of Viking Mars lander had been tested at speeds from mach 0.6 to mach 0.3 in Propulsion Wind Tunnel at AFSC’s Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn., AFSC announced. Atmosphere on Mars had been simulated in tunnels for tests conducted for nasa and Martin Marietta Corp. on aeroshetl and base cover that would protect lander during entry through Martian atmosphere. (AFSC Release 67.70)
Lightweight double-wall meteoroid shield developed for enlarged propulsion system of Mariner Mars 1971 was described in Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets by jpl scientist John R. Howard. Outer sheet of Teflon-impregnated glass fabric and multilayer thermal insulation was more effective than aluminum sheet of same weight because of impact phenomena modification by heterogeneous first sheet and impact energy absorption by thermal insulation. Series of tests over range of impact velocities with projectiles of glass, nylon, and syntactic paste had been conducted. Linear extrapolation had shown that composite outer sheet was sufficient for specified meteoroid threat. (JSR, 1/70,69-72)
Lowell Observatory astronomer Dr. Peter Boyce had reported “blue smog” of Mars was caused by physical changes on planet’s surface rather than by looking at Mars through earth’s atmosphere, Philadelphia Inquirer said. Dr. Boyce had used special area-scanning photometer attached to Lowell Observatory’s 610-mm (24-in) reflector at Cerro Tololo in Chilean Andes to obtain accurate photometric measurements of Mars. (P Inq, 3/25/70)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Luna XVII: “It is a time for congratulations to the Soviet effort this time. . .and perhaps time to take a lesson. For future probable explorations to lethal Mars, Venus and other planets almost certainly cannot employ manned landings. All the same, there is no reason to abandon plans NASA has made to land men and a wheeled Rover vehicle they can drive on the moon. There is always the possibility that the man on the scene can pick up more than back-seat drivers 240,000 miles [386 000 km] away.” (PInq, 11/19/70)
Scientists at Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Laboratory said studies of 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite that fell near Lost City, Okla., Jan. 9 had provided firmest evidence to date of intensity of cosmic rays beyond sun. Data obtained had raised possibility that manned spacecraft venturing to planets beyond Mars might have to be armored against swarms of high-energy “space bullets.” Meteorite was estimated to have weighed 227 kg (500 lbs) originally and was assumed to be fragment of explosive collision between two huge objects 6 million yrs ago. (AP, B Sun, 4/24/70, A3; Smithsonian PAO)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), for himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.), Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and Sen. Jacob K.	Javits (R-N.Y.), submitted amendment to H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill which would reduce NASA R&D appropriation by $110 million—amount requested by NASA for design and definition of space shuttle and station. Sen. Mondale said: “This project represents NASA’s next major effort in manned space flight. The $110 million.. .is only the beginning of the story. NASA’s preliminary cost estimates for development of the space shuttle/station total almost $14 billion, and the ultimate cost may run much higher. Furthermore, the shuttle and station are the first essential steps toward a manned Mars landing.. .which could cost anywhere between $50 to $100 billion. I have seen no persuasive justification for embarking upon a project of such staggering costs at a time when many of our citizens are malnourished, when our rivers and lakes are polluted, and when our cities and rural areas are decaying.” (CR, 6/29/70, S10057-8)
NASA announced 1971 flight schedule, highlighted by two manned Apollo lunar landing missions—Apollo 14 Jan. 31 and Apollo 15 July 25—and by two unmanned Mariner Mars launches in May. Other launches tentatively scheduled for 1971 included threfc Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp. nato-b comsat for NATO, imp-1 Interplanetary Monitoring Platform, solrad scientific satellite for USN, ISIS-B cooperative U.S.-Canada scientific satellite, PAET Planetary Atmosphere Experiments Test, OSO-H Orbiting Solar Observatory, SSS-A Small Scientific Satellite, UK-4 cooperative U.S.-U.K. scientific satellite, afcrl-a magnetic storm satellite for afcrl, OAO-C Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, and CAS-A cooperative U.S.-France meteorological satellite. NASA aeronautical program would include extensive testing of supercritical wing, (nasa Release 70-222)
NASA launched 1384.4-kg (3052-lb) sped (Supersonic Planetary Entry Decelerator) experiment from Wallops Station at 1:57 pm EDT, by one-stage Castor booster with two Recruit rockets strapped on. Payload separated from booster at 72.4-km (45-mi) altitude and coasted to 91,7-km (57-mi) altitude before descending. At 70,8-km (44-mi) altitude the conical aeroshell, 4.6-m (15-ft) in diameter, popped open like a parasol to simulate Mars entry spacecraft speeding through thin atmosphere. Aeroshell splashed down in Atlantic and was recovered by USNS Range Recoverer. Onboard cameras and test equipment parachuted toward earth 112.7 km (70 mi) from Wallops and were recovered in midair by helicopter. (NASA Release 70-171)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat for dod, Nato I military comsat for NATO, and Oscar V radio propagation satellite for U.S. and Australian amateur radio operators. Italian crew, trained by NASA, launched NASA’s Uhuru on NASA launch vehicle. U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was reached on procedure for joint efforts to design compatible rendezvous and docking systems for manned spacecraft. Since European Space Conference had indicated that major participation in U.S. space transportation program would probably mean end to Europa III launcher program funding, esc was assured U.S. would continue to make reimbursable launch services available for European payloads for peaceful purposes. Such participation was understood to mean at least 10% of developmental costs of space transportation system, or about $1 billion. During year NASA held briefings for U.N. Outer Space Committee and invited u.n. and specialized agencies to participate in International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey System in 1971. Discussions were held with Brazil, Canada, and Mexico on agreements to extend cooperation in earth resources area; experimenters from 28 countries signified intention to submit proposals to analyze data acquired by erts. Joint working group meetings were held in India and U.S. on satellite instructional TV experiment for ats-f. nasa and aid began 18-mo experimental project with Korea in application of aerospace technology to Korean economic problems. NASA and Canadian government signed agreement to study application of augmentor-wing concept to v/stol aircraft. Agreement was concluded with U.K. to test-fly NASA’s XH-51 rigid-rotor helicopter in U.K. and to share data. Agreements for new projects were reached with Netherlands, U.K., and Italy. Netherlands agreement called for cooperative development ana launch in 1974 of small astronomical satellite (ans) with one U.S. and two Dutch experiments to investigate stellar uv and x-ray radiation. U.K. agreement was for 1973 launch of uk-R x-ray satellite, fifth in Ariel series. Italian agreement established principles for nasa launch on reimbursable basis of Italian Sirio satellite to study wave propagation and electron flows in magnetosphere. nasa accented experiment from French National Laboratory for Space Astronomy to study stellar uv emissions from Skylab and accepted instrument developed by French National Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics for investigating solar chromosphere structure from osO-i, scheduled for 1973 launch. Assistance was accepted from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Observatory in planning activities of radio science team for 1975 Project Viking Mars probe. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, India, Spain, and Sweden, and negotiations were held with France for cooperative upper-atmosphere sounding rocket launchings at Kour-ou in French Guiana. Lunar material returned by Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 was studied by 54 foreign principal investigators in 16 countries in addition to U.S. scientists. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71)
During May: In Astronautics and Aeronautics, jpl scientists William G.	Breckenridge and Thomas C. Duxbury discussed applications of spacecraft- based navigation data for outer-planet missions and described processing of spacecraft-based science and engineering data from 1969 Mariner Mars missions. They concluded: “Stringent navigation requirements for proposed outer-planet missions make even the projected ability of a solely Earthbased system marginal, and so have emphasized the need for an onboard system.” (A&A, 5/70,44-9)
Experiment to determine if ozone was trapped in solid carbon dioxide polar cap of Mars was described in Science by Univ. of Colorado and York Univ. of Toronto, Canada, scientists. Experiment showed that solid carbon dioxide was effective trap for ozone at temperatures as high as 156 K (-179°F). “Ultraviolet reflection-absorption spectra of ozone in solid carbon dioxide at 127°K [-231°F] indicate that the ozone observed over the polar cap of Mars may be trapped in solid carbon dioxide.” (Broida, Lundell, etai., Science, 12/25/70, 1402) Dr. Edward H. Teller, physicist and atomic scientist of Univ. of California, advocated abolition of secrecy surrounding U.S. scientific research “so we can clearly understand what we are talking about ” in growing debate over impact of science and technology on society. “Secrecy in science should be abolished so that the democratic process can be better able to work in making the decisions on how science is applied.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/28/70,1) Dr. Bentley Glass, retiring aaas president and Academic Vice President of Univ. of New York at Stoney Brook, said number of scientists and technologists in U.S. had doubled in decade to form 20% of professional labor force. Growth rate was much faster than that of population and could not surpass limit of about 25% of professional force. Dr. Glass believed that the greater the volume of research, the less likely any one project would produce truly original results. “It is in fact becoming more and more difficult, as scientific knowledge grows, to make a totally new and unexpected discovery or to break through the dogmas of established scientific views.” SHOT session on Perspectives of Apollo History, chaired by Dr. James Lee Cate of Univ. of Chicago with Dr. John M. Logsdon of George Washington Univ. as commentator, presented sample narratives: “Space Science and Automatic Spacecraft Behind Apollo” by R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian; “The Saturn Family of Rockets” by Dr. John S. Beltz of Univ. of Alabama at Huntsville; and “The Apollo Command Spaceship” by Dr. Loyd S. Swenson, Jr., of Univ. of Houston. Narratives directed attention to problems of contemporary scholarship and to basic elements of Apollo. (Program; NASA Hist Off) Jeffrey V. Odom, manager of National Bureau of Standards metric study, told aaas seminar that report on metrication would be submitted to Congress in August 1971. Report was expected to include recommendations for gradual conversion to metric system in U.S., possibly over 10 yrs. New York Times, noting metric system proponents, emphasized that 90% of nations in world already used system and that U.K. expected to be almost completely converted by 1975, said NASA was first U.S. Government agency to convert to system in its scientific and technical publications. (Wilford, NYT, 12/29/70, 17) Stewart L. Udall, former Secretary of the Interior, in aaas speech accused science establishment, particularly nas, of failing to exert moral and political leadership on issues of technology impact on man. He proposed that consumer advocate Ralph Nader organize team of young scientists to make “dispassionate and intensive study of the National Academy and the whole scientific enterprise in this country.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/31/70, 3:6) Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman and aaas President-elect, left aaas meeting before radical young scientists assumed podium to accuse him of “crime of science against the people.” (Auerbach, W Post, 12/31/70, A4)
Challenge and objectives of space science and applications program for next decade were outlined by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: “In the allocation of its scarce resources NASA is emphasizing those projects which help solve immediate problems and deferring to a later year those major new starts whose objectives are primarily to gain the new knowledge. Obviously, we cannot continue to defer such promising scientific projects indefinitely without mortgaging the economic health, the technical progress, and the security of this Nation. “In the immediate future these postponements are tolerable because of our active ongoing program. Future Aeronomy and Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) Explorer missions will be directed at the earth’s environment: improved oso’s will study the sun and provide data for correlation with ecology studies; the Small Astronomy Satellites (sas) will start giving us continued data on galactic x-rays and gamma-rays; and future missions of the OAO will continue the successful observation program begun with oao-2. Before the middle of the decade, we will visit two additional planets, Jupiter and Mercury. We will orbit Mars in 1971 and land in 1976. Under our supporting programs, we are analyzing space data, developing theories to explain the findings; we are conducting relatively less expensive but very productive investigations with sounding rockets and airplanes; and are developing concepts and investigations for future missions.” Establishing scientific priorities, allocating proper resources to research, and deciding between various expensive scientific projects would continue to be “a most difficult problem.” NASA would work with in-house scientists, advisory groups, and nas and nae “to be sure that the scientific projects we are undertaking are sound and worthy of support.” (Testimony) Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified on continuation of Mars program before Committee: “The results of the Mariner 6 and 7 missions have affected very little the probability that life, in some form, may exist and they have not dampened the enthusiasm of the biologist to search for life on Mars. The apparent low nitrogen content in the atmosphere can be tolerated by many organisms. In fact, biota can be readily conceived which do not directly utilize gaseous nitrogen at all. The results have increased the geological interest in Mars primarily due to the discovery of the chaotic and featureless terrains. An understanding of these geological differences could shed new light on the origin and evolution of Mars and, thereby, on the origin and evolution of the solar system as a whole. We are, therefore, continuing the Mars program. . . . However because of the need to minimize expenditures. . .it has been necessary to delay the Viking missions from 1973 to 1975.” (Testimony) R. B. Marsten, Director of Communications Programs, OSSA, testified on broadcast service of NASA advanced flight experimentation in satellite communications: “Broadcast services come in three classes—the distribution class, which, through a relatively small satellite, would broadcast program material to large receivers, perhaps co-located with local broadcast transmitters for rebroadcast in the conventional mode; a somewhat larger satellite in the community mode, which would broadcast to moderate size receivers located in village squares, or in remote areas and connected to a cable distribution system for redistribution of the program material to viewing sets; and. . .direct broadcast mode, in which multi-kilowatt power level satellites broadcast directly to the user, who may have a conventional TV receiver. This application has the potential of providing instant national service where there is no ground infrastructure, and is much talked about now for educational purposes.” (Testimony) Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs, OSSA, said in submitted statement that research with instrumented aircraft was integral part of NASA program. “This research helps to bridge the gap between groundbased experiments and those that require the more expensive rockets and space vehicles. We have conducted auroral and airglow research observations of the solar corona during total eclipses and infrared observations. The ability to investigate interstellar dust and other celestial objects by observing their infrared emissions is opening up a promising line of research. A small jet aircraft has been used to take a 12-inch [305-mm] infrared telescope to 50 000 feet [15 200 m] above the earth. At this altitude, much of the infrared radiation from the universe is observable; in contrast, at the surface of the earth it is obscured by water vapor. Investigators from the University of Arizona have used a Lear jet from ARC for observations of planets, stars, and galaxies at wavelengths from 30 to 300 microns.” They had discovered centers of galaxies were bright in infrared. Because of importance of this area of astronomy, “36-inch [914-mm] telescope is presently being constructed to be placed in a C-141 jet airplane. This plane and the larger telescope will constitute a unique and effective airborne astronomical observatory.” (Testimony) Joseph B. Mahon, Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, submitted statement on NASA plans for use of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur booster configuration. Titan IIIC would be used to launch ATS-Fand ATS-G into synchronous orbit. Introduction of Titan-Centaur configuration in time scale to support Viking mission would represent "vital portion of the effort associated with the Centaur Program in Calendar Years 1971,1972, and 1973.” NASA and USAF had concluded basic management agreements for operation of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur systems, usaf would act as Titan IIIC launch vehicle systems manager, responsible to NASA mission direction. NASA would be Titan-Centaur launch vehicle systems manager but would use selected elements of existing usaf contractor organizations. Titan III complex at etr would be modified to provide single launch pad capability for supporting planetary opportunities with two launches from the same pad. Plans for Titan Ill-Centaur included engineering proof flight of all-up Viking configuration late in 1973. First operational use was planned for 1974 to support He-lios-A solar probe, subject to discussions with West Germany. During FY 1970, preliminary design and program definition effort for Titan Ill-Centaur would be completed and final design and qualification effort initiated, as well as action for procurement of proof-flight vehicle and supporting hardware. (Testimony)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., told news conference at Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.: “In the past it has taken a war to force technology to advance at an abnormal rate. The space program did it in peacetime, and to me this makes much more sense.” Swigert defended proposals for Mars exploration: “If we can learn more about our solar system and have those benefits accrue to the economy, I would say it is worthwhile.” (AP, W Post, 9/10/70)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Implications of failure of Mariner VI and VII uv experiments to detect emissions associated with nitrogen in Martian atmosphere were discussed in Science by Harvard College Observatory and SAO astronomer A. Dalgarno and M. B. McEIroy of Kitt Peak National Observatory. Examination of physical and chemical processes causing nitrogen emission in Martian airglow had shown that if atmosphere was uniformly mixed, mixing ratio of nitrogen to carbon dioxide of 5% was consistent with observational data on uv dayglow of Mars. If magnitude of the eddy coefficient in atmosphere was similar to that for earth, this limit was reduced to less than 0.5%. (Science, 10/9/70,167-8)
Supersonic Planetary Entry Decelerator (sped) experiment, launched from Wallops Station, simulated Mars reentry spacecraft speeding through thin atmosphere. A June photograph shows the parasol for sped deployed in systems check-out before mating to a single-stage Castor rochet motor. The flight experiment aided study of deployment characteristics required fora parachute to land instruments on Mars.
Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said in Memphis, Tenn., that U.S. could probably explore Mars or other planets in 13 to 15 yrs but “it will be terribly expensive.” Following speech at annual Navy League convention, he told press: “I don’t believe we will ever see one nation do it. I look for a multiple-nation group..,. Some have as good or better technology and such a combination would not impose abnormal costs on any one.” (AP, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/22/70)
NASA's HL-JO lifting body ('above right.) reached a lifting-body speed record of tnach 1.S6 and an altitude of 1980(1 meters (65 000 feet) during powered night after air launch from a B-52 aircraft. Experimental vehicles in the joint nasa-usaf Lifting Body Flight Research Program to develop the design of future space shuttle craft also included the X-24A (above left), which made its first supersonic flight Oct. 14, and the M2-F3 (center), which made its first glide flight June 2. research was still too flimsy to risk two-year manned Mars flight. (Krimsky, Long Beach [Calif] Independent, 2/19/70)
Mariner-Mars missions in 1971 were described by team of jpl scientists headed by Dan Schneiderman in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The first of these voyages of exploration begins. . .when, between May 6 and June 3, two Mariner-type spacecraft will rise from launch pads at Cape Kennedy on the way to Mars to become the first spacecraft to orbit that planet.” To obtain maximum scientific information, two identical spacecraft would perform separate missions, A and B. Each spacecraft would orbit Mars for 90 days in differing inclinations and periods. “Together they will cover 70% of the surface, permitting the study of seasonal effects. The information gained will help in selecting suitable landing zones for the unmanned Viking project which will land an instrument package on Mars.” Missions would carry six science experiments including TV experiment. TV pictures would enlarge understanding of dynamic characteristics, history, environment, and surface physiography of Mars and improve maps of surface. They were not expected to provide direct evidence of possibility of life, but to furnish indirect evidence of Mars’ suitability as habitat for life. (A&A, 8/70, 64-77)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Institute for Space Studies, discussed eventual colonization of outer planets in New York Times Magazine: While most Homo sapiens would remain on earth in world of future, small percentage—“restless, inquisitive, innovative, continually seeking out challenges and testing the limits of the environment”—would “move out to become a small, hardy population on Mars. Within a few decades of the year 2000, a pioneering band of men—and women—will be living on Mars. ... Children will be born on Mars. Later, the spacefarers will go beyond Mars and beyond the solar system. Some day they will find the earth and its debilitating gravitational pull as difficult a place in which to survive as today’s land-adapted men find the water out of which the ancestral fishes emerged 300 million years ago. Eventually they will constitute a new species, evolved out of Homo sapiens, but linked to the ancestral planet only by sentiment.” (NYT Magazine, 5/10/70, 30)	.
An 85-g (3-oz) palladium generator-separator developed for use in space could be used for air-pollution detection on earth, jpl announced. Unit was heart of gas cnromatograph system developed by NASA and jpl for use by Viking Molecular Analysis Science Team in analyzing Martian soil and atmosphere in mid-1970s. It was particularly sensitive to major U.S. air pollutants like sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen, (jpl Release 558)
Results of study of infrared spectra recorded by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by Univ. of California at Berkeley chemists Kenneth C. Herr and Dr. George C. Pimentel. Reflections at 4.3/x suggested presence of solid carbon dioxide in upper atmosphere of Mars. (Science, 1/2/70,47-9)
Achievement described as “first artificial synthesis of a living cell” was reported by State Univ. of New York at Buffalo in letter to press signed by Dr. Raymond H. Ewell, Vice President for Research, and Dr. James F. Danielli, Director of Center for Theoretical Biology, who had led experimenters. Amoebas had been partly dismembered and then reassembled, using components from other amoebas. Reconstituted amoebas had reproduced themselves and were indistinguishable from normal amoebas. Work opened “new era for artificial life synthesis, now being explored” and helped clear way for “synthesis of new micro-organisms, new egg cells and an organism capable of living on Mars.” New York Times said officials at NASA, which was supporting the work, had described experiment as “exciting” and “a big step.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/13/70, 1)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, during U.S.S.R. visit, told Soviet Academy of Sciences that he favored increased space cooperation and that development of space stations and shuttles was “most important” method of practical space usage. “I have found in my discussions with my Soviet cosmonaut colleagues that their objectives in space are very much the same as ours.” Armstrong said he would be glad to be member of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space crew. He felt Soyuz IX experiments in earth measurements would be useful to U.S. space program. In answer to question, Armstrong said he would ask “if I could take my family along” in volunteering for three-year Martian mission. (Clarity, NYT,, 6/4/70, 27)
