Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
First laboratory demonstration of controlled fusion—peaceful use of hydrogen-bomb reaction to make electricity—could occur within three years, Washington Post reported. Intensely concentrated laser light beam would be used to trigger fusing of atoms. Fusion would produce energy sufficient for conversion into plentiful electric power with potentially unlimited fuel, a form of hydrogen from sea. Physicist Edward Teller had said there was “outside chance” that laser-fusion would carry men to Mars and back by end of century. U.S.S.R. was believed to be two to three years ahead of rest of world in both laser-fusion and other fusion research. (Cohn, W Post, 8/11/72, A3)
Air Force qualification of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was announced by Air Force Systems Command. Qualification had followed July 11 and 26 and Aug. 13 and 19 tests by Martin Marietta Corp. at Roswell and White Sands, N. Mex. Tests had included supersonic, transonic, and free-fall environments. In Aug. 19 test, decelerator had been dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft). Previous tests had used rocket motors ignited after balloon had taken test system to desired altitude. In each test, decelerator deployed to slow down simulated softlanding instrument package, (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio)
Report of Soviet progress in space presented at annual meeting of Soviet Academy of Sciences appeared in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Academician M. D. Millionschikov said 1971 had been year of achievement in space. Creation of “the world’s first manned orbital scientific station, Salyut, was a major event. . . . Exploration of the moon and the planets with the help of automatic space vehicles has continued. Recently, a magnificent space experiment was completed—the Luna-20 automatic station’s delivery to earth of soil samples from the almost inaccessible' lunar mountain region. Two automatic ‘Mars’ stations were created. . . . Separating from the Mars-2 station, a capsule landed a pennant. . . and the Mars-3 descent vehicle made the first soft landing on the surface of Mars. In addition to the scientific exploration of space, broad plans were elaborated for utilizing satellites for extra-atmosphere astronomy. Work began on the utilization of satellites for exploring natural resources in the interests of the national economy including geological survey work, agriculture, forestry, water economy, fishing, the hydro-meteorological service, and geodesy.” (fbis—Sov, 3/13/72, L2)	_
Second in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of Viking parachute system was conducted over White Sands Missile Range. Helium-filled balloon lifted simulated Viking entry vehicle from Roswell, N. Mex., to 11 200-m (36 880-ft) altitude where payload was dropped and rocket motors ignited, boosting payload to 41 000-m (135 000-ft) altitude. Parachute deployed as planned and payload landed at wsmr about 56 km (35 mi) northwest of Holloman Air Force Base. Objective—to check parachute system at transonic conditions and at lowest parachute loading conditions expected over Mars—was met. Successful completion of three tests—one supersonic, one transonic, and one subsonic— would qualify Viking parachute system for use on Mars mission scheduled for launch in 1975. [See July 11, Aug. 13 and 19, Dec. 14.] (nasa Release 72-118; NASA proj off)
New York Times editorial commented on first global map of Mars produced by U.S. Geological Survey from Mariner 9 photos [see Nov. 27] : “Ever since telescopes were invented people have wondered to what extent Mars resembles Earth. Now, for the first time, the existence of a reasonably comprehensive picture of Mars provides a basis for comparison.” Despite differences from earth, “increased familiarity with the forces that have shaped its surface is bound to give man a more cosmopolitan view of how planets evolve—a view that should provide us with better understanding of the planet we call home.” (NYT, 11/29/72) November 30:	Six-day countdown for Apollo 17 began at 8:30 am EST at Kennedy Space Center. Spacecraft was scheduled for launch at 9:53 pm EST Dec. 6 (ksc Hist Off; AP, W Post, 12/1/72, A22)
Discovery that calcium chloride concentration in brackish waters of ponds in Victorialand region of Antarctica—most Mars-like area on earth— prevented growth of microorganisms was announced by NASA. Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Dr. Roy E. Cameron and Frank A. Morelli had concluded that any water found on Mars might be as salty and sterile. They had successfully grown microorganisms in Antarctic soil samples, but no form survived when kept in pond water. “In this environment,” Dr. Cameron said, “the capacity of life to adapt and survive is pushed to its limit and beyond. The concentration of living things around water sources in the dry valleys and their thinning out and final disappearance on the cold, dry slopes may provide the model for the distribution of life we may . . . someday find on Mars.” (nasa Release 72-90)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) had orbited moon 1358 times and was operating satisfactorily, Tass announced. Spacecraft had studied moon’s gravitational field, measured interplanetary magnetic field and meteor-flow density, studied characteristics of space radiation in lunar space for comparison with Mars 2 and Mars 3 data, and collected data on dynamics of changes in intensity of space radiation corpuscular flows. (fbis-Sov, 1/31/72, LI)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) completed photo-mapping of entire Mars surface with acquisition of final elements needed in playback of 30 pictures, bringing total photo count to more than 7000. Spacecraft—in Mars orbit since Nov. 13, 1971— would make 500th revolution around Mars July 20. During next three months Mariner 9 would provide precision tracking data to test relativity theory that electromagnetic radiation—spacecraft’s radio signal— passing close to sun would be slowed by sun’s gravitational field. Additional pictures would be taken once in August, once in September, and twice in October and stored for playback in late October. Lifetime was dependent upon supply of attitude-control gas. (nasa Release 72-143)
Soviet news agency Tass reported completion of Polar Morning—joint U.S.S.R. and France experiment at E. T. Krenkel Hydrometeorological Observatory in Arctic. During three-month expedition, series of meteorological rockets 'had carried Soviet and French payloads to altitudes between 90 and 180 km (56 and 112 mi) during period of transition from winter to summer and from polar night to polar day. Data were obtained on atmospheric temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud formations, corpuscular radiation, and solar activity. (FBIS-Sov, 6/16/72, LI) June 15:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Apollo 16 Astronauts Charles M. Duke, Jr., John W. Young, and Thomas K. Mattingly II met with President Nixon at White House to discuss April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission and joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Following discussion Dr. Fletcher and astronauts held press conference. Dr. Fletcher said President was “very pleased” with progress made toward joint mission. “The President particularly wanted to emphasize that . . . this is only the beginning of what he conceives as a long association with the Soviet Union in many other areas of space cooperation. ... we are busy working on other kinds of things that we can do together . . . perhaps through the turn of the century, doing things together for economic reasons and because he feels strongly that the international aspect of this is important in improving relationships. If we can do this together, we can do other things together.” President also emphasized worldwide space cooperation. As areas for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in future, Dr. Fletcher thought “the ones we can be sure of” were “the cooperative program on Mars [and] a new cooperative program on Venus, where we explore the upper atmosphere and the entire atmosphere and they explore the surface. We are going to be doing that together.” (Other nasa officials explained later these would be coordinated efforts rather than joint missions.) July meeting of principals at Manned Spacecraft Center would “iron out the management” of joint docking mission. Astronaut Young said that “real problem” was communication; “once we solve that problem we can prove that we can work together in a lot of other areas besides.” Dr. Fletcher said plans for joint astronaut and cosmonaut training had not been concluded, “but it is going to be absolutely essential that the cosmonauts come over here and train on our equipment and vice versa. That much has been agreed to.” Training program probably would start “within about a year.” Dr. Fletcher summed up progress made on joint mission since May 24 signing of cooperation agreement: “We have set up the agenda for the meeting which will primarily involve the management aspects. ... We also have, at home, worked out some of the details of the specifications . . . and now are waiting approval.” Perhaps most “spectacular” progress had been “great enthusiasm from Congress for the mission, particularly when we told them this was not going to cost any more money.” (Transcript; WSJ, 6/16/72)	.
Results of U.S.S.R. research of Mars as released by Soviet press were summarized by Interavia. Initial analysis of data collected by Mars 2 and 3 (launched May 19 and May 28, 1971) spacecraft during interplanetary flight had indicated large variations in composition of interplanetary plasma ions at 20 million km (12.5 million mi) from earth. Data had also revealed new information on distribution of solar plasma around solar system and its relationship with interplanetary and terrestrial magnetic fields. No magnetic field had been detected near Mars, indicating possible lack of liquid core. Orbits of spacecraft had been selected to cover areas of Martian surface difficult to investigate from earth-central latitudes of southern hemisphere to 65° south, equatorial zone, and northern hemisphere to 29° north. During Martian orbit infrared radiometer data had shown certain areas of surface to be definitely warmer than immediate surroundings, indicating possible volcanic activity. Mars 2 and 3 had found steam content in Martian atmosphere to be 2000 times less than that existing in terrestrial atmosphere. At times precipitated water could be 50 micrometers; at others, less than 10. Since photos taken by NASA’s Mariner 9 revealed impressive valleys which could have been formed by erosion, Soviet scientists had theorized that higher temperatures and pressures, sufficient to produce water in liquid form, existed on Mars in previous era. Very sharp differences in planet’s brightness, never before observed from earth, were observed by visible range photometer. Data were collected from measurement of radio-wave reflection. After landing, scientific results from Mars 2 and 3 had been meager. Mars 2 had hardlanded a capsule on Mars Nov. 27, 1971. Photos and measurements by Mars 3 (which softlanded a capsule Dec. 2, 1971) had indicated a dust cloud 6 to 8 km (4 to 5 mi) thick covering landing area, leading to speculation that either dust storms had raged over area and caused capsule to land incorrectly or capsule had sunk into dust layer. Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov had said U.S.S.R. planned to use 1973 launch windows if program of Martian exploration continued as planned. (Interavia, 10/72, 1139—41; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
nasa’s Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe (launched March 2) entered Asteroid Belt, beginning first reconnaissance of huge region of dust and rocks that circled sun between orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Doughnut-shaped belt was about 3 billion km (1.8 billion mi) around, 280 million km (175 million mi) wide, and 80 million km (50 million mi) thick. Asteroids in belt ranged in size from dust particles to rock chunks as large as Alaska. Passage of Pioneer 10 through belt would permit first measurements of asteroids too small to be seen with earth-based telescopes and of amounts and kinds of asteroidal material. During seven-month passage through belt, spacecraft was expected to pass within 8.9 million km (5.5 million mi) of asteroid Palomar-Layden Aug. 2 and asteroid Nike Dec. 2. Pioneer 10 carried three experiments for measurements in Asteroid Belt—asteroid-meteoroid detector, gas-cell-array meteoroid detector, and imaging photopolarim-eter. (nasa Release 72-136; arc Astrogram, 7/20/72, 1)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former nasa Administrator, delivered 1972 Tizard Memorial Lecture at Westminster School in London. Discussing man’s future in space, Dr. Paine evaluated role of applications satellites: Their “great economic and social value” was apparent “although their full potential is not yet appreciated. Men on every continent regularly use these services today; shares can be bought in the enterprises that provide them. We must not, however, overlook the equal value of the new information about the earth’s origin, history, environment, and destiny that our more basic lunar and planetary scientific programs are providing. Already studies of radiative energy transport in the atmosphere of Mars have contributed to terrestrial meteorology; lunar geological surveys have provided new clues to the early formation and structure of earth. The line between science and application in this rapidly advancing area is continually shifting and new scientific understanding of such questions as the origin of the Ice Ages might be of incalculable human importance.” (Text)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on use of U-2 aircraft to map storm damage in Chesapeake Bay area [see June 2]. Soviet Embassy had purchased residence in area and was improving property. “We just hope every precaution will be taken with the flood-mapping spy plane, so that the new era of sweetness and light between the United States and the Soviet Union will not come crashing down in flames just because somebody at the CIA wants an aerial closeup of the Russians’ new basketball court.” (W Star, 7/10/72) July 11:	Viking parachute system to lower instruments onto Mars surface in 1976 was damaged during first in series of three high-altitude tests over White Sands Missile Range. Parachute was carried to 5900-m (19 500-ft) altitude by large balloon and then boosted upward to supersonic speed by rocket. Damage had occurred when parachute deployed at 43 300-m (142 000-ft) altitude, where dynamic pressure reached 689.5 newtons per sq m (14.4 psf), instead of in thinner air at 45 300 m (148 500 ft) with 598.5 newtons per sq m (12.5 psf) as planned. Objective was to demonstrate capability of parachute system at highest speed and most severe loading conditions expected at Mars. NASA said parachute would have functioned satisfactorily in actual Mars landing. Since launch was only partially successful, it would be repeated in August. [See July 26, Aug. 13 and 19, Dec. 14.] (nasa Release 72-118; NASA proj off; Today, 7/14/72)
Tass reported Luna 19 achievements as Soviet lunar probe launched Sept. 28, 1971, neared end of its activity. During more than 4000 lunar orbits spacecraft had transmitted data in more than 1000 communication sessions. Experiment data had indicated presence of plasma produced in near-lunar space by interaction of “space irradiation and the lunar surface.” Luna 19 had photographed lunar area “to study individual parts of the lunar surface and possibilities for using orbital panoramas for the navigation of space apparatus.” Probe had recorded more than 10 increases in flux of solar cosmic ray protons, resulting from powerful solar flareups. During lifetime, Luna 19 onboard systems had functioned normally. Tass said two-year monitoring of space radiation by Luna 19 and predecessors Lunokhod 1 (lunar roving vehicle landed on moon by Luna 17), Verms 7 and 8, and Mars 2 and 3 would “make it possible to ascertain the energy spectrum, the charge components of cosmic rays, and the conditions of their propagation in the interplanetary medium.” (fbis-Sov, 10/4/72, LI)
Cameras on board NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) were turned off to check out malfunction in onboard computer. (nasa Release 72-67)
Pravda article by scientists from Soviet Academy of Sciences Institute of Space Studies described preliminary results from U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 probes. Spacecraft (launched May 19 and May 28, 1971) had measured atmospheric humidity and surface temperature, photometered atmosphere and surface, and photographed surface. Temperature along route from 58° south latitude, 330° longitude to 30° north latitude, 190° longitude had been determined. Highest temperature—recorded near mid-day region—was 253 K (—20°C; —4°F). On night side of planet temperature dropped to 183 K (—90°C; —130°F). Dust storm that had covered Mars since Mars 2 reached planet Nov. 27, 1971, was subsiding. “Photometric recordings obtained by means of the red filtre show dark areas corresponding to the Martian ‘seas’ that were previously absolutely undistinguishable. But the recordings made with the ultraviolet filter again showed bright clouds.” Onboard instruments to record emissions in three spectral bands containing lines of hydrogen, oxygen, and argon atoms showed that hydrogen emissions stretched to more than 3400-km (2100-mi) altitude and oxygen atoms concentrated near surface up to 600-800 km (370-500 mi). (Tass, fbis-Sov, 1/10/72, L3)
NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had approved recommendations of joint working session of scientists on planetary exploration held in Madrid May 19-20, NASA announced. Session had recommended that Mars study try to determine physical and chemical properties of planet’s surface, seek evidence of biological activity, determine precise composition of Mars atmosphere, and ascertain role of water in Mars’ evolution. Venus study should determine how and why planet became hotter than earth by determining planet’s atmospheric composition, cloud structure, depth of sunlight penetration in Venusian atmosphere, and characteristics of Venusian surface. Outer planets study should emphasize exploration of Jupiter and Saturn and environments. Session agreed meeting should be held before year’s end to define promising Mars landing sites and small group of U.S. and Soviet scientists should meet to consider probe of Venusian atmosphere. Madrid session had been held in accordance with recommendation of Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Exploration of NearEarth Space, the Moon and the Planets, made Aug. 6,1971. Cochairmen of Madrid session were Dr. Georgy I. Petrov of Soviet Academy and Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in nasa Office of Space Science, (nasa Release 72-187)
Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70 (Senate Document 92-51) was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The 670-page report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.— noted that Soviet space program remained “a strong and growing enterprise” unhindered by budgetary strain and undimmed by deaths of three Soyuz cosmonauts in 1971. Current level of Soviet space activity exceeded that of U.S. at its peak in 1966, with perhaps 2% of Soviet gross national product devoted to space (U.S. spent about 1% of its gnp at peak). Although U.S. launch record had been declining steadily since 1966, Soviet launches had continued to climb, at least until 1970. Contrary to assertion that it was concentrating its efforts on unmanned program rather than manned program, U.S.S.R. apparently was still planning manned lunar landing and might spend $49 million on both advanced unmanned and manned lunar programs. U.S. would have committed $35 billion to total Apollo program when complete. In unmanned research satellite program “the level of activity currently runs ahead of the corresponding level of work at NASA.” Compendium of every known Soviet launch that had achieved orbit showed that, along with scientific satellites, Cosmos program consisted of unmanned tests of spacecraft designed to carry cosmonauts, lunar and planetary probes that failed to leave earth orbit, unsuccessful Mars probes, and military research and development and observation satellites that accounted for 80% of Cosmos payloads. According to study, Cosmos series through April 1971 had included at least 16 tests of fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and 22 tests of experimental spacecraft designed to inspect and destroy other nations’ observation and navigation satellites. Soviet achievements in near future were dependent on success or failure of G booster (in Saturn V class) or similar booster. Studies of moon with Luna series spacecraft would continue, perhaps with spacecraft launched by advanced booster carrying both rovers and sample returners. Planetary program would continue, probably with flyby mission to Jupiter and landing mission to Mars. Dr. Sheldon stressed that “the Soviet program is not a sham. It may be exploited for political purposes, but it is real and it is pursued in earnest.” (Text)
Science agreements signed during U.S.-U.S.S.R. summit meetings May 22-26 were praised in Science article: “Taken together, they represent not only a significant expansion of programs already in existence, but forays into areas hitherto unexplored.” Agreements were designed to “insulate cooperative scientific endeavors from the stresses of international politics by putting authority into the hands of appropriate government agencies rather than the foreign ministries.” In space agreement, “nasa is operating on the assumption that the joint docking is only the first in a series of increasingly ambitious mutual experiments—serving both the causes of economy and international understanding—which could conceivably lead to something as grandiose as a joint landing on Mars 20 years hence.” (Holden, Science, 6/9/72, 1106-8)
Soviet scientists V. Moroz and L. Ksanfomaliti described in Izvestia findings on Mars atmosphere from Mars 2 and 3 spacecraft. Difference in contrast on two wavelengths between continents and seas during dust storm and change in contrast in same field had permitted evaluation of dust particle size and cloud thickness. Average radius of particles over Iapigya region Dec. 15, 1971, was estimated to be less than one micrometer and density of particles to be 100 million per sq cm (645 million per sq in). “If clouds of such density uniformly envelop the entire planet, its atmosphere must have contained several thousand million tons of dust.” Estimates suggested that particles have mostly silicate composition, “which agrees with the infra-red spectra obtained by Mariner 9. Particles of such a tiny size . . . fall very slowly—for about a month even in the absence of supporting vertical currents in the atmosphere. Hence the conclusion that no prolonged storm in the true sense of the word, i.e. constant winds in the period of investigation, occurred.” Unlike Venus, where cloud layer and atmosphere were more pervious and created “hothouse effect,” surface of Mars “gets cool rather than heated, giving rise to what may be described as an ‘anti-hothouse effect.’ When the storm ended, the temperature rose.” Water vapor content of atmosphere was low during and after the dust storm (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/22/72, LI)
Vladimir A. Kirillin, Chairman of U.S.S.R. State Committee for Science and Technology, and Soviet space expert Academician Boris Petrov, held Moscow press conference following signing of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space and science and technology agreements. Petrov said: “It is difficult to overestimate the importance of these works, this research, which has pursued humane goals of ensuring the safety of space flights. The concluded agreements give ground for the belief that these directions in Soviet-American cooperation in outer space will develop successfully in the future.” Kirillin said of science and technology agreement: “I think that if we get down to the realization, to the implementation of this agreement, it will definitely yield positive results.” (Transcript) May 25:	NASA’s Mariner 9 spacecraft, in its seventh month in Mars orbit, was in period of both sun occultation (April 2-June 4) and earth occultation (May 6-June 24) for short periods of each orbit. Sun occultations—when spacecraft passed into shadow of Mars and was powered by onboard battery—were declining from peak total time of 97 min. Only data from celestial mechanics and earth occultation experiments and engineering telemetry were being received. Battery was recharging satisfactorily twice daily and spacecraft was in good condition. Earth occultation—when Mars was between spacecraft and earth— varied from 43 to 90 min orbit. Resumption of limited data acquisition from scientific instruments would begin in June to conserve attitude control gas. (NASA Special Release)
Map of entire globe of Mars—first detailed map of another planet, prepared by U.S. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) and processed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory—was published by New York Times. Map showed entire Martian surface in Mercator projection at scale of 1 to 25 million at equator and in two special polar projections. Other maps were being prepared for even more detailed study of Mars. Map reprinted in Times would be released by U.S. Geological Survey early in January. Times commented that map was produced in Flagstaff, Ariz., few miles from mountain-top observatory where Dr. Percival Lowell in 1877 observed presumed canals on Mars that “inspired so many tales of Martians,” canals that were “nowhere to be seen on the map of Mariner 9.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/27/72, 1, 30; usgs Map Info Off)
Phase II of prototype development program for advanced medium STOL (short takeoff and landing) transport (amst) was authorized by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Contractors Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. would design, build, and test two prototype aircraft, using existing engines, (dod Release 863-72) Dissident group, Scientists and Engineers for Social and Political Action, unsuccessfully attempted to disrupt opening aaas meeting and later held press conference to protest alleged AAAS attempts to “exclude political dissent from scientific and community groups.” (Lyons, NYT, 12/27/72, 14)	_ Space Shuttle Payloads Symposium Dec. 27-28 considered space shuttle system and its capability, science payloads, space operation roles, and other aspects of space shuttle system. Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in NASA Office of Space Science, discussed effect of data derived from Mars and Venus probes on understanding of solar system, during Dec. 29 session on NASA planetary research. (AAAS Bull, 11/72; AAAS PAO) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Deputy Director of National Science Foundation, presented progress report on nsf’s Research Applied to National Needs (rann) Program Dec. 29. rann, originated in August 1968, was “gaining in strength and effectiveness.” It had been receiving “excellent proposals in great numbers from good people” and had in hand “proposals which would cost over $400 million to support—which unfortunately, would somewhat overstrain our present budget.” (Text) William A. Fischer of U.S. Geological Survey said Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by NASA July 23) had discovered at least two major deposits that might contain large quantities of copper. “And if I were a geologist looking for oil and natural gas, I’d buy up every erts photograph of Northern Alaska and Northern Canada that I could get my hands on.” (Kirkman, Cl Press, 12/28/72) During shot meeting Dr. John B. Rae, Chairman of Dept, of Humanities and Social Sciences at Harvey Mudd College, was elected shot President for term expiring Dec. 31, 1974; Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, was elected to Advisory Council. (NASA Hist Off) December 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 541 from Plesetsk into orbit with 348-km (216.2-mi) apogee, 218-km (135.5-mi) perigee, 81.3° inclination, and 90.2-min period. Satellite reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; 1/31/73; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe—orbiting Mars since Nov. 13, 1971—had resumed its scientific examination of Mars following engineering analysis of onboard computer, NASA announced. Cameras had been turned off March 17 while trouble-shooting procedures were conducted. Cause of problem had not been determined, but systems were working properly and problem had not recurred. Mariner 9 was 288 million km (179 million mi) from earth and had returned 7000 pictures of Mars and mapped 85% of Mars since launch May 30, 1971. Last pictures to be taken by Mariner 9 until first week in June had been recorded March 22 and 23 and science instruments would be turned off March 30. From April 2 to June 4 Mariner 9 would pass through Mars shadow once during each orbit for periods of up to 100 sec, during which spacecraft would operate on battery power. Limited science operations would resume after June 4, with spacecraft recording data and taking pictures about once a week until mission ended in November. Primary objectives of mission had been completed Feb. 11. (NASA Release 72-67)
Scientists were developing estimate of interactions between unvisited deep-space planets and solar wind in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration project to program future deep-space missions. Series of space environment models had been developed by Ames Research Center scientists Dr. Arthur W. Rizzi, NOAA physicist Dr. Murray Dryer, and Dr. Wen-we Shen of Texas Instruments, Inc. Scaled magnetopause or ionospheric shell had been made for each planet by using available data on earth, Mars, and Venus, and extending models that had worked well for these planets to cases of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, (noaa Release 72-161)
Photographic equipment carried by U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft in Mars orbit were described by Tass: “Automatic devices take pictures on the film which is automatically processed after photographing and then, on command from earth, the pictures are sent by television channels to the flight control centre.” Each spacecraft carried two “photo-television devices with wide-angle and long-focus objectives. ... all units and elements are placed together in one rigid body with the objective fixed outside and in the wide-angle camera—together with the objective and a device for changing colour filters.” Pictures were taken synchronously and transmitted with “an optico-mechanical television device.” (fbis—Sov, 3/8/72, LI)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1970, 1971, 1972 (nsf 71-35). Federal obligations for research and development (r&d) in 1970 totaled $15.3 billion excluding plant; slight rise to $15.4 billion was expected for 1971. Figure was decrease of 5% in constant dollars. Basic research obligations were expected to rise from $2.1 billion in 1970 to $2.2 billion for 1971 and $2.4 billion for 1972. Federal support for basic research declined in 1970 but was expected to reach new record highs for 1971 and 1972. Bulk of Federal basic research, 81%, was funded by NASA; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; National Science Foundation; Atomic Energy Commission; and Dept, of Defense. NASA had led in basic research support since 1961, with 29% of total in 1971. Applied research obligations totaled $3.5 billion in 1970 and were expected to rise to $3.8 billion for 1971, increase of 8%. Total was expected to reach $4.2 billion in 1972—all-time high in current dollars. dod, hew, and NASA continued to dominate Federal applied research effort and would account for 78% in 1971. Obligations for development totaled $9.7 billion in 1970 and would decline 3%, to $9.4 billion, in 1971. In 1972, Federal development total was scheduled to rise to $10.0 billion, or 1966 level, dod, nasa, and AEC were most prominent in Federal development effort in 1960-1972, accounting for 92% in 1971. dod funded 63%; nasa share had declined since 1965 to expected 19% for 1971. Although total Federal R&D obligations were expected to increase 9% from 1970 to 1972, nasa and aec decrease continued. NASA estimate for 1972, however, was smallest reduction since downward trend began in 1967. Report noted increases in key programs—Skylab, space shuttle, Viking Mars explorations, and unmanned missions to outer planets—had almost offset decreases in Apollo program. (Text)
Tass reported completion of U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 missions. Spacecraft, launched May 19 and'May 28, 1971, had reached Mars in November and December 1971 and had transmitted data on planet and atmosphere. Mars 3 instrumented capsule had landed on Mars and transmitted data from surface for 20 sec. Preliminary findings were: temperature ranged from 163 K (— 166°F) to 286 K (55°F); soil had low conductivity, with Martian seas warmer than continents; surface-level atmospheric pressure was 50-60 newtons per sq m (5.5-6 millibars), 200 times less than earth’s; carbon dioxide atmosphere broke up into carbonic oxide molecule and oxygen atom at 100-km (62-mi) altitude; atmosphere was 10 times less dense than earth’s and was closer to surface; and magnetic field charges exceeded interplanetary background level 8 times. (fbis-Sov, 8/25/72, LI)
Mariner 9 probe (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) completed 232 orbits of Mars. Primary mission objective of photographing Mars from south pole to northern hood had been completed. Jet Propulsion Laboratory was preparing to assemble map of Mars, using more than 100 overlapping pictures taken by Mariner 9 and data from onboard instruments for corresponding surface and atmospheric characteristics. (nasa Release 72—48)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
Brazilian Agriculture Minister Cirne Lima inaugurated new meteorological satellite tracking station in Brasilia, Brazil. Station was second built in Brazil; first was in Rio de Janeiro. (FBis-Brazil, 2/3/72, D3) February 2:	Mariner 9 news conference was held at NASA Hq. Spacecraft (launched May 31, 1971) was in 81st day in Mars orbit, had accepted 25 000 commands, and had taken about 5000 pictures. Dr. Bradford Smith of New Mexico State Univ. said wind-transported dust that had obscured early Mariner 9 photography was more widespread and occurred more frequently than generally had been supposed; substantial quantities of surface dust were displaced each Martian year by local winds that varied with season and with specific areagraphie location; and large-scale atmospheric instabilities occurred, producing hemispheric and global dust storms which were seasonal but apparently did not occur every Martian year. Storm observed by Mariner 9 had begun in late September 1971, reached its peak in late October, and had cleared slowly until mid-December. Planet was quite clear in February. Mariner .9 photos included pictures of huge volcano with base 500 km (300 mi) wide, Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey told press. “. . . as the storm cleared we were able to establish that the dark spots that we saw barely sticking up through at first” were “the very summit of Nix Olympica. This tall mountain with a complex crater at the top and the scalloped edges and the flat, or non-raised rims indicated to us that this was probably a multiple volcanic vent. As the storm continued clearing finally we could see all the way down to the great plains at the base of the mountain. Now this is a great volcanic pile .. . twice as big as the great volcanic pile that forms the Hawaiian Islands. The Hawaiian pile is about 225 kilometers [140 miles] across and . . . about 9 kilometers [6 miles] high. It is the largest volcanic pile on the earth. It is something like 32,000 feet [9800 meters] from the floor of the Pacific to the top of the mountain.” Photos also showed “spectacular channel” 100 km (60 mi) long with numerous side branching valleys that ended in featureless areas. Absence of vents at ends of valleys made gaseous eruption formation improbable and suggested channel might have been formed by water erosion. Highest amount of water vapor—one thousandth of that in earth’s atmosphere—above Mars’ south polar cap suggested that water vapor was being released from region as cap retreated. Absence of vapor over north polar cap indicated that water vapor there was condensed in carbon dioxide and was transported by storm or by general circulation from south polar cap to north polar cap. Vapor over south polar regions was slightly less than 20 precipitable micrometers. Mariner 9 photos of Mars had provided data which conflicted with data from 1969 Mariner 7 Mars probe. From 1969 photos of heavily cratered planet experimenters had decided that Mars was “a dead planet, very primordial . . . the product of the accumulation of the cosmic debris that fell in to form the planet.” Mariner 9 photos showed “something very, very different indeed. ... we can see the great volcanic piles and because of the crispness of the edges and the lack of craters, we think these are geologically young . . . [and] we have a geochemically evolved planet.” Comparison of 1969 and 1971 photos showed that south polar cap regions completely covered by frost in 1969 were only partially covered in 1971. During period when photographed by Mariner 9 little separations had widened and solid carbon dioxide coverage had broken up until many dark spots showed through as the ice sublimated and revealed underlying dark rocks. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado reported that Mars atmosphere was primarily carbon dioxide but also contained atomic hydrogen and atomic oxygen. “The atomic oxygen comes presumably from the photo-dissociation of carbon dioxide and the atomic hydrogen comes most probably from the photo-dissociation of water vapor.” Amount of atomic hydrogen varied very little with altitude. Atomic hydrogen extended some 20 000 km (12 000 mi) from planet like a “great big sphere of glowing hydrogen atoms with the spacecraft running around through it. Those hydrogen atoms are put there from photo-dissociating water vapor and because of the very low gravitational field of Mars, it is relatively easy for these atoms to escape. In fact, the picture that we have, is that water comes up out of the surface of Mars, goes into the lower atmosphere . . . [and] gets deposited in the polar caps; when the polar caps thaw, it is released into the atmosphere.” Atomic hydrogen was escaping into upper atmosphere at rate equal to 380 cu m (100 000 gallons) of water per day. (Transcript)
Smithsonian Institution displayed collection of 60 works by astronomical artist Chesley Bonestell in Aerospace Art Hall of Arts and Industries Building. Artist had been commissioned by Collier’s magazine in 1952 to illustrate series of articles by rocket expert Dr. Wernher von Braun, later NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and by rocket historian Willy Ley. Articles had resulted in Viking Press books: Conquest of Space, Conquest of the Moon, and Exploration of Mars. Smithsonian exhibition was coincidental with American Museum showing of Bone-stell’s works in New York [see May 16]. (Smithsonian Release; Smithsonian Pio) June 1:	President Nixon returned from state visits to Austria, U.S.S.R., Iran, and Poland and reported to Congress on trip. Commenting on agreements signed with U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings, he said: “Recognizing that the quest for useful knowledge transcends differences between ideologies and social systems, we have agreed to expand United States-Soviet cooperation in many areas of science and technology. “We have joined in plans for an exciting new adventure ... in the cooperative exploration of space, which will begin—subject to Congressional approval of funding—with a joint orbital mission of an Apollo vehicle and a Soviet spacecraft in 1975.” President asked for “fullest scrutiny” of antiballistic missile treaty signed May 26, “because we can undertake agreements as important as these only on a basis of full partnership between the executive and legislative branches of our Government.” {PD, 6/5/72, 975-81)
Legislation to rename Jet Propulsion Laboratory as H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory effective Jan. 4 [see Oct. 21] had set off negative reaction, Los Angeles Times reported. “General feeling” among JPL scientists and engineers was that Laboratory and its work should not be involved with politics. Protest petition had been signed by 210 students of California Institute of Technology, which operated Laboratory for NASA. Cal Tech officials were surprised and concerned at not having been consulted about change and planned to talk to Government officials in Washington, D.C. {LA Times, 11/5/72) * Spokesman for Cape Kennedy local of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees said Boeing Co. officials had defied union demands to submit wage dispute to Federal arbitrators. Attorney Bernard Mamet said 60 members of local had vowed to walk out by Dec, 5 if their request was denied. He said Boeing had halted negotiations in eight-month dispute and had refused to resume talks before Nov. 14. Boeing technical writers were asking at least partial restoration of April 1971 wage cut. Dispute had raised “slim threat” of walkout on eve of Apollo 17 launch, Orlando Sentinel said later. Sympathy strike by other locals of union could cause “serious problems.” (0 Sen, 11/8/72) November 6:	NASA selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for two unmanned Viking spacecraft in summer 1976 was announced by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs, in telephone interview. NASA also released Mariner 9 photos of sites-— two at edge of Nix. Olympics slopes, another near slopes of three smaller volcanoes north of canyons along Martian equator, fourth on desert plain, and fifth in region of flattened craters at edge of highland terrain. Observations from Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had shown sites were low, relatively warm regions, possibly moist, where life form was most likely to be discovered. Prime objective of Viking missions was to determine if Mars harbored life or potential for life. In choosing sites, project scientists had eliminated nearly one third of Mars because of high elevations. In mountainous regions, Viking parachutes would not have sufficient atmosphere to brake spacecraft descent. Scientists also had rejected areas where surface appeared too soft for spacecraft landing, too hard for retrieval of soil samples, or so steep that spacecraft might tip over on landing. Attention had centered November 6:	Selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for mass's two unmanned Viking spacecraft in 1976 was announced. The map showing the sites was based on photos televised from Mariner 9, launched May 30, 1971, and in orbit around Mars since Nov. 13, 1972. All the sites were fairly smooth areas near scientifically interesting geological features and were in regions of the planet where warmer temperatures and greater likelihood of water increased chances of finding evidence of life. The first map of the entire globe of Mars, prepared by the VS. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9, was published Nov. 27. on broad Mars equatorial band with brightest sunlight and highest temperatures, which increased chance of finding water vapor in atmosphere and thus of finding biological activity. Landing zones were about 65 km (40 mi) wide and 650 km (400 mi) long. Precise sites would be selected after further analysis of Mariner 9 photos. U.S. and Soviet scientists 'would meet during winter to compare Mars landing targets. There was “no use in landing on top of each- other. We would also like to optimize the coverage of Mars.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/7/72, 61; NASA pio)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on planetary exploration program at opening session of FY 1973 nasa authorizatization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Dr. Naugle presented plan under study for “much more modest outer planets exploration program” instead of originally proposed two-mission, four-spacecraft Grand Tour of all outer planets, canceled because of budgetary restrictions. Jupiter exploration would continue. “We are studying a mission for the initial exploration of Saturn. We would take advantage of the rare alinement of the planets to launch two Mariner-class spacecraft in 1977 on a trajectory which would carry them first past Jupiter and on to Saturn to investigate that strange planet. ... At present, this program appears to be an excellent outer planets mission within the current constraints. However, we are studying other options with our science advisory groups to determine the set of outer planets missions which provide the most significant scientific information.” Viking project to softland spacecraft on Mars in 1976 remained “most significant element of the ongoing planetary exploration program.” Mariner 9’s orbiting of Mars had been major highlight in 1971 planetary program. To date, “Mariner 9 . . . has been in orbit 96 days, is still healthy and operating nominally. ... it has transmitted back to Earth over 5700 pictures of Mars, a number of closeups of its two moons, and measurements of surface features and atmospheric properties by ultraviolet and infrared spectrometers.” NASA had mapped approximately 66% of Martian surface at resolution of 1 km (0.6 mi) or better. “To date we have visited Venus and Mars, and will soon reach Jupiter and Mercury. Within the next year we shall have studied Mars in detail from orbit and within 5 years shall have begun an intensive automated exploration of its surface. By the end of the decade we expect to know whether life exists, has existed, or could exist on Mars.” Three spacecraft to be launched in 1972 would open “brand new areas of research or application.” Pioneer-F would be launched in March to begin study of Jupiter. Next, Earth Resources Technology Satellite would open new field of earth study. In fall, astronomy Explorer satellite would begin to study gamma rays from stars. Major
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
British press correspondent Arthur Smith presented British view of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs since Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: “Two major events in space marked 1971—both of them signs that America’s formidable lead in space exploration is being whittled away by the incredibly dynamic program” of U.S.S.R.: launch of Soyuz 11, which put U.S.S.R. ahead of U.S. in total launches for first time since 1958, and U.S.S.R.’s landing of Mars 3 capsule on Mars—“relatively unproductive from the scientific point of view,” but impressive. “These two events demonstrate that the Soviet space program is now making great strides after many years of relatively minor achievement in both manned and unmanned exploration and application. The characteristic pattern was a Soviet achievement announced to a surprised world, followed some months later by a more sophisticated and more useful U.S. version of the same mission, yielding far more scientific data, but little prestige.” U.S.S.R. program was characterized by excessive secrecy because, according to Soviet officials, rockets used in space program were similar to those used in military program. Smith said genuine reason for secrecy “is the desire to guard against a failure in the full blaze of world publicity.” U.S.S.R. “guards against ever having to admit failure by announcing launches only post facto. If there is a launch pad failure there is no announcement at all. If orbit is reached by the spacecraft, but it does not function as planned, no mention is made of this in the curt bulletin.” If lunar or planetary probe failed to enter planned trajectory, mission objective “is not mentioned, and the spacecraft is merely allocated a number in the catch-all Cosmos series. ... It is impossible to be absolutely certain how many of these escape stage failures there have been, but there may have been as many as 10 or 15 aimed at Venus and Mars alone.” Soviet program had “little ... of the technical virtuosity of the American approach,” but had more impetus and would “obviously continue on a growing scale. Apart from the progress in individual projects, the ever increasing number of Soviet launches demonstrates that the Russian equivalent of NASA is financially more secure. And the speed with which the Soviet space establishment can respond to a failure is also a pointer to the massive scale of the back-up precautions which are taken.” Soviet program, by its nature, was ensured greater financial security. “By their very success in being able to reach an unparalleled level of technology in their spacecraft, the American engineers have been working against their own best interests.” {Bull Atom Sci, 4/72, 18-24)
Last in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was held over White Sands Missile Range by Martin Marietta Corp. under Air Force Research Laboratories direction. Decelerator was dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft) to check out parachute system at subsonic conditions. In previous tests rocket motors had boosted speed after balloon had carried system to desired altitude. [See July 11 and 26, Aug. 13, and Dec. 14.] (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio; NASA Release 72-118) Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of stars in ultraviolet range between 1000 and 3000 A to investigate composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space and stellar sources. Secondary objective was to evaluate onboard computer, light baffle, inertial reference unit, electronically scanned star tracker, and heat pipes. Spacecraft carried two experiments—Princeton experiment package (pep), 80-cro (32-in) Cassegrainian telescope and photoelectric spectrometer; and Univ. College London (ucl) x-ray experiment containing three telescopes and collimated proportional counter. All spacecraft operations were carried out as planned, with spacecraft checkout completed Aug, 24, experiment checkout completed Aug. 26, and stabilization and control system checkout completed Aug. 28. By 2:00 pm edt Aug. 29 Oao 3 had completed 120 orbits with systems operating almost perfectly, pep was viewing bright star Zeta in constellation Ophiuchus and obtaining excellent data. UCL experiment was undergoing calibration and alignment and would begin observing x-ray sources in September. Fourth OAO launched by NASA, Oao 3 at 2200 kg (4900 lbs), 2 m wide and 3 m high (7 x 10 ft), was heaviest and most complex automated spacecraft developed by U.S. It had new gyro inertial reference unit with four star trackers, electrically scanned star tracker, precision digital solar-aspect sensor, and onboard computer that could handle 16000, 18-bit words and store 1024 ground commands. OAO-B had crashed Nov. 30, 1970, when shroud failed to separate after launch. Oao 2 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was still returning valuable data. Oao 1 (launched April 8, 1966) had failed because of high-voltage arcing in star trackers and malfunction in power supply system. OAO program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72-156)
Press conference on scientific results of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, project scientist, said Mars “used to he likened to earth in science fiction, and was compared to the moon after the first pictures from Mariner 4 in 1965. Now we are seeing that Mars has a character all its own. It is not earth-like or moon-like, it is Mars-like.” Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey said Mars could be divided into four major geological provinces: Nix Olympica-Tharis volcanic province with volcanoes up to 8 km (5 mi) high and 500 km (300 mi) in diameter; Ophir-Eos equatorial plateau region with faults and rifts 5 km (3 mi) deep; cratered and smooth terrains with large circular basins like lunar impact basins; and south polar cratered terrain covered with glacial sediment layers up to 100 m (330 ft) thick. Convincing evidence that water had played active role in evolution of Mars was shown in Mariner 9 photos of deep, winding channels that might have once been beds of fast-flowing streams. Masursky suggested two explanations for apparent heavy rains and floods on Mars in past: volcanic heat might have melted water ice stored below surface as permafrost or increased dosages of sunlight on polar caps every 50 000 yrs, because of axis wobbling, might have melted polar caps completely. Dr. Geoffrey A. Biggs of Jpl described north polar hood of variable clouds that appeared to have general west-to-east flow pattern, with some systems resembling small cyclones. Photos also showed “white cloud phenomenon”—brilliant white spots, believed to be water ice clouds, associated with volcanoes. “The clouds appear mostly in the afternoon, when warmer air is moving up the slopes and cooling as it goes.” Pictures of north polar area showed wavelike clouds “formed by a simple, harmonic movement of air, of winds up to 115 miles per hour [185 kilometers per hour] . . . very much like the cold fronts shown in earth atmosphere pictures.” (Summary statement and abstracts; Wilford, NYT, 6/15/72, 1; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 6/15/72)
NASA released three photos of Mars taken by Mariner 9 Aug. 7. Pictures showeid that Mars north polar icecap was shrinking and showed sedimentary systems during late spring. Fractured terrains, partially flooded by volcanic extrusions, were visible in center of planet. (LA Her-Exam, 9/7/72)
First photos of Mars taken by U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft were shown on Moscow TV. One photo showed equatorial zone with sun at low angle throwing long shadows over mountainous area. Second photo showed sharply defined, ring-shaped formation against light-colored background. Origin of formation, visible through dust clouds, was not established. Third photo showed craters of Syrtis Major. (NYT, 1/23/72)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
Mariner 9 project scientists were pondering past and future of planet Mars as spacecraft (launched May 30, 1971) began final weeks of Mars probe, New York Times said. Questions of existence of water on Mars, Martian atmosphere, and possible future use of planet as refuge for man when earth became uninhabitable had “no clear answers.” Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech believed Mars was currently evolving, had never had any vast bodies of water, and might be facing atmospheric dead end.” Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey had said presence of river-like channels on Mars indicated existence of liquid water in recent past. Dr. Carl E. SagAn of Cornell Univ. had suggested that periodic changes in Mars’ angle of rotation could make Martian climate unstable, alternating between present ice age and warm, earthlike areas that could support “thriving biology.” Mars controversy centered on Mariner 9 photos that showed many channels on Mars seemingly carved out by flowing water. (Wilford, NYT, 10/8/72, 68)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe photographed area of Mars 800 km (500 mi) from south pole from 3335-km (2072-mi) altitude. Photos, released to press Jan. 11, showed pits and hollows—including two large closed basins 16 km (10 mi) wide—with more detail than seen before. According to Dr. Carl E. Sagan of Cornell Univ., spots occurred in sizes from more than 160 km (100 mi) to size of Yankee Stadium in New York. Many blotches seemed to be associated with craters, indicating that they might be wind shadows where hill or other feature had protected downwind area from dust deposition. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/12/72, 1)	_ _
Special awards ceremony marking outstanding success of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars mission was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—assisted by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology—presented 32 NASA medals. Dan Schneiderman, Manager of Mariner Project, was awarded NASA Distinguished Service Medal for “creative leadership in conception, organizational planning, and management of a highly efficient Mariner 9 team which . . . achieved all objectives of the most successfully productive mission to Mars.” (JPL Release 624)
Mission officials for Viking Mars mission were concerned about tenuous values of dielectric constant (measure of electrical charge a substance could withstand at a given electrical field strength) estimated from radar observations of Mars surface, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Massachusetts Institute of Technology investigators had found strong signal in 2-5 dielectric-constant range and weaker signal above that. Values suggested Mars had either hard bedrock surface impenetrable by spacecraft sampling equipment or deep dust surface that could not support landing vehicle. (Av Wk, 9/11/72, 11)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, described major alterations in “nature of the space effort” to be expected with 1978 introduction of space shuttle, in signed New York Times article. National space program had “turned an important corner in 1972—a year that, in a very real sense, was a year of decision” in choosing to proceed with shuttle. U.S. had “turned from a period of space exploration to a period of space exploitation for practical purposes.” By 1978 it would be “realistic to consider a variety of missions either not practicable at present cost levels or that were beyond the state of the art as it was in the pre-shuttle era.” Missions would include advanced, space-based communications systems that, when used for education, would “have the potential for eliminating illiteracy from the face of the earth.” Shuttle-launched advanced-version Nimbus satellites, combined with weather-modeling ground computers, would permit experiments in weather modification to dampen violent storms. Earth resources program data would provide precise picture of crop and timber conditions and extent of attacks by disease, drought, and fire. By 1980s, pilot space manufacturing operations might be in progress. “Super pure vaccine could thus be produced. Perfectly homogeneous alloys, fiber composites and perfectly round ball bearings are other possibilities.” During 1980s, “program of planetary exploration should record the completion of a close look at all the planets in our solar system as well as a detailed study of Mars, Jupiter and Venus. Large orbiting telescopes will be aimed at the outer reaches of the universe, examining such phenomena as quasars and pulsars.” (NYT, 12/4/72, 50)
Institute of High Energy Physics at Serpukhov, near Moscow, inaugurated experimental complex which could extract proton cluster with maximum energy from 70-bev proton accelerator in millionth fractions of a second. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/9/72, LI) June 8-9:	NASA’s Mariner 9 spacecraft—orbiting Mars since Nov. 13, 1971—began photographing Mars after two-month rest period. Clear photos of Mars south and north poles—not clearly visible with earth-based telescopes and obscured from spacecraft by clouds in winter and spring—were taken June 8 and stored before transmission June 9 to Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station. Pictures were taken during 418th revolution in orbit with 16 900-km (10 500mi) apogee and 1650-km (1000-mi) perigee. Mariner 9 would take about 500 pictures during next nine weeks. It had taken 6876 photos covering 85% of planet between Nov. 13, 1971, and April 2, 1972, before it entered occultation period. (NASA Release 72-123)
Dept, of Defense was trying to develop nuclear warhead that could evade Soviet missile defenses, Wall Street Journal reported. DOD spokesman had said USAF had been working on “evasion technology” for several years but program—budgeted for $42.1 million over past two years— was in early r&d stages. (WSJ, 2/22/72, 7) New plan—necessitated by budgetary restrictions and congressional recommendation, and endorsed by National Academy of Sciences— National Research Council’s Space Science Board—would launch two spacecraft in 1977 on trajectory that would carry them by Jupiter and then Saturn during rare alignment of planets. Spacecraft for mission would be based on Mariners developed to explore inner planets Mars, Venus, and Mercury. They would have large antennas for longdistance communication, be powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators, carry more than 68 kg (153 lbs) of instrumentation including TV cameras, and be launched by Titan-Centaur-Burner III boosters and accelerated by Jupiter’s gravity and orbital velocity for flight to Saturn. Possible Saturn encounters included flying close to planet’s satellite Titan—larger than planet Mercury and only satellite known to have atmosphere. Spacecraft would encounter Jupiter in about IV2 yrs and Saturn about 3% yrs after launch. Mission plan flexibility would permit selection of different flyby trajectory at Saturn for second spacecraft based on data from first. Plan would maintain option to use Pioneer-class spacecraft for Jupiter and Saturn orbiters in late 1970s. Project responsibility had been assigned to Jet Propulsion Laboratory. In other testimony, Dr. Naugle said NASA had developed heat sterilization techniques for Viking lander and new thermoradiation techniques expected to have future space and industrial applications. Program initiated measures to ensure that all planetary missions had “acceptably low probability of impacting or contaminating the target planets.” (Transcript; NASA Release 72-42)
Mariner Mars ’71 primary mission—to explore Mars from Martian orbit for period sufficient to observe planet’s surface and view selected areas during dynamic changes, photograph planet, and obtain infrared and ultraviolet data on atmosphere and surface characteristics—was adjudged successful by NASA. Mariner 8 launch May 8, 1971, was not successful because of malfunction of Atlas-Centaur booster. Mariner 9 was successfully launched May 30, 1971, and reached Mars Nov. 13, 1971. All Mariner 9 instruments operated successfully and were continuing to transmit data. When Mariner 8 was lost, mission plan for Mariner 9 had been altered to meet primary mission objectives in best way. Plan had been altered second time when dust storm on Mars delayed systematic mapping of planet. (NASA proj off)
Space researchers should look for insect life on Jupiter and for seeds and pollen on Saturn, Russian-born cosmologist Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky said during lecture sponsored by Ames Research Center’s Biotechnology and Planetary Biology Divs. at arc. He hypothesized that Venus and Mars had been in different orbits and had passed close enough to earth in centuries before Christ to cause cataclysms described in Old Testament. Dr. Velikovsky also suggested that several magnetic shells within solar system could return echoes and urged that spacecraft be sent to investigate them, (arc Astrogram, 8/3/72, 1; Mead, San Jose, Calif, Mercury, 8/15/72)
Soviet scientists writing in magazine Zemlya I Vsellennaya had suggested that canals on Mars were optical illusions created by dark features of Mars surface relief, Tass reported. Scientists—using data from U.S. Mariner 9 and U.S.S.R. Mars 2 and 3 spacecraft (all three launched in May 1971 and still in orbit around Mars)—had said large-scale pictures of Mars showed no signs of canals, but showed planet was pockmarked with craters. They had concluded Mars surface relief was about 300 million yrs old and that craters were destroyed twice as fast as those of moon because Mars atmosphere encouraged erosion, (fbis-Sov, 7/5/72, L4)
New York Times editorial commented on space cooperation: “These past few years astronomy has probably advanced further than in any previous century since the invention of the telescope. Fantastic progress has been made through American and Soviet exploration of the moon, Mars and Venus.” Need was “to build on this new base of knowledge with a program of further manned and unmanned space exploration conducted under a system of international cooperation which combines the resources, manpower and knowledge of many nations. No generation has ever faced a nobler challenge than space now poses before all humanity.” (NYT, 4/16/72, 5:12)
Experiment to plot evolution of sun and earth over aeons was described in Science by Cornell Univ. astronomers Dr. Carl E. Sagan and Dr. George Mullen. Findings had indicated that sun’s energy emission had increased 40% over last 4.5 aeons and would continue to increase until earth temperature reached boiling point, in about 4.5 more aeons. Infrared characteristics of atmospheres of other planets would determine whether life on them, if any, would survive. Mars atmosphere should be approaching required conditions for emergence of life at about same time earth temperature accelerated upward. (Science, 7/7/72, 52-5)
Charles W. Mathews, NASA Associate Administrator for Applications, testified on future applications of NASA research in domestic communications before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1973 authorization hearings: “Domestic communications systems . . . will make available many television-handwidth channels, for both public and commercial use, to all the population . . . including remote and sparsely populated regions. Several . . . channels could be available for educational and instructional use. There are likely to be universities of the air which will permit many students . . . to achieve college degrees while spending only a small . . . time in academic residence.” Improved systems would “permit an increase in the number of people who could receive actual pre-school training and training in early-childhood education and health-care practices.” Health care could be improved and costs reduced through hroad public access to health-care services and information, while centralized health-record-keeping could aid hospital personnel, administrators, and private physicians. Two-way television teleconferences between health professionals could become possible. In law enforcement, “fingerprints and other criminal records and data could be almost instantaneously available anywhere in the country, and television conferencing could make possible the remote taking of testimony as well as remote identification procedures.” Postal service would improve “with the advent of electronic mail handling. Satellite links may be expected to carry a majority of the long distance letter mail, making inexpensive overnight delivery possible to all but the most remote locations. New satellite systems for aviation and maritime traffic management will reduce the accident rate and increase the efficiency of transoceanic and coastal transportation of goods and people. NASA Deep Space Network support of Mariner 9 mission (launched May 30, 1970) was described by Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition: “From lift-off on May 30 to insertion into its egg-shaped orbit around Mars on November 13 and continuing during orbital operations around Mars, Mariner 9 has been monitored and controlled by the deep space network. The navigational accuracy required to insert Mariner 9 into Martian orbit was unprecedented in prior flights into deep space. The aiming point . . . after a flight of about 380 million kilometers (240 million miles) was an area only 160 kilometers (100 miles) square. This represents an aiming area some 100,000 times smaller than was attainable for the Mariner 2 flight to Venus in 1962. Since the network issued the commands for retroengine firing and Mariner 9 was injected into orbit... the spacecraft has been completing two orbits of Mars each earth day and recording some 30 television pictures of the Martian surface on each orbit. After each orbit, when the spacecraft can be ‘seen’ by the Goldstone 64-meter [70-yard] antenna, Mariner 9 transmits back the tape recorded pictures upon command from the network.” (Transcript)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) had completed 111 revolutions of Mars and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) had completed 6 revolutions, Tass announced. Radio contact with spacecraft remained stable and onboard instruments were continuing to function satisfactorily. (fbis—Sov, 2/22/72, L2)
Dr. William W. Duke, twin brother of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., replied in letter published by Washington Post to April 26 article by Post columnist Nicholas von Hoffman that criticized astronauts and Apollo 16 mission. “My brother stated publicly that he would go to the moon anonymously. He sought no personal gain. No one will recall the names of these space explorers, but each time one mission is completed, the next is easier. I am sure the second, third, or one hundredth man to sail around the world found it easier than the one preceding. Who is to judge what is to be gained now or one hundred years hence in and from space?” (W Post, 5/10/72, A15) May 10—24:	Committee on Space Research (cospar) held 15th meeting in Madrid. First firm indication of water ice on Mars from photos returned by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Dr. James A. Cutts. He and team had noted that residual south polar cap 320 km (200 mi) wide was unchanged throughout southern summer but was hidden by thin carbon dioxide frost that covered region 3200 km (2000 mi) in diameter during winter. In spring, it appeared that dry ice again evaporated and cap shrank to 320-km zone of water ice. Working sessions on terrestrial planets and outer planets were held by NASA and Soviet scientists to discuss programs for exploration of Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter. Discussions fulfilled recommendation of August 1971 nasa-U.S.S.R. Working Group that planetary exploration be discussed jointly at international colloquia. Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council submitted United States Space Science Program: Report to COSPAR. Report, covering 1971, summarized analyses and observations from experiments on board spacecraft, sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft. (Miles, LA Times, 5/11/72; Text; NASA Int Aff; NASA Release 72—106; W Post, 5/23/72, A10)
Mariner 9 mission ended as attitude-control gas supply was depleted and engineering telemetry signal ceased during 698th Martian orbit of spacecraft launched May 30, 1971. Mariner 9 had reached Mars Nov. 13, 1971, and was 383 675 000 km (238 416 000 mi) from earth when engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory sent 45 960th, and last, command—to turn off radio transmitter. Spacecraft was expected to remain in Mars orbit some 50 yrs. During 349 days (more than one half Martian year) of orbital activity, Mariner 9 had maintained instrumented surveillance of Mars and made first closeup photos of Martian moons Phobos and Deimos. Major findings had included: geologically active planet with volcanic mountains and calderas larger than any on earth, equatorial crevasses more than 3000 km (2000 mi) long and three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, indications that free-flowing water might have existed in Mars’ geologic history, evolution of monumental dust storms that raged to altitudes of 50 to 60 km (31 to 37 mi) above Mars surface, and realization that dust storms and cloudiness accounted for much of variability of Mars’ appearance over years. Mariner 9 was first man-made object to orbit another planet. Mariner project, managed for NASA’s Office of Space Science by jpl, had been planned as two-spacecraft mission to Mars but Mariner 8, launched May 8, 1971, failed to enter orbit when Centaur stage of Atlas-Centaur booster malfunctioned after normal countdown and liftoff from Eastern Test Range. Spacecraft had reentered earth’s atmosphere. Plans had been revised and Mariner 9 had been launched successfully to conduct missions of both Mariners. Data from Mariner 9 experiments would provide groundwork for 1975 Viking lander mission to search for evidence of life on Mars, (jpl Release 634; A&A 1971)
U.S. planned to commemorate 200th anniversary of Nation’s birth by attempting to land unmanned spacecraft on planet Mars July 4, 1976, according to NASA spokesman quoted in Washington Post. Attempt would be made by Viking spacecraft scheduled to enter Mars orbit about July 1, 1976. (W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced appointment of Dan Schneiderman, former manager of Mariner Mars 1971 Project, as manager of Civil Systems Program Office. He would manage JPL effort to develop applications of laboratory capabilities to problems in medical engineering, public safety, urban land use, and transportation, (jpl Release 622)
NASA’s Pioneer 10 spacecraft, en route to Jupiter, crossed orbit of Mars and entered space never before visited by spacecraft. Pioneer 10 had safely crossed region of “Great Galactic Ghoul” 209 million km (130 million mi) from sun where two Mars-bound spacecraft had been lost and third had stopped transmitting for seven hours, apparently because of impact of high-velocity meteoroids. Since launch March 2 Pioneer 10 had traveled 249 million km (155 million mi) on its 998-million-km (620-million-mi) flight path to Jupiter and was 75 million km (47 million mi) straight-line distance from earth. It would enter Asteroid Belt in early July, reach Jupiter in December 1973, and cross orbit of Pluto in about 15 yrs. (NASA Release 72-111)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) photographed vast Mars chasm with branching canyons resembling network of dry river beds. Describing photo, which was released to press Jan. 19, Harold Masursky, of U.S. Geological Survey, said in interview that chasm probably had been caused by “faulting of the crust,” a cracking and sliding process associated with earthquakes. Masursky believed line of small craters running parallel to canyon had probably been caused by venting volcanic gases and ash. Wind erosion and landslides had probably altered canyon, but landscape in photo appeared to be geologically young. (Wilford, NYT, 1/20/72, 25)
Low-altitude qualification test of Viking parachute—decelerator system to slow Viking spacecraft for softlanding on Mars 1976—was conducted by NASA at Dept, of Defense Joint Parachute Test Facility in El Centro, Calif. Parachute, 16-m (53-ft) in diameter and deployed by mortar, was dropped from B-57 aircraft. It opened on schedule, but dropped payload. Test was first of two low-altitude tests planned for 1972 and followed series of six development tests. High-altitude tests with balloon-launched parachute would be conducted during summer. Investigation was under way to determine cause of failure, (frc Release 6-72; W News, 4/28/72, 45)
Tenth year of interplanetary exploration was celebrated by Jet Propulsion Laboratory on 10th anniversary of arrival at Venus of Mariner 2, launched by NASA Aug. 27, 1962. Five more Mariners—designed and built by JPL engineers—had been launched during decade. In 1965 Mariner 4 (launched Nov. 28, 1964) flew by Mars, obtaining first close-up pictures. Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967) helped determine atmosphere of Venus was 75 to 100 times more dense than earth’s. Mariner 6 (launched Feb. 24, 1969) and Mariner 7 (launched Mar. 27, 1969) took photographs of Mars surface from as close as 3500 km (2200 mi). Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) gathered data during 698 revolutions of Mars, provided map of entire planet, and showed evidence of volcanic activity and free-flowing water in planet’s geologic history, (jpl Release 640; A&A 1962; nasa Release 72-241)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. space mission scheduled for 1975 would include 48-hr linkup of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and crew exchange, Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said in report released by Tass. Coyuz spacecraft, manned by two cosmonauts, would be launched first. “In seven and a half hours, Apollo spaceship manned by three astronauts will be launched from Cape Kennedy. In 24 hours, Apollo will approach the Soyuz ship and link up will be made. The system that will be formed will be operated as a single spacecraft. Within two days, spacemen will move from one ship to another, scientific and technical experiments will be made and there will be television transmissions to the earth. At the end of the third day, the spaceships will be undocked and will soon land on their respective territories.” Shatalov said he hoped manned Mars mission before end of 20th century would be international flight—“Possibly it will be the Soviet-American flight.” (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, L2)
U.S.S.R. hoped to land robot life-detection laboratory on Mars within few years, according to Leninskoye Znamya (Lenin’s Banner) newspaper article by Soviet space experts. Automatic Microbiological Laboratory would scoop up sample of Martian soil and examine it for microorganisms such as bacteria, yeasts, and fungi that might be able to survive in thin Martian atmosphere. Laboratory would also draw Martian air through filter to trap and analyze microorganisms and would detect emission of heat and carbon dioxide. (Wilford, NYT, 3/27/72, 7; upi, W News, 3/13/72, 5)
Decision to plan large multipurpose optical telescope to be launched and serviced by space shuttle in 1980s was announced by NASA. Large Space Telescope (lst) to study energy processes in galactic nuclei, early stages of stellar and solar system formation, supernova remnants and white dwarfs, and other phenomena relevant to origin of universe would also provide long-term monitoring of atmospheric phenomena on Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Telescope, able to observe galaxies 100 times fainter than those seen by most powerful ground-based optic telescope, would weigh between 9000 and 11000 kg (20 000 and 25 000 lbs) and have length of 12 to 16 m (40 to 52 ft) and diameter of 3.6 to 4 m (12 to 13 ft). It would include diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter. LST project management had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 72—98)
Mariner Mars ’71 extended mission of 259 days beyond primary mission was adjudged success. Objectives of extended mission of Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971, and inserted in Mars orbit No. 13, 1971) had been to map 70% of planet with 1-km (0.6-mi) visual resolution and to study dynamic characteristics of Mars at reduced data-acquisition rate. During extended mission Mariner 9 had mapped 100% of planet and had observed large areas with infrared and ultraviolet instruments. S-band occultations and celestial mechanics measurements had proved Mars to be geologically and meteorologically active. (nasa proj off)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
NASA’s Mariner 9 completed 146th day in Mars orbit. Since launch May 30, 1971, Mariner 9 had responded to 37 764 commands and had taken 6876 pictures. Spacecraft was undergoing solar occultation (passing into shadow of Mars) and would resume acquisition of data in early June when occultation ceased. Spacecraft resources were being budgeted to keep Mariner 9 active through superior conjunction of Mars and sun in September when spacecraft signals would be deflected by solar gravity. Analysis of deflection could provide accurate check on theory of relativity. (NASA proj off)
Experiments at U.S.S.R.’s Radio Physics Institute had suggested that upper Mars mantle was hard and porous like earth dendrites, Tass reported. Report on study had said small, isolated dust regions were source of Mars dust storms and there was no uninterrupted dust mantle. Dust over Martian surface was no more than 1 mm (0.04 in) thick. White polar caps were reported to be hard-frozen carbon dioxide. (fbis-Sov, 7/31/72, LI)
Col. H. J. Odenthal (usaf, Ret.), pioneer airman who once assisted in rescue of Orville Wright after his aircraft had crashed, died at age 84. Col. Odenthal had helped organize Signal Corps air photographic and mapping division and had been awarded Croix de Guerre for his mapping flights in France during World War I. (Barker, W Post, 1/23/72, B16) January 22—25:	Intelsat-IV F—4 comsat was launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat) . Launched from Eastern Test Range at 7:12 pm est by Atlas-Centaur booster, satellite entered elliptical transfer orbit with 36 523-km (22 694.3-mi) apogee, 5984-km (3718.3-mi) perigee, and 28.2° inclination. Primary objective was to place satellite in transfer orbit accurate enough for onboard propulsion systems to transfer it to planned synchronous orbit for commercial communications over Pacific. Apogee-kick motor was fired at 7:32 pm est Jan. 24 and Intelsat-IV F—4 entered circular orbit with 35 787-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 25 625km (22 136.4-mi) perigee, 23-hr 52-min period, and 0.7° inclination over Pacific at 165° east longitude. It would drift 1.1° per day to reach station at 174° east longitude in early February. Satellite’s first major mission would be coverage of President Nixon’s visit to People’s Republic of China in February.	, Intelsat-IV F-4 was third comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1402 kg (3090 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000—9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F-3 had been launched Dec. 19, 1971, and was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; nasa Release 72-16) January 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA plans for continuing fruitful space program in interview published by Christian Science Monitor: “For the next few years, we may have fewer of the more spectacular explorational missions .... We will focus more on . . . communications satellites, weather satellites, earth resources survey satellites.” Next Applications Technology Satellite (ats) would demonstrate direct TV broadcasting in region of Rockies and Alaska, using large satellite with big antenna that could beam programs directly to augmented receivers in individual homes. Demonstration—-in cooperation with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare—would work through educational network rather than directly to homes, however. Comsats were “not quite so exciting an aspect of space technology” in U.S. but, “worldwide, there has been more interest in this than in almost any other aspect of our program.” Interest equaled that of ERT satellite. “Countries with vigorous mineral exploitation and agricultural development are interested in ERT satellites .... Countries with underdeveloped communications and education, such as India, are keenly interested in the broadcasting satellites.” In weather satellite field, new sophisticated instruments “give hope that we can get a really world weather observing network going.” Infrared sensors, microwave sensors, and high-resolution optics that obtained temperature profiles throughout atmosphere by looking “through holes in cloud systems” should help “to get points all over the globe where we now get only pieces of the picture.” NASA would try processing materials in zero g during Skylab program. “If it works with men doing it, there are cheaper ways we could do it without men. It may be one of those things that will be worth doing when we can get routine access to space with the shuttle.” In response to question, Dr. Fletcher said second Skylab would be “a very good thing for the country. But I’m not sure the budget needed for both a Skylab and the shuttle would be salable. The shuttle is more important in the long run. Not to do more of the Skylab sort of thing will be bad for prestige. The Russians will be doing much more than we will. I’m sure there will be criticism from Congress and the public.” But with shuttle and current budget level, “we could do virtually all those things we have talked about doing in this century. We could go back to the moon and establish crude bases .... We could establish a permanent space station. We just might be able to send men to Mars and get them safely home.” Apollo industrial base had already been destroyed, Dr. Fletcher said. “We could assemble a nucleus of people who know these things within NASA. But that’s about all.” As NASA turned toward space shuttle, “We hope and expect that many of the people who worked on Apollo will be in that program, so we won’t lose all the basic space flight know-how.” In international cooperation, France had asked to participate in Skylab mission and U.S.-U.S.S.R. meetings to establish compatible space docking system had progressed. “It looks as though we can do it technically. With existing hardware, we could do a docking in something like 1974 to 1975.” Scientific community was “still debating whether it would prefer an intensive Jupiter and Saturn explorational program or some form of grand tour to other planets as well,” Dr. Fletcher said. There was “no slackening of interest in Grand Tour” on NASA’s part. (CSM, 1/22/72)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
