Jet Propulsion Laboratory was fashioning three large photomosiac spheres of Mars from thousands of photos taken by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971, to become the first spacecraft to orbit another planet Nov. 13, 1971). Two 1.2-m (4-ft) globes would be completed, one for NASA Hq. and one for Lewis Research Center. A 1.8-m (6-ft) globe would be exhibited in JPl’s museum, (jpl PIO; Miles, LA Times, 7/22/73)
NASA Public Information Director Richard T. Mittauer died of Hodgkin’s disease in Alexandria, Va., at age 46. He had joined NASA in 1959 and had received a NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work on the 1971 Mariner Mars mission. (W Star & News, 7/2/73, B5) July 2:	The Skylab 3 mission to carry the second crew to work and live aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop (launched May 14) would be launched no earlier than 7:08 am EDT July 28, NASA announced. Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean (commander), Dr. Owen K. Garriott (science pilot), and Jack R...Lousma (pilot) would conduct scientific and technical experiments for 56 days. Splashdown was scheduled for 8:38 pm edt Sept. 22 in the Pacific, (nasa Release 73-125)
Selection of the Chryse valley near the mouth of the Martian Grand Canyon and of Cydonia in the Mare Acidalium, 1600 km (1000 mi) northeast, as landing sites for NASA’s two unmanned Viking spacecraft in July and August 1976 was announced at an Hq. press conference. The two spacecraft were scheduled for launch on their year-long, 740-million-km (460-million-mi) journey toward Mars in the summer 1975. The sites had been selected by prominent scientists after a one-year evaluation of 22 potential areas for scientific interest and the probability of a successful landing. The possibility of finding water at these sites increased the chances of finding evidence of life. Backup sites were Tritonis Lacus and Alba. Arriving at Mars, the spacecraft would enter a highly elliptical orbit and then separate into two parts, an orbiter and a lander. Each lander would carry a miniature chemical laboratory to analyze Martian soil for signs of life. A 3-m (10-ft) retractable claw would scoop soil samples for analysis. Other instruments would analyze the atmosphere and measure pressure, temperature, wind velocity, and quake activity. The orbiter would perform visual, thermal, and water-vapor mapping. (Transcript; nasa Release 73-91)
Climatic changes on Mars indicated by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA
A New York Times editorial noted that “works aimed at exploring the planets by instruments of the most diverse sort” continued activity after the close of manned exploration of the moon. It commented on the discovery by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists that the Venus equatorial area was dominated by huge craters [see Aug. 5]. (NYT, 8/8/73, 32) Mars 7, which would reach its destination in mid-March 1974, was similar in design and mission to Mars 6. Both spacecraft—intended for exploration of Mars, near-Mars space, and the interplanetary medium— carried Soviet- and French-built scientific equipment. All four Mars probes would carry out research in combination. Tass said Mars 4 would perform experiments using instruments on Mars 6 while Mars 5 would work in conjunction with Mars 7. On Aug. 10, at 4:00 am Baykonur time (7:00 pm edt, Aug. 9), Mars 4 was 6 432 000 km (3 997 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 5, 5 067 000 km (3 148 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 6, 1535 000 km (954 000 mi) from the earth; and Mars 7, 102 000 km (63 000 mi) from the earth. Tass reported that all spacecraft were proceeding according to their programs. A midcourse correction of the Mars 6 trajectory Aug. 13 and of the Mars 7 trajectory Aug. 16 put the flight paths “within the pre-set limits.” Tass said onboard systems of all four probes were functioning normally and measurements were being made of physical characteristics of interplanetary space, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; fbis-Sov, 8/10/73, LI; 8/16/73, LI; 8/17/73, LI; SBD, 8/13/73, 217) August 9:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of identical, parallel, $800 000, 17-mo contracts to Itek Corp. Optical Systems Div. and Perkin-Elmer Corp. for competing preliminary designs and program definition of the Large Space Telescope (lst). The large, multipurpose, orbiting, optical astronomical facility would be launched by the space shuttle, which also would return it to the earth for major maintenance and refurbishment. The LST would use a 3-m (10-ft) primary mirror and—because of its size, quality, and location above the earth’s atmosphere—would be able to resolve objects 10 times smaller and 100 times fainter than those observed by ground telescope, (msfc Release 73—110)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. would lay off 1000 employees to reduce operating expenses, the New York Times reported. The expense paring had been ordered by Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements to increase operating efficiency after the controversy over increasing costs of the Crumman-produced F-14 fighter aircraft. (Andelman, NYT, 3/28/73, P28) March 28—29:	Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: The Office of Space Science had assumed total responsibility for collecting, handling, and analyzing data from the Apollo program, and “we plan to devote the next several years to their detailed analysis and interpretation. Our objective is a better understanding of the origin, history and present environment of the Moon, and the definition of goals and objectives of possible future flight programs. These studies will also use the data from the still-continuing flight program of the Soviet Union.” The French-built laser reflector on the Soviet lunar roving vehicle Lunokhod 2 deposited on the moon by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), “in addition to the three carried by Apollos 11, 14, and 15, provides another control point for lunar mapping studies and other scientific objectives. The close cooperation between the French and Soviets in putting the device on the Moon and between the Americans and French in securing early observations is a striking example of the possibilities for effective scientific cooperation in space among the nations of the world.” Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972) was “very much a pathfinder as it goes to Jupiter. We know Jupiter has intense radiation fields. We plan for Pioneer 10 to pass by Jupiter about three-and-a-half Jupiter radii from the planet. We think that Pioneer 10 at that distance . . . will be able to survive as it goes through those radiation belts. If by chance it does not, then we would probably retarget Pioneer G so that it stayed farther out.” If Pioneer 10 survived the radiation belts, “we would probably target Pioneer G closer so that we could get a better look at Jupiter and get more information about the intensity of the radiation belts as we get closer to Jupiter.” (Transcript) March 28-30:	A symposium on federally sponsored university research in transportation noise was conducted at Stanford Univ. by the Dept, of Transportation in cooperation with NASA and the National Science Foundation. Papers presented by university researchers and representatives of Government agencies covered jet noise, combustion noise, noise from moving bodies, sound propagation through ducts, rotor noise, high-intensity sound, tire noise, and economic and community aspects of noise, (dot Release 15-73; dot pio) March 29:	usns Vanguard, 181-m (595-ft) nasa tracking ship, left Port Canaveral, Fla., for Mar Del Plata, Argentina, to support Skylab missions scheduled to begin in May. Vanguard would be a link in NASA’s worldwide tracking network relaying two-way information between a spacecraft and mission control at Johnson Space Center in Houston via Goddard Space Flight Center. En route Vanguard would record tracking data for the Pioneer G launch scheduled for April 5. (gfsc Release; Skylab prog off)
Univ. of Texas physicists A. A. Jackson IV and Michael P. Ryan, Jr., proposed in a Nature article that the event that leveled forests in a wide region of Siberia on June 30, 1908, was the passage of a black hole that had plunged completely through the earth. They suggested that ships’ logs for that date be examined for evidence of an unusual occurrence. The object that fell on Siberia had been referred to as the Tunguska meteorite, although it had left no crater or other clearly identifiable meteorite residue. “We suggest that a black hole of substellar mass . . . could explain many of the mysteries associated with the event.” (Nature, 9/14/73, 88-89) September 14—23:	The first major international aerospace show in Latin America was held in Sao Paulo, Brazil. More than 250 firms from 11 nations displayed products from satellite equipment to metal forgings, aircraft, helicopters, and small components. Aircraft exhibited included the British Hawker Siddeley Harrier vstol [vertical or short takeoff and landing] fighter, Fokker F-28 twin-jet transport, Israel Aircraft Industries’ Arava cargo transport, Aeronautica Macchi MB-326 jet trainer-fighter, Aerospatiale A-300B Airbus, Canadair CL-215 amphibian, Northrop F-5E light jet fighter aircraft, and Lockheed C-5A heavy logistic transport. Of the nations invited to participate by the sponsoring Brazilian Ministry of Aeronautics, only Japan and the U.S.S.R. had declined. (Av Wk, 9/17/73, 22; Interavia, 9/73, 954) September 17:	The liquid-fueled “core” vehicle of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was moved from the Vertical Integration Building to the Solid Motor Assembly Building in the Titan complex at Kennedy Space Center. Twin 26-m (85-ft) solid-fueled-rocket strap-on boosters would be attached to the core. The Titan-Centaur, scheduled to be launched on its proof flight in January 1974, mated the Titan III core vehicle and its twin solid-fueled rockets with the Centaur high-energy liquid-fueled final stage. The 49-m (160-ft), 3610-kg (7959-lb) configuration was designed to carry heavy payloads on orbital and planetary missions, such as the Viking Mars mission and the joint U.S. and West German Helios mission to the sun, during the mid- and late 1970s. The liftoff thrust of the twin solid-fueled boosters was 10.8 million newtons (2.4 million lbs). On its proof flight the Titan-Centaur would carry a mass model of the Viking spacecraft and a 66-kg (145-lb) Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment (sphinx) spacecraft, to measure in orbit for one year the interaction of space plasmas with high-voltage surfaces. The main purpose of the flight would be to demonstrate that the launch vehicle and launch facilities could support operational missions and that the Centaur could perform an operational two-burn mission and an operational three-burn mission carrying a payload to a synchronous altitude of 35 888 km (22 300 mi). The effort to integrate the Titan with the Centaur had begun in the mid-1960s when NASA recognized the need to fill a performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and Saturn launch vehicles, (ksc Release 215-73)	*
A need “to shift gears and return to the main line of development in space flight” was underlined by Michael A. G. Michaud in a Spaceflight article: The purposes of space flight “go far beyond our lifetime. Ultimately, our journey away from Earth will determine the future of the human race; this millennial, evolutionary effort must not founder now for lack of a satisfying rationale.” The basic purpose of space flight was “to expand the realm of Man.” Reasons were to challenge human abilities, learn more about the universe we live in, search for extraterrestrial intelligence and prepare for contact with it, develop and test technologies for earth use, stimulate and employ advanced sectors of the economy, improve orbital applications of space technology with immediate benefits, develop and test military technology, and encourage international cooperation. Michaud proposed a medium-term program to the year 2000 to assemble a manned space station in earth orbit, build a base on the moon, land human beings on Mars by 2000, prepare for interstellar flight, search for planets in other systems, and begin the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. A long-term program beyond 2000 would plan to send unmanned probes to the most promising nearby stars, create a permanent colony on Mars, experiment in planetary engineering—possibly on Venus, “where orbiting space vehicles could introduce materials into the atmosphere that might change its composition” —launch the first manned interstellar flights, and communicate with extraterrestrial intelligence. [SF, 10/73, 362-5)
New Mexico Univ. geologist Dr. Bradford A. Smith said riverbeds on Mars probably had dried because of orbital changes. When the Mars orbit was more elliptical than at present, the perihelion would be much closer to the sun, perhaps producing long-term climate changes which might, “at certain times, permit liquid water to exist.” Dr. Conway B. Leovy, Univ. of Washington, said dust storms encountered by Mariner 9 were “phenomena which will recur on Mars depending on the particular astronomical relationship between the perihelion and the solstice.” Dust storms might have been responsible for “the remarkable laminated terrain which has been observed in both polar zones.” Scientists had determined from Mariner 9 photos that the planet was a more varied and dynamic body than expected. Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences, said: “Mars is like three planets: the old cratered planet, the young volcanic active planet that you see, and then an entirely different situation in the polar regions in Mars.” Mars as “planetary laboratory” of towering volcanoes, deep rift valleys, broad plateaus broken by fault lines, ancient planes with moonlike craters, sand dunes, clouds with water ice, and ever-changing polar caps would “substantially increase our basic knowledge of planets . . . and . . . when that history is written you will find that planetary exploration has contributed in a major way to the health and welfare of life on this planet.” (Transcript)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt visited Kennedy Space Center to thank employees for their efforts in making manned exploration of the moon possible. Dr. Schmitt said man would explore Mars in the not too distant future. “The reason it is possible to talk this way and not be accused of talking science fiction is because there’s no longer science fiction. It’s now only science prediction.” (upi, LA Her-Exam, 2/21/73)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
The U.K. Trades Union Congress announced that it was asking its 9.5 million members to boycott French products for a week in protest against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific. (W Post, 6/28/73, B19) June 27-28:	Pioneer 11, launched by NASA April 5 toward a December 1974 rendezvous with the planet Jupiter, became the second spacecraft to cross the orbit of Mars. By June 28 the probe was 76 781 000 km (47 711 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at 108 000 km (67 110 mi) per hr. The earth had passed between the spacecraft and the sun, permitting scientists to look for the earth’s magnetic tail, the extension of the magnetic field blown away from the earth by the solar wind. Data had suggested a malfunction in the spacecraft radio transmitter but were insufficient to identify the problem. The backup traveling-wave tube was being used. Flight controllers had fired the thrusters on Pioneer 10—twin probe launched March 2, 1972, toward December 1973 meeting with Jupiter— on June 21 to trim its course slightly and ensure passage behind Jupiter’s 1 moon Io. Pioneer 10, traveling at 43 470 km (27 000 mi) per hr, was 533 540 000 km (331 542 000 mi) from the earth. It had crossed the orbit of Mars in 1972 and finished crossing the Asteroid Belt in February, (nasa Release 72-122) June 28:	NASA held three Skylab 1-2 postflight reviews at Johnson Space At a summary review of the May 14-June 22 mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that Skylab 1—2 had accomplished the intent of its 48 experiments—6 earth resources, 15 medical, 5 astronomical, 17 scientific and technological, and 5 student-proposed. Space station operation experience had been gained and there were no constraints on continuing the Skylab program as originally planned. More data had been handled in real time than ever before and gave “no reason to believe that all of the things that we had previously said we accomplished in flight are not going to give us creditable scientific data for analysis by scientists.” Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, earth resources experiment package project scientist, said during an erep review that the erep experiments had gathered good data for 145 principal investigators on 13 km (8 mi) of magnetic tape. Data were collected over six foreign countries—Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Venezuela. There were 186 individual task sites covered, including the Puerto Rican trench, the Gulf of Mexico, the Wabash River area, and the Amazon River basin. During a review of the Skylab 2 crew health, Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said medical experiments on the Workshop had yielded very interesting results. All three crew members had stayed within their preflight baseline levels on the bicycle ergometer study. In the motion-sensitivity study—with two crew members participating—the preflight threshold level (the point at which motion sickness symptoms would begin) of science pilot Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin was 121/2 rpm in the rotating chair, at which speed he could perform 50 head movements. Pilot Paul J. Weitz had a preflight threshold of 15 rpm and 40 to 50 head movements. Both men could do 150 head movements in flight at preflight speeds without symptoms. During tests immediately following splashdown both men had experienced vestibular disturbances with even the slightest head movement. The symptoms had disappeared within two days and both crewmen had performed at preflight speeds on the third day following recovery, completing 150 head movements without symptoms. (Transcripts)
Results of the Mariner 9 ultraviolet spectrometer experiment to measure seasonal variation of ozone on Mars were reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado and Cal Tech scientists. Observations made between Nov. 14, 1971, and Oct. 27, 1972, had shown ozone to be present in polar regions of Mars and to have seasonal variation. In summer, the amount in the polar atmosphere was less than three micrometer-atmospheres. In autumn, ozone increased and was found in association with formation of the polar hood. In winter, the maximum amount of ozone was present, “57 micrometer-atmospheres over the polar hood and 16 over the polar cap. In spring, the amount over the polar cap decreases mono-tonically until by the beginning of summer the ozone disappears. Ozone is not observed in the equatorial region during any season.” (Barth et al., Science, 2/23/73, 795-6)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
The U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Interplanetary Exploration released a statement following a weeklong meeting in Moscow. Scientists had met to analyze data about the Mars surface and atmosphere for selection of future landing sites for unmanned spacecraft. They also had discussed new results from exploration of Venus by Venus 8 (launched by U.S.S.R. March 27, 1972) and earth-based optical and radio measurements. Recommendations for cooperation would be announced when confirmed by both sides [see March 5]. The Group had been established under a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences agreement of January 1971. U.S. scientists were led by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in nasa’s Office of Space Science. Soviet participants were headed by Academician Georgy I. Petrov, Director of the Institute of Space Research, (nasa Release 73-20)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified on the effects of the Apollo program before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: Apollo “did not just sweep across our landscape to successful achievement of its specific objectives. Its effects on Earth are permanent and pervasive. Not just the hundreds of thousands of jobs it provided, the schools and homes it caused to be built, and the economic impact of the program itself; not just the invaluable accretion of scientific knowledge; not just the restoration of faith in American technological leadership—but a radical and enduring upgrading of technological capability throughout American industry. It is such advances that have enabled the United States to retain its preeminence in high technology production. And it is the continuation of such preeminence that is at stake when we consider the future of our space program.” (Transcript) April 5-26:	NASA’s Pioneer 11 (Pioneer-G), second Jupiter probe, was successfully launched into an excellent trajectory from Eastern Test Range at 9:11 pm est by a three-stage Atlas-Centaur-TE.........M-364—4 launch vehjcle. Eighteen hundred persons watched the nighttime launch after touring the Kennedy Space Center Flight Training and Vehicle Assembly Buildings, where Skylab was being prepared for a mid-May launch. Pioneer 11 sped away from earth at a velocity of 51 800 km per hr (32 200 mph), equaling the speed of Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, and still heading toward Jupiter), which flew faster than any previous man-made object. The primary objective was to obtain precursory scientific information beyond the Mars orbit with emphasis on investigation of the interplanetary medium during the 609- to 825-day journey, the Asteroid Belt, and Jupiter and its environment. The secondary objective was to advance the technology for long-duration flights to the outer planets. The 259-kg (570-lb) spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 12 scientific experiments to measure magnetic fields, plasma, cosmic rays and charged particles; the electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared ranges; and the asteroid-meteoroid population. During the encounter trajectory with Jupiter, the spacecraft would provide the best possible information on the radiation environment, provide good viewing conditions of Jupiter before periapses, and obtain a short occultation of the spacecraft by Jupiter. The spacecraft also carried a pictorial plaque identical to the one carried on Pioneer 10 for identification of its origin by any possible intelligent beings of another solar system. Six hours following launch the large number of thruster pulses used to precess the spacecraft and point the antenna toward the sun provided the impulse to deploy fully one of the two radioisotope thermoelectric generators that had failed to deploy completely at first. The magnetometer boom was deployed and the spin rate stabilized at 5.4 rpm. On April 6 four science instruments—the helium vector magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid, detector—were turned on. An April 11 midcourse correction moved the target point at Jupiter from slightly ahead of the planet as it moved on its orbit, and above the equatorial plane, to slightly behind the planet and below the equator. The adjusted course would allow several mission choices: to make an equatorial pass either close to or distant from the planet to inspect one or more of its moons; to pass over the flattened pole of the planet; to fly on to Saturn in 1980; or, like Pioneer 10, to leave the solar system and escape into interstellar space. The option chosen would depend on Pioneer 10 findings during its pass of Jupiter in December. Nine of the twelve experiments were turned on and were operating normally.	. The control center for Pioneer 11 was transferred April 16 from Jet Propulsion Laboratory to the Pioneer Missions Operations Center at Ames Research Center. On April 26 Pioneer 11, traveling at 9.34 km per sec (20 900 mph), was 14 350 000 km (8 920 000 mi) from the earth. A second midcourse correction was made. The operation of all spacecraft subsystems was normal and 11 of the 12 experiments were transmitting good data. Six to seven hits had been recorded by the meteoroid detector. The infrared radiometer remained to be turned on. The spacecraft was expected to enter the Asteroid Belt in August 1973 and reach Jupiter in December 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by Ames Research Center. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1968, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays. (NASA prog off; nasa Releases 73-41, 73-72; arc Release 73-43; icsc Release 61—73)
Dr. Wolf V. Vishniac, Univ. of Rochester microbiologist and biological scientist in NASA’s Viking Mars lander program, died at age 51 after falling down a steep slope during a scientific expedition to Antarctica for NASA. Dr. Vishniac was studying how microbes multiplied in the arid Antarctic soil. He had been a member of NASA’s Lunar and Planetary Missions Board 1967—1970. He had served on the Office of Manned Space Flight’s Joint Editorial Board on Space Biology and Medicine since 1965 and was coediting Volume One of “Space Biology and Medicine.” He had been a member of the Viking Biology Team since 1969, had served on the Lunar Sampling Analysis Team in 1968 and 1969, and had been active on the Space Sciences Board of the National Academy of Sciences, (nasa Release 73-277; AP, NYT, 12/ 13/73, 48) December 10-14:	More than 120 papers by scientists worldwide were presented at the Third Earth Resources Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center. The Symposium highlighted data from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by nasa July 23, 1972), which had provided more than 100 000 images of the earth’s surface. Also emphasized was the extension of scientific techniques and findings discussed in a March symposium, including applications directly benefiting the public in dealing with local and regional resource problems, (nasa Release 73—271; gsfc pio) December 11:	Mariner 10, NASA’s two-planet probe launched Nov. 3 toward Venus and Mercury, had discovered that the gas remnants of the exploding star Gamma Velorium in the Gum Nebula were twice as hot as scientists had expected, the Washington Post reported. Instruments aboard the spacecraft had detected ultraviolet radiation from the nebula so intense that it corresponded to temperatures as high as 56 000 K (100 000°F), suggesting that some stars were undergoing even more violent nuclear reactions than expected. Dr. Bruce Murray, California Institute of Technology scientist, was surprised that so old a nebula was still radiating any detectable heat. The discovery might be “the start of a whole new field of astronomy. . . . Never before have we been able to detect interstellar radiation associated with this temperature range.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/11/73, A10)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Dr. Roy E. Cameron and Frank A. Morelli had departed for a two-month research project in Antarctica to determine the degree of man’s impact on the environment, jpl announced. The National Science Foundation-sponsored ecological measurements of Antarctica’s primitive soils would also provide information for NASA’s development of life-detection systems for Viking landers on Mars, (jpl Release 643)
Sir Robert Watson-Watt, Britain’s “father of radar,” had died in Scotland at age 81, the Washington Post reported. Watson-Watt was credited with directing and accelerating development of radar immediately preceding World War II. He was best known for his work in the use of radio waves to detect aircraft, but also had developed an underwater detection system for use against German U-boats during the Battle of the North Atlantic. (Hailey, W Post, 12/7/73, C15) December 8:	The risk to future development of man’s life outside the earth was “that the public will come to denigrate what Skylab has done and rate it below the achievements” of Pioneer 10, an Economist article said. Pioneer 10’s pictures, “passable photographs” of Jupiter, were “better than no pictures at all, but if the evidence of the first space shots past Mars are anything to go by, useful results require the cameras to go in much closer than Pioneer was able to do, and to stay in orbit round the planet for long enough to take ... a set of controlled mapping pictures. Pioneer 10 has shown that it is going to be technically possible to do this; the next stage is to build the space probe that will do it. When it comes to this sort of detailed work, the instruments on board tend to need the fine adjustments that only men can give them.” The U.S. should be planning “another Skylab with instruments calibrated to look further into space than the present ones. The results could be even better than Pioneer 10’s.” (Economist, 12/8/73, 20)
“The equatorial sinuous channels on Mars detected by Mariner 9 point to a past epoch of higher pressures and abundant liquid water. Advective instability of the martian atmosphere permits two stable climates—one close to present conditions, the other at a pressure of the order of 1 bar [100 kilonewtons per sq mi] depending on the quantity of buried volatiles. Variations in the obliquity of Mars, the luminosity of the sun, and the albedo of the polar caps each appear capable of driving the instability between a current ice age and more clement conditions. Obliquity driving alone implies that epochs of much higher and of much lower pressure must have characterized martian history. Climatic change on Mars may have important meteorological, geological, and biological implications.” (Science, 9/14/73, 1045-8)
U.S. Patent No. 3 730 287 was granted to nasa and to aerospace designer Edward Hryniewiecki of Comprehensive Designers, Inc., a Jet Propulsion Laboratory subcontractor, for a vehicle designed to explore planets with difficult terrain. Each of four legs with triangular wheels would have its own motive power for movement by walking, by turning wheels, or on tires revolving around the wheels like endless tracks. The vehicle had been planned for unmanned, remotely controlled exploration of Mars, but NASA was willing to license manufacture for oil and mineral exploration and rescue operations. (Pat Off pio; Jones, NYT, 5/5/73, 45)
nasa launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment to a 290.8-km (180.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily. Preliminary estimates indicated the experiment was 90% successful, (gsfc proj off) September 22:	One of four U.S.S.R. spacecraft—Mars 4, 5, 6, or 7, launched toward Mars July 22 and 25 and Aug. 5 and 9—would soft-land near the Mars south polar cap to test the physical properties of Martian soil and surface rocks and check the possibilities of transmitting TV pictures of the surrounding terrain to earth, Roald Sagdeyev, Director of the Space Research Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in a Tass interview. Mars 4 and 5 were 19 515 000 km (12 126 000 mi) and 18 584 000 km (11548 000 mi) from the earth and would reach Mars in February 1974. Mars 6 and 7 were 16 664 000 km (10 354 000 mi) and 15 623 000 km (9 708 000 mi) from the earth and would reach Mars in March 1974. Radiation and magnetic measurements were being made and cosmic rays were being studied, Sagdeyev said. The stations also would investigate solar noise in the meter wave band as well as register the flux of solar plasma. United Press International reported later that Western space experts had speculated that a landing craft might carry a Marsokhod roving vehicle to explore the Martian surface. UPI also reported that it was believed that the U.S.S.R. departure from the usual practice of not announcing mission goals was to demonstrate Soviet willingness to cooperate with the U.S. in view of the plans for a 1975 joint U.S.— U.S.S.R. mission. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 9/24/73, Ul; AP, W Post, 9/24/73, A21)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin galactic astronomy experiment. The second, launched two hours later, carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 3—13:	NASA’s Mariner 10 (Mariner-J) Venus-Mercury probe was launched into a parking orbit from Eastern Test Range at 12:45 am est by an Atlas-Centaur Dl-A launch vehicle. After a 25-min coast, a 130-sec burn of the Centaur engines injected the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would allow Mariner 10 to pass within 5300 km (3300 mi) of Venus Feb. 5, 1974. Using the gravitational field of Venus to change the speed and flight path of the spacecraft, Mariner 10 would travel toward a March 29 encounter with Mercury, approaching the sun more closely than any other planetary mission. Mariner 10 would be the first spacecraft to use gravity assist in a dual-planet mission and the first to explore Mercury. The primary objective was to measure Mercury’s environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity-assist mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED! The seven experiments aboard the octagonal 503-kg (1108-lb) spacecraft included a TV camera and an infrared radiometer to investigate the planet’s surface; plasma science experiment, charged particle telescope, and magnetometer to investigate the environment around the planet and the interplanetary medium; dual-frequency-radio science experiment and ultraviolet spectrometer to measure characteristics of the Mercury neutral atmosphere and ionosphere if they existed; and celestial mechanics experiments to measure planetary mass characteristics and test the theory of relativity. All experiments had been designed and selected for their Mercury scientific objectives but also would obtain important data at Venus and during the cruise phases. The Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station was unable to maintain command lock with the spacecraft following spacecraft injection. Acquisition of the star Vega by the spacecraft Canopus tracker also was delayed, but two-way communications were established within an hour and, after repeated commands, Vega was acquired. Solar panels, high-gain and low-gain antennas, and plasma science and magnetometer booms were deployed. On Nov. 4-5 four moon and three earth TV picture mosaics were completed. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft was 1 394 000 km (866 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at a speed of 4.32 km (2.68 mi) per sec. All science experiments except the infrared radiometer and electrostatic analyzer had been turned on. The scanning electron spectrometer portion of the plasma science experiment was not operating properly and the problem was being analyzed. Four trajectory correction maneuvers were scheduled during the mission. The first, Nov. 13, successfully adjusted the flight path for closest approach to Venus on Feb. 5, 1974, as planned. A second would be made Jan. 18, 1974. On Feb. 9 and March 1, 1974, after the Venus encounter, maneuvers would target the Mariner 10 to pass Mercury at 1000-km (620-mi) altitude. The Mariner program, including mission operations and tracking and data systems, was managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., was responsible for the launch vehicle. Previous missions had been made to Mars, including Mariner 4, 6, 7, and 9 (launched Nov. 28, 1964; Feb. 24, 1969; March 27, 1969; and May 30, 1971). Mariner 9 had been the first spacecraft to orbit a planet other than the earth. All others had been flyby missions. (nasa prog off; jpl Release 673) November 3—January 9, 1974:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 interplanetary probe (launched March 2, 1972) became the first spacecraft to reach Jupiter during a two-month encounter, returning new findings about the giant planet and continuing toward Uranus and eventual exit from the solar system. November 3—December 3:	Encounter operations were begun Nov. 3 by Ames Research Center controllers and scientists and on Nov. 4 Pioneer 10 began sending photopolarimeter images of Jupiter to the earth three to eight hours a day. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft, 25 000 000 km (15 500 000 mi) from Jupiter, had begun measuring the placet’s atmosphere above Jupiter’s orange-and-blue-striped cloud tops and the characteristics of particles making up the dense clouds. On Nov. 8 the spacecraft crossed the orbits of Hades and Poseidon, the first two of Jupiter’s outer moons, and on Nov. 9 and 11 it crossed the orbits of Pan and Andrastea. At a Nov. 19 press briefing at arc Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, said that low temperature in that area of the solar system slowed evolution and scientists hoped to find objects not very different from what they were at their formation. “The passage of Pioneer 10 past Jupiter also marks the gateway to the exploration of the outer solar system. This is an exploration which is critical if we truly want to understand the formation and evolution of our solar system.” Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said that Pioneer 10 had encountered 100 times more space dust than expected during the journey between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter. He expected that 30 times more particles would be detected as the spacecraft neared Jupiter. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s moons Demeter, Hera, and Hestia Nov. 22 and was 11400 600 km (7 084 000 mi) from Jupiter. By Nov. 25 a charged particle detector aboard the spacecraft had begun to show traces of particle radiation. Preliminary indications were that the probe was beginning to cross into Jupiter’s magnetosphere, estimated to be 20 times stronger than the earth’s. The planet’s radiation belts contained particle concentrations up to 1 million times higher than the earth’s Van Allen Belt and were considered by some scientists to be extremely dangerous to the spacecraft’s electronics. At a distance of 8 336 400 km (5180 000 mi) from Jupiter, spacecraft instruments began returning pictures of Jupiter’s great red spot. The final spacecraft-attitude change before encounter was made Nov. 26 and a 24-hour day of imaging and polarimetry began. At 3:30 pm EST Nov. 26 Pioneer 10 successfully crossed Jupiter’s bow shock wave at a distance of 7 709 000 km (4 790 000 mi)—with great turbulence when the solar wind hit Jupiter’s magnetic field. The spacecraft was unaffected by the turbulence hut data from 6 of its 11 instruments changed dramatically. Solar wind speed abruptly decreased to half the normal velocity and solar wind temperatures rose sharply. On Nov. 27, at a distance of 6 760 000 km (4 200 000 mi) from Jupiter, the spacecraft crossed into the planet’s true magnetic envelope, the region of interplanetary space into which the solar wind could not penetrate. Pioneer 10 crossed the magnetopause, entering the magnetic field for the first time at 3:30 pm est. At a Nov. 29 press briefing arc scientists said new data had shown the reach of Jupiter’s magnetic field to be greater than predicted. It stretched more than 13 000 000 km (8 000 000 mi) in diameter and its strength was 40 times that of the earth’s ma'gnetic field. Its direction was south, rather than north as predicted. The strength of the magnetism at 6 400 000 km (4 000 000 mi) from the planet seemed to rise and fall in a regular 10-hour phase, possibly because of the planet’s rotation. Jupiter’s mass was also found to be greater than estimated and the spacecraft was being drawn toward Jupiter faster than planned; it would arrive at its closest approach two minutes earlier than predicted. On Nov. 30 Pioneer 10 recorded a sharp drop in magnetic and radiation measurements, indicating disappearance of the magnetic field. Eleven hours later the spacecraft again crossed the magnetopause, which had apparently been driven toward the planet by a disturbance in the solar wind. At 1 427 500 km (887 000 mi) from the planet, the spacecraft entered Jupiter’s dipole magnetic field. Preliminary data indicated that the outer portions of Jupiter’s magnetic field did not rotate with the planet and were more flattened than the earth’s field. Also, the magnetic dipole center was appreciably offset, both radially and toward the north from the center of the planet. The magnetic axis was tilted from the spin axis. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s innermost moons—Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, and Io—Dec. 2-3. As it came within 446 000 km (277 000 mi) of Ganymede, the infrared radiometer indicated the moon’s surface temperature was 125 K (—235°F). Six hours before its closest approach to Jupiter the probe entered the dangerous region of intense radiation and, soon after, the imaging system ceased returning picture data. Radio commands switched the system back to normal operation within 30 minutes, however. The press later reported that NASA attributed the mishap to an unidentified flight control room guest who had inadvertently pressed against a cathode ray display, pushing a button that cut out eight instruments. December 3—11:	As the gold and silver spacecraft approached Jupiter and radiation intensity increased 10-fold every two hours, reaching 65 million ev 90 min before periapsis, tense scientists paced the floor of arc’s Mission Control with fingers crossed. At 9:25 pm est Dec. 3, after a flight of 641 days and 826 000 000 km (513 000 000 mi), Pioneer 10 sped past Jupiter at an altitude of 130 000 km (81 000 mi), traveling 155 140 km per hour (96 400 mph), the fastest speed ever achieved by a man-made object. The spacecraft’s 11 instruments sent back readings and pictures that came in loud and clear, taking 46 minutes to reach a jubilant team on earth. “Needless to say, we’re elated,” Dr. John Wolfe, Pioneer Project Scientist, told cheering newsmen. The Washington Post later described the scene at arc: “So deluged were Pioneer scientists with transmissions of the spacecraft’s instruments, they were literally changing their minds about Jupiter’s physics and chemistry every hour.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “Some of us have been looking through telescopes at Jupiter since our early teens. This is more than we ever dreamed of.” The spacecraft suffered no apparent failures and continued to function as planned. However, preliminary estimates of radiation belt parameters and observed effects on the spacecraft and instrumentation indicated that the margin of survival had been small. As Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter, the spacecraft was accelerated and slung by the planet’s gravity into a new trajectory that would take it past the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and, traveling at a constant 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph), out of the solar system toward the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 10 would be the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. By 7:00 pm EST Dec. 4, it had traveled nearly 1600 000 km (1000 000 mi) beyond Jupiter. December 11—January 9:	arc Mission Control ended Jupiter picturetaking Dec. 11 and returned to routine interplanetary operations. The spacecraft recrossed the bow shock wave Dec. 12 and continued into interplanetary space. By Dec. 14 the spacecraft was 10 881000 km (6 761 000 mi) from Jupiter, traveling at 83 525 km per hr (51 900 mph) toward the edge of the solar system. Preliminary findings from the encounter included the discovery of an ionosphere (implying a tenuous atmosphere) surrounding Jupiter’s moon Io, detection of helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere, new density measurements of the entire Jovian system that would affect current theories on the formation of the universe, and new temperature measurements of Jupiter that indicated little difference between average daytime and nighttime temperatures. Pioneer 10 was expected to continue collecting and returning data until it reached the orbit of Uranus in 1980, almost 3 200 000 000 km (2 000 000 000 mi) from the earth. Data returned would determine whether the second Jupiter probe, Pioneer 11 (launched April 5 and crossing the Asteroid Belt since August), could safely be retargeted closer to the planet. The Pioneer 10 mission was officially adjudged a success Jan. 9, 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by arc. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1969, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays, (nasa prog off; arc Release, 11/6/73; nasa Releases 73-243K, 73-256, 73-279; Wilford, NYT, 11/25/73; 11/30/73, 1; 12/4/73, 1; 12/5/73, 13; O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/73, Al; AP, W Star-News, 11/28-29/73; AP, B Sun, 12/3-4/73; Miles, LA Times, 12/4/73; 12/6/73) November 3:	The Skylab 4 launch crew successfully completed a simulated launch of the Saturn IB booster at Kennedy Space Center. The booster was scheduled to lift the Apollo command and service module and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue into orbit Nov. 10 to dock with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) and begin NASA’s third manned Skylab mission. Following the perfectly timed simulation, the fuel was drained from the launch vehicle and preparations for the final countdown were begun. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/73, A7)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, now an Eastern Air Lines, Inc., senior vice president, left Moscow after a visit to the U.S.S.R. at the invitation of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. During the visit, which began April 28, Borman laid a bouquet at the Kremlin wall where Yuri Gagarin and other cosmonauts were buried and visited the cosmonaut training center and a Salyut orbital station mockup at Star City. In an interview he said that he believed the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz space flight was “the forerunner, the prototype to exactly the type of mission that we’ll eventually see going to Mars. It is very difficult to project the pace at which space exploration will go forward, because it doesn’t depend on technology so much as it does on economic and political action. But I think that by the end of this century we will have a manned earth mission to Mars.” (Tass, fbis—Sov, 4/30/73, L2; 5/3/73, G2; Moscow News, 5/19-25/73)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1924 913 fixed-price-incentive contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for incorporation of engineering change proposals on the F-4 fighter aircraft production contract. A $1 294 776 fixed-price-incentive contract to General Dynamics Corp. for additional funding for inspection and correction of F-lll landing gear pin deficiencies also had been awarded, (dod Release 296-73) June 14:	Tentative selection of 22 scientists—including one each from France and Germany—from among 72 scientists who responded to NASA’s August 1972 invitation to provide experiments for one of two Pioneer spacecraft to probe Venus in 1978 was announced by NASA. Mission objectives were to gather information on the Venusian atmosphere and clouds. Participating scientists would define experiments studying composition and structure of the atmosphere down to the surface, the nature and composition of the clouds, the circulation pattern of the atmosphere, and the radiation field in the lower atmosphere. The mission—comprising a bus, a large probe, and three small probes —would use a spin-stabilized, solar-powered spacecraft. The trip from earth to Venus would take 125 days. The probes would be separated from the bus 10 to 20 days before entry into the Venusian atmosphere. The large probe would descend through the atmosphere in iy2 hrs; the small probes would fall free to the planet’s surface about 75 min after entry. The bus would be targeted to enter the Venus atmosphere at a shallow angle and transmit data until it was destroyed by atmospheric-friction heat. The atmosphere probe was scheduled for launch in May 1978, about three months before a Venus orbiter was to be launched. Both spacecraft would arrive in the vicinity of Venus in December 1978. By comparing the atmospheres of Venus, Mars, and the earth, scientists hoped to construct an efficient model of the earth’s atmosphere to predict long-term climate changes and short-term effects of environmental pollution. Experiments for the orbiter mission would be selected in early 1974. (nasa Release 73—115)
The U.S.S.R. launched its Mars 4 probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 12:31 am local time (3:31 pm edt, July 21) into a parking orbit from which it was inserted into a 470-million-km (290-million-mi) trajectory toward Mars. All systems performed satisfactorily, Tass reported. The spacecraft would reach Mars in February 1974 to continue scientific exploration of the planet and the space near it begun by Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971). United Press International reported Western sources as saying the apparent aim of Mars 4 was to softland research instruments and TV cameras on the Martian surface. Mars 4 would be the fourth Soviet spacecraft to reach Mars. Mars 1 (launched Nov. 1, 1962, to fly by Mars) had transmitted data to the earth for more than four months during its journey, before communications went dead. Mars 2 had been put into orbit around the planet and transmitted data to the earth into August 1972. An instrumented capsule from the spacecraft crashlanded on the Martian surface Nov. 27, 1971, becoming the first man-made object to reach the surface. Mars 3 had also attempted to softland an instrumented capsule, during a dust storm. TV pictures were transmitted to the earth for 20 sec before transmission ceased abruptly. The spacecraft ended its mission in August 1972. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; fbis-Sov, 7/23/73, LI; upi, NYT, 7/23/73, 8; A&A 1962, 1963, 1971, 1972)
The next 10 yrs in transportation could be the decade of the hovercraft, Jane’s Surface Skimmers said in its 1973-74 edition. Editor Roy Mc-Leavy noted that'the Soviet Ekranoplan already carried 900 fully armed troops at more than 350 km per hr (220 mph) over almost any surface. Hovercraft production would almost certainly develop into “one of the world’s major industries.” U.S. Navy surface ships might cost as much as $50 million; France was studying “hoverfrigates”; and the U.S.S.R. was joining in “this more sophisticated approach to naval strategy.” (AP, W Post, 11/29/73, A32) November 28—December 1:	An International Colloquium on Mars was held at Cal Tech and Jet Propulsion Laboratory by nasa, the American Astronautical Society, and the American Geophysical Union to evaluate new ideas stimulated by the successful Mariner 9 mission to Mars (launched by nasa May 30, 1971). Four hundred scientists from 10 countries participated in the program, which discussed Martian surface history and evolution, atmospheric history as related to interactions with the surface, and future exploration of Mars, (nasa Release 73-255; jpl pio)
Photo-mapping of Mars by Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had revealed multiple circular features surrounding both poles which might indicate that the Martian north and south poles had moved, California Institute of Technology scientists reported in Science. Some of the concentric patterns were centered on points displaced from the present north and south poles of Mars, implying that these were ancient positions of the poles and testifying to a slow drift of the Martian spin axis. Such a drift of the earth axis could explain the evidence for radical climate changes in the past—fossil coral reefs in Greenland and fossil forests in the South Pole—and revive the debate with scientists who believed the climate changes were due to the constant moving of the earth’s continents and oceans. (Murray, Malin, Science, 3/9/73, 997999)
The U.S.S.R. had abandoned its women’s cosmonaut training program, the Washington Evening Star and Daily News reported. Gen. Georgy T.	Reregovoy, commander of the Soviet cosmonauts, had said in an interview with the Polish newspaper Express Wieczerny in Warsaw, “We train only young men, not women.” (upi, W Star & News, 2/23/73, A3) February 24:	A Raltimore Sun editorial commented on the Feb. 15 press conference on the Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe (launched March 2, 1972) : “There was reason to worry for Pioneer’s wellbeing, as it traveled the section beyond Mars; so many chunks of rock float along there, on such erratic tracks, that our expensive new-model spacecraft could have inadvertently smacked into something a great deal bigger than itself. Even a sideswipe might have thrown it off course. Happily, it has registered contact only with the sort of fine-grained debris that litters space in general.” Pioneer 10 had indicated the existence of more asteroids between the earth and Mars than previously realized and fewer between Mars and Jupiter. “Or is it so new a phenomenon, that the closer to earth’s big cities you come, the thicker the traffic gets?” (R Sun, 2/24/73)
nasa’s Pioneer 11 probe, launched April 5, was traveling at 120 000 km per hr (74 000 mph) and had covered 48 million km (30 million mi), one fifth of its 20-mo journey to the planet Jupiter. All experiments and spacecraft systems were functioning well. Instruments were sampling the sun’s field and wind, measuring solar and galactic cosmic ray particles, measuring hydrogen and helium in interstellar space, and making sky maps of the zodiacal light (sunlight reflected from cosmic dust between the earth and Jupiter). Meanwhile, Pioneer 10 (launched March 3, 1972) had covered 560 million km (350 million mi) of its 1-billion-km (620-million-mi) flight path and was due to arrive at Jupiter in December. Good data were being returned from all scientific instruments. Pioneer 10 was defining for the first time the interplanetary medium far beyond the orbit of Mars and the Asteroid Belt, (nasa Release 73-107)
