Federal support to universities and colleges had declined 7%, to $3823 million, during FY 1973 in the first decline since 1970, the National Science Foundation reported. The drop had been largely the result of a $267-million decrease in funds from the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare but other significant decreases were posted by nsf, down $40 million; Dept, of Defense, down $11 million; and NASA, down $8 million. Federal funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million, 5% below 1972. Two science fields had shown an increase in Federal r&d support between 1972 and 1973'. Life sciences’ $934 million was a 4% increase; engineering’s $204 million was up 6%. (nsf Highlights, 15 July 74) 15— 16 July: Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1—first U.S. domestic communications satellite, launched by NASA 13 April—began operations during inaugural ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. McFall, Chairman of the Board and President of Western Union Corp. transmitted the first message, from New York to Los Angeles, using the original Morse key to tap “What hath God wrought!” It was the same message sent by inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24 May 1844 over the first experimental telegraph, a 65-km line between the Capitol in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md. Regular commercial operations began 16 July, providing services for Westar J’s first two commercial customers, American Can Co. and Bank of America. (Westar Inaugural Transmission press kit, 15 July 74) 16— 29 July: NASA launched Aeros 2 (Aeros-B) aeronomy satellite for West Germany from Western Test Range at 4:51 am pdt on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle into polar orbit with an 879.0-km apogee, 221.3km perigee, 95.65-min period, and 97.44° inclination. The NASA mission objective—to place the Aeros 2 satellite in an earth orbit permitting successful achievement of the scientific objectives—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 26 July. The scientific objective was to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of the main absorption. The long-range objective of the satellite, which carried one Goddard Space Flight Center and four West German experiments, was to provide a model of the ionosphere from which upper atmospheric conditions could be predicted. By 29 July the vehicle and experiments were performing satisfactorily and the West Germans were initiating spacecraft operations. A July 1965 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany had provided for a series of cooperative satellite projects. The Aeros program, the second in the series, was authorized by a 10 June 1969 agreement and Aeros 1 was launched 16 Dec. 1972. The 1974 contract between NASA and the West Germany Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) for the Aeros 2 launch provided for reimbursement of NASA for launch vehicle and services. NASA would also provide one experiment, tracking, and backup for data acquisition, bmft was responsible for development of spacecraft and instrumentation operation and control of the satellite after launch, and data reduction and analysis except for the gsfc experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. (nasa mors, 30 Nov 72, 8 & 29 July 74; NASA Releases 69-91, 74-183; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 75) The 1969 launch of Apollo 11 was commemorated 16 July by ceremonies at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. At 9:32 am edt, the moment of launch, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., unveiled a plaque designating the site a National Historical Landmark. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the thousands of guests: “No matter our achievements, ... we cannot relax our pursuit of knowledge, for we must face the coming crises of our time. Every effort must be made to see that the opportunity which our technology presents is not lost. We may be sure that the opportunity will not occur soon again, if ever. To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources— a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no return.” Unless “we continuously restore the fund of basic knowledge, we shall ultimately exhaust it. . . . “Some day we will establish scientific outposts on the Moon, and even tap its mineral resources. And in the not-too-distant future astronauts may tread the surface of Mars and the glaciers of the moons of Jupiter in search of extraterrestrial life. . . . The future began here at 9:32 a.m. on July 16, 1969. At that moment on July 16 in the year 2069, launch windows to Mars, Neptune, and Pluto will be open. Will we fly through those windows? I think we will.” In 19 July ceremonies at the San Clemente, Calif., Western White House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names of each astronaut who had represented “this country in a flight above the surface of the Earth.” President Nixon told Armstrong the greatest contribution to the space program was not the exploration or technology but the “spirit you and your colleagues . . . have had the opportunity to demonstrate.” The Smithsonian Institution hosted 20 July activities marking the day of the landing. Speaking on the Mall in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks said Apollo 11 had been a “dramatic demonstration . . . that progress in human affairs does not spring full blown from the efforts of one man or group of men. What we saw was the culmination of the efforts of hundreds of scientists and engineers from Leonardo da Vinci ... to the Apollo 11 astronauts. Each built on what his predecessors had accomplished until the accumulation of knowledge made possible the kind of quantum leap forward represented by the Apollo Program.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, called the day of the landing “the day man ended an era of one-planet civilization and began a new age as traveler and colonizer of the universe.” Despite difficulties, men would “make more of these steps into the vast but exciting reaches of the solar system.” A 21 July service at the Washington Cathedral in Washington, D.C., dedicated the Space Window donated by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator at the time of the landing. The window, designed by Rodney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory, representing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. During the ceremony, Armstrong presented a 7.18-g, 3.6-billion-yr-old lunar rock, brought from the moon by Apollo 11, to the Cathedral. The rock would be inserted into a hydrogen-filled plexiglass container embedded as the centerpiece of the window. (PD, 22 July 74, 815; NASA Activities, 15 Aug 74, 5-14; transcript; program)
Noting the space program’s emphasis had shifted earthward now that space flight was an accepted and almost routine part of life, John N. Wilford commented in the New York Times that “it is only natural that after surveying the canyons of Mars, the clouds and haze of Venus and the radiation belts of Jupiter, men turn back and take a new look at the earth and, in the words of T. S. Eliot, ‘know the place for the first time.’ ” (NYT, 10 Feb 74,7) Mars 5 was put into orbit around Mars at 6:45 pm Moscow time (11:45 am edt) 12 Feb., with a 32 500-km apogee, 1760-km perigee, 25-hr period, and 35° inclination. Mars 6 and 7, launched 5 and 9 Aug. 1973, would approach Mars in March. During a 22 Sept. 1973 interview with Tass, Director Roald Sagdeyev of the Space Research Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences had said one of the four Mars probes would softland near the Martian south polar cap to test the physical properties of the soil and surface rocks and check the possibilities of transmitting TV pictures of the surrounding terrain to earth. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 14 Feb. 74, Ul; A&A 1973)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a speech at Utah State Univ. that he was “certain there is intelligent life somewhere in this universe, but probably not in this solar system.” Primary life would probably be found in our solar system, with Mars as the most likely candidate. The U.S.S.R. was expected to land a spacecraft on Mars within the next few weeks, but in an area not likely to have any life form. A NASA spacecraft would land on Mars in 1976 in the area most likely to have water. NASA intended to continue systematic exploration of the solar system and to search for extraterrestrial life. (Bean, Logan [Utah] Herald Journal, 20 Feb 74)
Bacteria found frozen in Antarctic ice and soil for a possible 1 million years had grown and reproduced in the laboratory when put into nutrient fluids, the National Science Foundation announced. If the estimate of the age proved correct, the bacteria would be the oldest examples of life ever found on the earth. Results of the project, spdnsored by nsf and nasa’s extraterrestrial life detection program, would add weight to the theory that some forms of life might be frozen into the permafrost of planets such as Mars. The bacteria had been found at a depth of about 130 m near the main U.S. base on Ross Island. Later samples also had been found in Taylor Valley 95 km away. A senior scientist in the project, Dr. Roy E. Cameron of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said in a telephone interview with the New York Times that rod-shaped, club-shaped, and spherical specimens grew and reproduced, but one type, particularly interesting because it had been capable of spontaneous movement, could not be made to reproduce, (nsf Release 74-155; Schmeck, NYT, 30 April 74)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was quoted as saying in an interview: “From what we know today, there is no medical reason to bar a two-year mission to Mars. . . . We still need more data, but I don’t think the medical findings from a six-month or a year-long mission would differ appreciably from the experience with our three Skylab missions.” On a two-year mission to Mars (not likely to be considered before the early 1990s), “we’re going to have a hard time keeping people completely busy,” leaving astronauts more time to think of their isolation. “That’s another problem we’ll have to deal with.” Meanwhile, all the data indicate “that man is really adapting to the zero-gravity environment of space. He does that in a way that causes some very large fluctuations initially in various body systems” but, “with time, it appears that these fluctuations settle down.” (US News, 11 Feb 74, 62-64)
Data from U.S.S.R. space probes Mars 4, 6, and 7 [see 9-12 March] had indicated that several “tens percent” of the Martian atmosphere was made up of an inert gas, probably argon, Tass quoted Prof. Vasily I. Moroz as reporting in Izvestiya. The data would substantiate Soviet scientists’ belief that several million or even several hundred thousand years ago Mars had an atmosphere with a density close to that of the earth. In addition, data from Mariner 9 (launched 30 May 1971) and Mars 5 had shown that the planet had had surface water and might “acquire it again, for such changes take place during the planet’s geological history . . . with a definite periodicity.” New data was increasing hope of finding the simplest biosphere. “In any case, in the not so distant geological past Mars apparently had . . . die conditions necessary for the emergence of life. The reappearance of such periods in the future is not ruled out.” The Western press later quoted U.S. scientists as saying that the presence of large amounts of argon would have “dramatic implications” and would tend to support the theory that the Martian climate had been going through a series of cycles during which ice ages alternated with warmer and wetter conditions. But Dr. Carl E. Sagan of Cornell Univ. said during a telephone interview that the 90% content of carbon dioxide in the Martian atmosphere had been well established, so that “at most 10% of argon was barely possible.” (fbis-Sov, 26 March 74, U1; Shabad, NYT, 7 April 74,34)
The first system to use solar energy to heat a U.S. school began operation in Timonium, Md. The $568 000 project, jointly sponsored by the National Science Foundation and AAl Corp. [see 2 Feb.], was rushed into operation in six weeks to use the remainder of the winter’s chilly days to gather experimental data for future solar heating systems. (Richards, W Post, 8 March 74, C2) 7, 12-14 March: Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on NASA’s space science program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1975 authorization hearings: A Solar Maximum Mission (smm) satellite was proposed for FY 1975 design study and launch in the next period of maximum solar activity, 19781979. smm would investigate solar flares and related phenomena and their effects on the solar-terrestrial system, making, for the first time, simultaneous measurements of flares across the electromagnetic spectrum—within a national program of satellite, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations of the sun during maximum activity. The spacecraft would be shuttle-retrievable for refurbishment and reflight with advanced solar physics experiments in the 1980s. Requested funding for the Large Space Telescope (Ls’r) for FY 1975 was $6.2 million, to proceed with design of telescope optics, detectors, and support systems. NASA had originally planned to spend about $10 million in FY 1975 on the lst—to be launched on the space shuttle in 1980—but reduced the request to reflect the four- to six-month delay in shuttle development. NASA—in cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory, Sandia Laboratories, and West Germany—was developing an Aries sounding rocket to support the physics and astronomy program. Aries, which used the 2nd stage of surplus Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles, would provide a greater lift and longer flight time than possible at the price of rockets now in use. Cost overruns on the 1975 two-spacecraft Viking mission to Mars could total 10% of the original $838-million estimate for the program because of hardware development problems. Major problems with the biology instrument included packing the sophisticated instruments into a small volume, development of very small valves to inject sufficiently small amounts of nutrients into Martian samples, and thermal control. The instrument was running $21.2 million over the budgeted cost. Difficulties also had been encountered in producing enough 0.005-cm plated magnetic wire of uniform characteristics for the onboard computer. Dr. Naugle said that, although the overall coniplexity of the spacecraft had been underestimated, “we expect these problems to be solved and to launch both Viking spacecraft on schedule in 1975.” (Transcript) Experiments were designed to demonstrate an attitude control accuracy of better than three arc minutes using a gas jet system, measure the performance in orbit of operational infrared sensor components, demonstrate an inexpensive Canopus sensor of high reliability, measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft, determine interference generated by the propane gas control system, demonstrate a basic sensing element with application in digital sun and earth albedo sensors, and measure degradation of silicone solar cells in orbit. NASA’s objective of placing the satellite in an earth orbit that would permit achievement of the scientific objectives was met, and the mission was adjudged a success 19 March. Under a December 1972 Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the U.K.’s Dept, of Trade and Industry, NASA would be reimbursed for launch vehicle and services. Developed for the U.K. by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., the 83.5-by 66.5-cm, 92-kg spacecraft was powered by a four-panel 250-cm-long solar array of 1800 solar cells. Miranda was deployed in a fully sunlit polar orbit with a yo-yo despin system and its attitude control system acquired the sun through three sun sensors. The eighth NASA launch of a U.K. satellite and the fourth on a Scout vehicle—Miranda carried the names of 80000 Boy Scouts from nine U.S. states on a microdot. (NASA MOR, 21 March 74; NASA Releases 74-36, 74-53; UN Reg;- Newport News, Va, Daily Press, 22 Feb 74; SBD, 12 March 74,59)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Grigory Khozin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Institute of U.S. Studies expressed resentment of criticism by some U.S. press members and others of Soviet motives and technical ability in the cooperative Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Writing in the weekly Literaturnaya Gazeta, Khozin particularly censured suggestions of early Soviet reluctance to cooperate in space and of Soviet spacecraft docking difficulties, made in the recent book U.S.-Soviet Cooperation in Space by former U.S. Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., Foy D. Kohler. He accused “certain U.S. circles” of being “glad to cast a shadow” on ASTP and to “smear the forthcoming joint experiment precisely because it is a joint one [and] promotes the establishment of normal relations between countries.” Khozin declared that the U.S.S.R., as well as U.S. space program leaders and “ordinary Americans,” favored further close cooperation in space. (fbis-Sov, Sept 74, B2-3; Smith, NYT, 19 Sept 74) 18 September—21 October, 24 November-14 December: Two sets of critical surface-simulation tests were successfully conducted on the Viking lander proof-flight vehicle in a Martin Marietta Corp. thermal vacuum chamber under Martian temperature and pressure conditions. The tests verified the ability of Viking systems to withstand Martian temperatures and verified lander operations and ground support systems from the acquisition of a simulated Martian soil sample to analysis, interpretation, and reporting of data by Viking science teams. The spacecraft performed tasks—using the surface sampler, imaging system, meteorological sensors, x-ray spectrometer, seismometer, and thermal control systems—in temperatures ranging from 178 to 308 K (—135° to 95°F). (nasa prog off, interview, 21 Oct 75; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74,44-45)
The Titan IIIE-Centaur proof-flight vehicle (TC-1), launched by NASA from Eastern Test Range Complex 41 at 9:48 am edt carrying a Viking spacecraft model and the sphinx satellite, was destroyed after the Centaur engine failed to start. At 8.1 min from launch, after normal separation from the Titan booster, the Centaur main-engine start failed and the vehicle automatically went into the restart sequence. A second attempt to start the engine failed at 9.2 min after liftoff. Since the vehicle had not achieved orbital velocity the Range Safety Officer at the Antigua, West Indies, tracking station transmitted destruction commands and the Centaur was destroyed at 12,5 min after the liftoff. The vehicle fell into the Atlantic Ocean 3530 km downrange. Inflight data indicated that the liquid-oxygen boost pump had failed to operate during both attempted engine starts. A committee was formed to investigate the failure and recommend corrective action. Although the primary objective of demonstrating the capability of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was not accomplished, some objectives were fulfilled: demonstration of the capability of the launch facility to support a Titan-Centaur launch, structural integrity of the vehicle, Centaur guidance and control of the Titan, Titan-Centaur separation, and Centaur standard shroud capability. The Viking Dynamic Simulator had been instrumented to verify flight loads for the two planned 1975 missions to Mars. Remaining attached to the Centaur stage, the vds was to have flown a typical Viking launch trajectory with a shortened bum to limit the spacecraft to a low earth orbit, to test the guidance system, and estimate injection accuracy. The sphinx Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment spacecraft had been intended for launch into an elliptical orbit to investigate the effect of charged particles in space on high-voltage solar cells, insulators, and conductors. The launch vehicle combined NASA’s versatile high-energy liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen Centaur upper stage with the Air Force-developed Titan III booster, a two-stage liquid-propellant core rocket augmented by two strap-on solid-fueled rocket motors. It was designed to fill the performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and the Saturn vehicles and boost NASA’s heaviest unmanned payloads into orbit or interplanetary trajectories. The first of six scheduled operational missions—the U.S. and West German Helios solar probe scheduled for the fall—would be configured to a two-burn mission to obtain data lost on the proof flight. The Titan-Centaur program was managed by NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center was responsible for the Titan-Centaur system. The Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization was responsible for the Titan IIIE booster, including aerospace ground equipment and Launch Complex 41 site activation. Kennedy Space Center directed launch operations at etr. (NASA mors, 25 Jan, 24 June 74; NASA Release 74r-25; UPI, W Post, 12 Feb 74, A2; Robinson, Today, 13 Feb 74)
Tentative NASA plans for launching 810 payloads into space in the next two decades were outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. The total, for late 1973 to 1991, included non-NASA payloads for Government agencies (other than the Dept, of Defense), foreign agencies, and private industry. The tentative payload model—presented to Congress in October 1973 to show “what could be done in the 1980s” when the space shuttle was in use—included as many as 10 missions to the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1990 and 1991 two very heavy payloads might be sent to orbit one of Jupiter’s moons and land an instrument package. Tentative missions to the inner planets included five missions to Venus, one of them with a lander, and two spacecraft to orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return samples from the two moons of Mars. Lunar missions under consideration included a lunar polar orbiter in 1979, two other orbiters in the 1980s, two lunar rovers in the 1980s, a lunar halo satellite to ensure communications with the hidden side of the moon, and two lunar rovers in 1990 and 1991 that could return samples to the earth from any point on the moon. Other plans under consideration were a flyby and rendezvous with Comet Encke and a landing on the nucleus, a flyby of Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. Of the 810 total payloads, 57 were designated for planetary exploration and 753 for earth orbit. Scientific satellites for earth orbit were Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large Solar Observatories, Large Radio Astronomy Observatories, and x-ray telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing. In the applications field were large Earth Observatory Satellites. And NASA expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation satellites for other agencies or private industry through 1991, not including those for DOD. Of some 300 payloads to be flown in the Spacelab, most would be NASA payloads in the fields of astronomy, physics, earth observations, earth and ocean physics, communication and navigation, life science, and space technology. Of non-NASA payloads, 10 would be for private industry space processing, beginning in 1985. Some 10% were expected to be flown for foreign users. The large number of contemplated missions, even with the increasing number of U.S.S.R. launches, was expected to have very little impact on the environment. Effects of the major constituents of the solid-fueled rocket booster exhaust—water vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, and aluminum oxide—would be negligible. (Text)
nasa and European Space Research Organization officials met in Paris to discuss future cooperative missions to the planets. Joint mission possibilities included an out-of-the-ecliptic flight to study the sun, missions to Jupiter and Mercury, and experiments on missions to Venus and Mars. NASA would receive suggestions for the 1980s from European nations during the next few months, nasa Director of Planetary Programs Robert S. Kraemer had said that international cooperation would be necessary for one third to one fourth of the payloads the agency envisioned for the next 15 yrs. (nasa, Spec Asst to Deputy Assoc Admin, interviews, 20-21 Jan 75; Couvault, Av Wk, 1 April 74, 38-9)
Computer enhancement of multispectral photographs from Erts 1 satellite (circling the earth since 23 July 1972) had been proved useful for finding mineral and water deposits on the earth. Computer image enhancement, first used at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to improve early spacecraft pictures of the moon and Mars, had identified surface signs of known mineral deposits for JPL and U.S. Geological Survey investigators. Twenty ERTS-identified points had been verified in a test area, exploratory drilling had uncovered water-bearing rock 12 m below an ERTS-indicated water hole, and fractures indicating other drilling sites had been revealed, (nasa 74-27)
“I am sure life will move out from the Earth, probably first to the Moon and then to Mars,” Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech reviewing NASA’s planetary program before the National Space Club. Just what form of life would be transplanted, whether man or some simple organism, would be the subject of debate. Four planets—Jupiter, Venus, Mars, and Mercury—had already been visited. The next major event would be the Viking landings on Mars in 1976. Historically, two significant events in 1965 had determined the direction of the planetary program. The first was r. study at Woods Hole, Mass., which had recommended that the space program, following Apollo, should search for life on the planets and give first priority to the study of Mars—while also maintaining a wide-ranging program of general planetary exploration—because Mars most closely resembled the earth and was the most likely to support life. The second event, the 14 July 1965 flight of Mariner 4 past Mars, supported the recommendations when it found evidence of water in the Martian atmosphere. “In retrospect, I think the decision . . . has been sound.” But a major decision that faced NASA this summer, one year before the launch of Viking, was whether there should be follow-on Viking missions. “Should Mars continue to have first priority in planetary exploration? . . . Clearly, if we find evidence of life on Mars, . . . Mars will have first priority.” (Text)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, would receive the National Civil Service League’s Career Service Award for Sustained Excellence, NASA announced. Dr. Naugle had joined NASA in 1959 as head of the Nuclear Emulsion Section at Goddard Space Flight Center and, in 1967, had become Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Science at Headquarters. Under his leadership, scientists had mapped the entire surface of Mars, collected the first detailed information about Jupiter and its moons, and advanced the use of unmanned spacecraft as astronomical observatories. Dr. Naugle would receive the award, given to Federal officials with at least 10 yrs outstanding public service, on 9 Oct. Dr, Carolyn Huntoon, Johnson Space Center, would receive the League’s Special Achievement Award for her design of a Skylab experiment that had measured biochemical reactions to weightlessness. (NASA Release 74-252)
NASA had deleted a backup Viking lander spacecraft and would substitute the proof test orbiter for one of two flight orbiters to help offset significant cost increases and meet target dates for the two 1975 missions to explore the planet Mars, NASA reported to Speaker of the House Carl Albert. Technical problems in the guidance-and-control computer, biology instrument, and lander proof-test capsule qualification had delayed cornpletion of the landers, made the schedule “extremely tight,” and increased costs an estimated $48.8 million over the $89 million in the FY 1975 budget. NASA notified the House that' it planned to use for Viking $48.8 million available from the Skylab program after its successful completion. (Text in Viking Proj Hearings, House Subcom on Space Science, 21-2 Nov 74)
NASA was presented the Principality of Monaco’s gold and diamond-studded Silver Jubilee plaque at the Annual Awards Luncheon of the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C., for its contribution to worldwide television. The award was presented to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, by U.S. Information Agency Deputy Director Eugene P. Kopp on behalf of Prince Ranier III of Monaco, who had said that NASA’s live telecasts from the moon deserved recognition as “one of the most dramatic television events of the past quarter century.” (jsc Roundup, 29 March 74,1) Mars 6 and 7—continuing to transmit data on solar wind and radiation from heliocentric orbit—were part of a series of four automatic stations launched to explore the Martian atmosphere and surface. Mars 4 and 5, launched 22 and 25 July 1973, had approached the planet 10 and 12 Feb. Mars 4 flew by Mars when its braking engine failed to fire. Mars 5 went into a successful orbit and continued to transmit data to the earth. Earlier, Mars 3 had softlanded a capsule on Mars 2 Dec. 1971 during a windstorm; the capsule had transmitted 20 sec before falling silent. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 15 March 74, Ul; 21 March 74, Ul; Pravda, fbis-Sov, 27 March 74, Ul; W Post, 15 March 74, A29; gsfc SSR, 31 March 74; Av Wk, 25 March 74,17; 1 April, 11)
