NASA’s use of the firefly s two light-producing chemicals, luciferin and luciferase, to test for the chemical presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), an energy-storage compound present in every living cell, had increased interest in luminescence as a tool for medical research, the New York Times reported. Research done in 1948 by Johns Hopkins Univ. scientists had demonstrated that ATP was the third essential ingredient—along with luciferin and luciferase—necessary for the firefly’s glow, and that the amount of light generated was directly proportionate to the level of ATP present. The Hopkins scientists had also developed a simple test for life itself, since luciferin and luciferase added to any living matter could reproduce the firefly’s glimmer. NASA applied this information, with more sophisticated lightdetection instruments, to develop a test for life on Mars for use aboard the Viking spacecraft (launched 20 Aug.) NASA scientists working with the firefly chemicals at Goddard Space Flight Center had developed many applications, including a method of detecting bacteria in water; this permitted speedy diagnosis of urinary infections, as well as testing the effect of various antibiotics on particular infections. Univ. of Calif, scientists continued the research, adapting the techniques for related work in measuring creatine phosphokinase (CPK) in the bloodstream. CPK, present in all human blood, was produced in abnormally high quantities during muscle-cell degeneration that accompanied cardiac arrest or muscular dystrophy. CPK could be treated to produce ATP and, with the application of firefly chemicals, to produce a glow proportionate to the amount of CPK in the bloodstream. Researchers had used the measurements as a quick blood test to tell whether a patient had suffered a heart attack. (NYT, 25 Aug 75) 26 August—3 September: NASA launched Symphonie 2, France and West Germany’s second experimental communications satellite at 9:42 pm EDT 26 Aug. from Eastern Test Range. A three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle boosted the spacecraft into a synchronous transfer orbit with a 37 974-km apogee, 413-km perigee, 678.3-min period, and 13.2° inclination. On 29 Aug. at 11:48 am EDT, ground controllers activated the onboard liquid-fueled apogee motor to circularize the. orbit at geosynchronous altitude. By 31 Aug. Symphonie 2 was in an orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 35 364-km perigee, 23-hr 47-min period, and O.CP inclination. NASA’s primary objective for the mission—to launch the Symphonie 2 into a synchronous transfer orbit with sufficient accuracy to enable the satellite to accomplish its operational mission—had been successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on 3 Sept. When finally positioned at 11.5° west longitude over the equator, the 402-kgSymphonie 2 would provide 1200 telephone, 8 voice, and 2 TV channels for experimental communications between Europe and the African and South American continents. Second of two experimental comsats developed by the French-West German Consortium Industriel Franee-Allemand pour le Satellite Symphonie (CIFAS), under the direction of Germany’s Gesellschaft fur Weltraumforschung GFW and France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Symphonie 2 would expand the French-West German experimental satellite TV and telegraph communications program begun with the launch of Symphonie 1 on 18 Dec. 1974. In October 1973 NASA had agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis, and in June 1974 had signed a launch services contract with the consortium. Estimated cost of hardware and services was $12 million. Goddard Space Flight Center, under the direction of the Office of Space Science, was responsible for the launch vehicle and for limited tracking during initial activities. When the satellite separated from the vehicle third stage, the Symphonie Project Operations Group in France and West Germany would assume operational responsibility. (NASAMORs S—492— 204— 75— 02, 25 July, 3 Sept; GSFC SSR, 31 Aug 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21—27 Aug 75; NASA Release 75— 234)
The U.S. could land men on Mars in 10 yr if a commitment similar to President Kennedy’s pledge in 1961 to make a moon landing were made, Dr. Wernher von Braun, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech at the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Dr. von Braun, vice president for engineering and development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., said that nuclear-powered command ships could be sent to orbit the planet while a lander traveled to the Martian surface. The cost of the program would approximate the near-$25 billion cost of the Apollo program. (B Sun, 16 Feb 75, B16) '
A Today editorial had commented on the planned Viking flight to Mars: “Success of the Viking flight could mean additional Congressional support for more sophisticated flights in the future. ... It will be almost another year before we will have the answers to the Viking experiments. . . .At that time, we will be celebrating the 200th birthday of our country—and what better way to celebrate the birth of one nation than with the discovery of another?” (Today, 20 Aug 75)
NASA had awarded a $152 565 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, and test of the Space Shuttle external tank, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The contract, which covered the first increment of the external tank project for 1 Sept. 1973 to 30 June 1980, called for a maximum production rate of 24 tanks per year and delivery of major ground-test articles and 6 flight-model tanks. The work would be done at Michoud Assembly Facility under the direction of MSFC. (MSFC Release 75—28) During January: Opportunities and Choices in Space Science, 1974, a report published by the Space Science Board of the National Research Council, recommended that NASA undertake the Large Space Telescope as the only new space research start in FY 1976. The telescope should be followed by a series of permanent national and international observatories in orbit. The report also recommended that, budget permitting, NASA undertake in 1977 a lunar—polar mission, a Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter, a Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission, and a solar maximum mission. However, NASA should compare the importance of the Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter with the Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission if current FY 1977 budget estimates would not support both missions. Other recommendations included an immediate reevaluation of strategy for missions to explore the outer solar system during the next decade and for returning a Martian surface sample to earth instead of landing an unmanned laboratory to perform analyses as current plans propose. The report strongly endorsed the High Energy Astronomical Observatories (HEAO), Pioneer—Venus mission, and Mariner— Jupiter—Saturn mission as vital to the nation’s space science efforts. (Text)
Launch of the Viking—A spacecraft to Mars was postponed because of a faulty thrust-vector control valve found in the solid booster stage of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle during countdown tests. The launch team decided to remove and replace the valve, rescheduling the launch for 14 Aug. (Viking Status Bulletin No 10, 20 Aug 75; O’Toole, W Post, 12 Aug 75; McElheny, NYT, 12 Aug 75)
Intelsat IV F-6 communications satellite was destroyed by a NASA range safety officer 415 sec after launch from Eastern Test Range when the Atlas-Centaur test vehicle tumbled out of control. Lifting off at 6:35 pm EST, the mission had been normal to Atlas booster-engine cutoff at 138 sec. Then telemetry data indicated several malfunctions, including electrical problems and loss of altitude. After destruction, the vehicle impacted in the Atlantic Ocean 800 km downrange from the launch site. An investigation of the failure was begun under the direction of Lewis Research Center and the mission was officially judged unsuccessful 6 March. The failure was the first for an Atlas-Centaur since May 1971, when a circuit problem in the Centaur ended the launch of the Mariner 8 Mars probe. The 1400-kg Intelsat IV F-6, launched by NASA on a cost-reimbursable basis for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the 89-member-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, was intended to be the primary spacecraft over the Indian Ocean region, with Intelsat IV F-5, launched 13 June 1972, becoming the backup. The failure of Intelsat IV F—6 would have no immediate effect on Intelsat global communications; Intelsat IV F-5 could provide the primary function and Intelsat III F-3, launched 6 Feb. 1969, was still capable of providing limited backup. The Intelsat IV F-6 mission had been scheduled originally for launch in February 1973 but experienced a series of delays from problems in both the satellite and the launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 26 Feb 75, 13 March 74; PAO, interview, 21 Feb 75; NASA Releases 73—83, 75—7, 75—47; NASA “Note to Editors,” 3 May 73, 27 June 75; SBD, 24 Jan 75, 127)
Viking 1 was successfully launched at 5:22 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range’s Launch Pad 41 on a Titan Ill-Centaur launch vehicle. The launch, first scheduled for 11 Aug., had been postponed until 14 Aug. to replace a faulty thrust-vector control valve on the launch vehicle [see 11 Aug.]. A second delay had occurred when the spacecraft’s internal batteries had discharged to 9 volts, well below safe limits [see 13 Aug.]. The spacecraft, Viking A, had been removed from the launch vehicle and replaced by Viking B. The range safety officer had issued a waiver of standard procedures and permitted removal and installation of the spacecraft without detanking and depressurizing the launch vehicle, thus allowing the launch to be rescheduled for 20 Aug. Viking 1, consisting of a 2360-kg orbiter attached to an 1180-kg lander, was placed in a trajectory to Mars within the designed 3-sigma limits. Nearly 35 min after trajectory insertion, the Centaur stage separated from the spacecraft. The solar panels were deployed and oriented toward the sun, and the biocap—a container used to hermetically seal the lander while in earth’s atmosphere—was jettisoned. On 27 Aug. at 2:30 pm EDT a trajectory-correction maneuver targeted the spacecraft to its Mars orbital insertion point. By 28 Aug. all systems aboard the spacecraft were operating normally and in a cruise mode. Travel time to Mars was estimated at 10 mo, with a possible Mars landing on 4 July 1976, the height of the U.S. Bicentennial. A second spacecraft, Viking B, had been scheduled for a 1 Sept, launch to arrive at Mars in 12 mos. The Viking missions supported NASA’s planetary program goals of exploring the solar system and gaining knowledge of its origin and evolution, and of the origin and evolution of life and of the dynamic processes that shaped man’s terrestrial environment. Specific purpose of the two Viking missions was to increase knowledge of Mars by making observations from Mars orbit and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the surface, with particular emphasis on biological, chemical, and environmental data on past or present existence of life on the planet. Viking 1 was targeted to land in the Martian equatorial region, in a very low area resembling the fluvial plain of a dry river bed—an ideal site to search for organic material. Alternate sites for both Viking landers had been selected and there would be some flexibility until insertion into Mars orbit, after which the available band of landing sites would be narrowed by orbital geometry. Once in orbit, the orbiter would survey prospective landing sites; when the decision on where to land had been made, retrorockets would separate the lander from the orbiter and the lander would descend to the surface, sequentially braked by its aeroshell’s drag, by a parachute, and finally by its retrorockets. After landing, the science instrumentation would be activated and exploration would begin; data would be transmitted back to earth by the lander radio or through a radio-relay link with the orbiter. The orbiter’s main body, an octagonal ring 46 cm high with alternating 140- and 51-cm sides, consisted of 16 modular compartments. The entire structure was 10 m across the tips of the extended solar panels and 3.3 m high from the lander attachment points to the launch vehicle. Besides propulsion, navigation and control, communications, power, computer, and data-storage subsystems, the orbiter carried its science instrumentation mounted on a scan platform that could move with 2 degrees of freedom. The three science instruments were twin high-resolution, slow-scan TV cameras; an infrared atmospheric water detector; and a high-resolution infrared thermal mapper for detecting surface-temperature variations. The lander was a six-sided aluminum and titanium box 46.2 cm deep and enclosed top and bottom by cover plates; it measured 3 m wide and 2 m high from the footpads to the top of the S-band antenna. The six sides measured 109 cm and 56 cm alternately, with the three landing legs attached to the three narrower sides. The three retrorockets were mounted at 120° intervals on the lander; generating up to 2838 newtons (638 lbs) thrust, they would be ignited at an altitude of 1220 m to slow the lander’s descent from 222 kph to 9 kph at landing. Four small engines provided attitude control. In addition to subsystems for thermal control, power, and communications, the lander carried six instruments: twin scanning TV cameras, a sophisticated biology laboratory, a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer, a meteorology instrument, and a seismometer. Used with numerous temperature, pressure, and magnetic sensors, the instruments would perform entry, landed, and radio experiments. NASA’s investigation of Mars had begun in 1964 with the launch of Mariner 4. That spacecraft’s flyby on 15 July 1965 had revealed the planet to be moonlike with a dry, barren, cratered surface showing little evidence of wind or water erosion and no magnetic field. The better instrumented Mariners 6 and 7 that flew by the planet during the summer of 1969 reported a chaotic view of jumbled ridges and valleys unlike anything found on the earth or moon. The spacecraft also showed wide featureless expanses where craters had been somehow eroded, suggesting that Mars had been geologically active. Mariner 6 and 7 photographs showed a thin layer of snow—probably carbon dioxide—and instruments measured a thin atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide. High-quality photographs from Mariner 9, placed in Martian orbit on 13 Nov. 1971, provided evidence of fluid erosion, glacial action, and volcanoes. The Viking missions had continued the Mariner explorations of Mars. Viking was managed by Langley Research Center under overall direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science; LaRC also had management responsibility for the lander system designed and built by Martin Marietta Corp. Jet Propulsion Laboratory designed and built the orbiter system. The Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was the responsibility of Lewis Research Center; LaRC managed launch and flight operations executed by Martin Marietta, Kennedy Space Center, and JPL. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for tracking and data systems, and JPL managed the mission control and computing-center system. (NASA MORs S—815—75—01/02, 1 Aug 75, 28 Aug 75, 16 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—183; LaRC Launch and Mission Operations Status Bulletins Nos 9—11; Viking: Mission to Mars (NASA SP—334); W Post, 18-22 Aug 75; NYT, 18-22 Aug 75)
President Ford’s announcement that he intended to restore the White House Office of Science and Technology was discussed in a Washington Post editorial: most scientists were heartened by President Ford’s announcement. They had unanimously deplored President Nixon’s decision to abolish the office, believing that it was vital to the nation’s well-being for the President to get the most objective possible scientific assessment of new weaponry, as well as of medical, economic, and environmental policies. However, scientists also felt that the establishment of the office and the possible appointment of National Science Foundation Director Dr. H. Guyford Stever as its head would not solve the problem. A report drafted by a committee of 13 leading scientists had spelled out what was needed: establishment of a Council for Science and Technology that would carry the same weight as the Domestic and Economic Councils and could hold its own with the Office of Management and Budget and DOD. Any serious candidate for the top science job would want to consider whether the President “really intends to make constructive use of a science adviser. Past experience tells us that the best mechanism for advice from the scientific community is of no avail if the President isn’t listening.” (IF Post, 31 May 75, A12) During May: Preparations continued for late summer launches of the two Viking spacecraft to Mars. A Lander 1 plugs-out test was completed 8 May, 2 days later than planned, because of a grounding problem. By 26 May all flight equipment, except for the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, had been installed on Lander 1. Lander 2 was mated with its protective aeroshell on 28 May. Orbiter 1 was undergoing final mechanical assembly as the flight subsystems became available after individual reworking. By 31 May all temperature-control louvers, protective covers, and thermal blankets had been installed. Initial Orbiter 2 system testing was completed 5 May, and Orbiter block validation tests were begun. All solar panels for both Orbiters had been assembled and swing-tested, and were awaiting buildup of the low-pressure gas system. On 13 May a major hardware review of both landers was held at Kennedy Space Center with 100 NASA and industry participants. The review was the final chance to discuss modifications in the spacecraft before closure of the bottom plates and sterilization. Following the review, Langley Research Center’s Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said, “Everything is going just great and right on schedule.” (Viking launch and mission operations status bulletins 4, 5, 6; NASA Activities, June 75)
Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology, announced the appointment of Dr. Bruce C. Murray as Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, succeeding Dr. William H. Pickering who was retiring after 21 yr in the position. Dr. Murray, a Caltech professor of planetary sciences for 15 yr, had also been a researcher on JPL space missions for more than 10 yr. He was completing scientific descriptions of Venus and Mercury from Mariner 10 data, gathered during a February 1974 encounter with the planet, and comparing the surface histories of Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the moon with the history of the earth. Dr. Pickering had been with JPL since 1944 and had served as its Director since 1954. As Director, Dr. Pickering led JPL in designing and building the first orbiting U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958). Also under his leadership, JPL had designed the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner spacecraft that were launched to gather information on the moon and nearby planets. (NASA Release 75—179)
A planet’s size and bulk might be more important than its location in the solar system in determining whether it can support life, Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said in a New York Times article. Conventional scientific thought had always been that the chance of life’s evolving on a planet was narrowly restricted by the planet’s distance from its parent star. However, planetology—the study of comparative geology of the planets, made possible by space probes such as Pioneer, Mariner, and Viking—provided evidence for the newer theory. The most important single factor in the geology of earth-like planets was the amount of internal heat left over from their birth. Planets as large as earth conserved heat, losing it very slowly through volcanic action over long periods of time. Molten volcanic material carried gases, including water vapor, that had been trapped below the planet’s surface; the vapors condensed into oceans, other gases formed an atmosphere, and life began. Mariner’s photos of Mars had confirmed the existence of volcanoes; but, because of the planet’s relatively small size, these exhausted their internal heat supply and died out rapidly about 100 million yr ago. During its active period, Mars must have had in its atmosphere large volumes of volcanic gases, including water vapor; Mariner photos had shown what were apparently dry river beds. When the volcanoes became extinct, the water and atmosphere leaked away into space and the small planet was left dry and nearly airless. Any life forms found on Mars by Viking or future space probes would probably be fossils. The study of lunar material added another example to the comparative geology of earth-like planets: The moon rocks brought back by Apollo astronauts had revealed volcanic activity on the moon; because the moon was smaller than Mars, this activity had stopped even earlier and the gases and moisture escaped even more quickly, leaving another dry, airless, and lifeless body. Scientists concluded that Mars was cold and lifeless not because it was farther from the sun than earth but because it was smaller and geologically inert. If the earth were moved out to the orbit of Mars, the average temperature of the earth would drop somewhat but its insulating atmosphere, continually replenished by volcanic gases for some billions of years longer, would maintain a livable temperature over large areas of the surface. (Jastrow, NYT, 24 Aug 75, E7)
The Soviet Union might attempt to land an automatic microbiological laboratory on Mars before the U.S. Viking spacecraft, whose twice-delayed launch is now scheduled for 20 Aug., could arrive, the Christian Science Monitor reported Finnish astronomer Heikka Oja as telling the British Interplanetary Society. By launching a probe between 17 Sept, and 3 Oct. and using higher speeds and shorter trajectories, the Russians could reach Mars in May 1976, 2 mo before the scheduled Viking arrival. Between 1971 and 1973 the Soviets had made 4 attempts to land probes on Mars; only Mars 3 (launched 28 May 1971) succeeded in softlanding a capsule (on 2 Dec. 1971). Landing in a dust storm, it ceased transmitting after 20 sec. Oja said the Soviets hoped to repeat this experiment, this time in a region near the south polar cap of Mars where the thin, mostly carbon dioxide atmosphere might contain moisture. (Gatland, CSM, 19 Aug 75) . .
First major inflight tests of the Viking 1 lander scheduled to touch down on Mars in July 1976 had shown the craft to be in excellent health, flight controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported. JPL engineers completed thorough checks of the nuclear power, propulsion, guidance, attitude control, computer, tape recorder, telemetry, heat control, and radar landing systems, as well as four of the scientific instruments, including two cameras to photograph the Martian surface in closeup. The second Viking lander, scheduled to reach Mars in Sept. 1976, would undergo similar checkout the following week. (Pasadena Star-News, 14 Nov 75, 1)
Space scientists and astronomers had been wrestling with a “cultural crisis” in putting names to features of distant worlds that had never been clearly seen before, as closeup views of several planets became available and more were on the way. Working through the Intemational Astronomical Union, the scientists had been forced to look beyond the names of scientists and explorers that had been used almost exclusively for objects on the moon and on Mars. A meeting on the problem in Moscow in July 1974 had agreed that objects on Venus would be called after women famous in mythology and history. New maps of the recently photographed surface of Mercury would bear the names of contributors to the arts and other humanities; the scientists had sought advice from scholars in the humanities to get the widest possible representation from past and present cultures. The Moscow meeting on new approaches to names for planetary features had been preceded by intense work on naming newly discovered configurations on the moon and on Mars. A complete scheme of names for more than 500 large formations on the far side of the moon—visible only to spacecraft because one side of the moon had always been turned toward earth—had been approved in 1970. Soviet scientists had rejected suggestions of names from the humanities for features on the moon and on Mars; they had urged a fresh start on Mercury, a new planet, with formations named not only for authors, as the Americans had originally suggested, but also for persons in other branches of the humanities. (NYT, 25 Dec 75, CIO)
Scientists were calling for names for the thousands of mountains, craters, and chasms being found on planets faster than they could be named, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The two Viking spacecraft scheduled to reach Mars in 1976 and the two Soviet Venera spacecraft scheduled to approach Venus in October would no doubt uncover a host of new unnamed features. Names for known features on Venus, Mars, and the moon would be officially chosen at the August 1976 meeting of the International Astronomical Union (IAU), world clearinghouse for solar-system nomenclature. (Jones, CSM, 7 Aug 75, 2) ...
of Jupiter for the first time. Instrumentation at McDonald Observatory, the Univ. of Texas’s 27-m telescope facility in Austin, made the discovery by using high-resolution spectra. Dr. Reinhard Beer, JPL leader of the team, reported that the near-infrared spectra had been produced by a Connestype Fourier spectrometer in 1974; spectral lines—the “signatures” of various molecules—had disclosed that carbon monoxide molecules were present to a depth of at least 50 km into the lower atmosphere. Carbon monoxide had been previously found in minor amounts in the atmospheres of earth, Venus, and Mars. Although the spectra had shown no indication of carbon dioxide in the Jovian atmosphere, Dr. Beer reported, future telescope searches from higher altitudes might reveal its presence there. (NASA Release 75—269)
New members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, led by Committee Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), made an orientation tour of Kennedy Space Center. In addition to visits to Launch Complexes 36 and 39, the KSC industrial area, and the Visitors Information Center, the committee members viewed the Apollo spacecraft being readied for the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Viking lander being prepared for the August twin mission to Mars. The members also received special briefings on Center activities^ (KSC Release 11—75)
All four batteries on the Viking 2 lander had been fully charged, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported. The problem had been solved by using a backup charger system carried on the orbiter after the primary system failed earlier [see 2 Nov.]. Recharging took about 24 hr per battery. The voltage had to be replenished before the spacecraft entered Mars orbit and before the lander separated from the orbiter. The difficulty with the lander’s primary charger had been traced to failure of one of four resistors in the circuitry. To prevent unforeseen problems with the backup charger, Viking project officials had decided to keep at least one of the batteries charged throughout the remainder of cruise flight, to ensure activation of the switch shifting the lander from its solar-panel power to that from radioisotope thermoelectric generators. The two RTGs had not been used for primary power during flight to avoid thermal problems from the heat given off by the units. (LA Times, 6 Nov 75, 1; AvWk, 10 Nov 75, 6; SBD, 12 Nov 75, 64; Langley Researcher, 14 Nov 75, 1)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
Viking Lander 1 would undergo a critical milestone in its development, terminal sterilization, beginning 13 June, Robert S. Kramer, NASA Director of Planetary Programs, said at a Viking news conference in Washington, D.C. The Lander would remain in the oven for 2.5 days and then be removed and checked out. Past missions had failed because “maybe we knew how to sterilize a spacecraft but we didn’t know how to make one work after it was sterilized,” Kramer said. However, “we think we know a lot more now than we did 15 years ago. We believe we have developed the techniques to be fully reliable, but when we complete that test along about next Tuesday morning, then we are going to find out for sure.” A. Thomas Young, Viking Mission Operations Manager at Langley Research Center, said that plans called for launch of Viking 1 on 11 Aug. and launch of Viking 2 on 21 Aug. Mission planners had deliberately arranged for the first Viking to arrive at Mars on 18 June 1976, after 10 mos of travel, and Viking 2 to arrive on 7 Aug. 1976, about 1 yr after it was launched. Both spacecraft would spend about 17 days in orbit examining landing sites “to assure ourselves that they continue to be safe.” The sites, which had not been examined since 1971, must be checked again because Mars was a dynamic planet. Lander 1 was scheduled to begin its descent 4 July and start black-and-white photography immediately upon landing. Color photography would begin 18 hr later. The first soil sample would be collected on the eighth day. Analysis of the sample would take 12 days to complete, and 20 days would be required to complete one cycle of all surface science. Young noted that, to avoid confusion during the mission, Martian days would be called “sols” because they were a half-hour longer than earth days. During surface operations, the Orbiter passing overhead once a day would remain synchronized with the Lander; on the pass, the Orbiter, acting as a communications satellite, would relay information from the Lander to earth. When the Lander completed its work, the Orbiter would perform observations of its own, studying Martian surface features, including the proposed Lander B landing site, from orbit. (Transcript)
The first radar probes of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede had been made by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Ganymede, at the time some 600 million km distant from earth, was found to have a rougher surface than the inner planets Mercury, Mars, or Venus. Dr. Goldstein scanned Ganymede three or four times on each of six nights in August 1974, using the 64-m antenna at JPL’s Goldstone station of the Deep Space Network; the radar employed a 400-kw microwave beam at a frequency of 12.6 cm. Writing in Science magazine, Dr. Goldstein and co-investigator George A. Morris said the most likely surface of Ganymede was rocky metallic material imbedded in a matrix of ice. Such a surface could be smooth with a top layer of ice rubble but would appear rough to the radar because the ice would be transparent to the microwave beam. The theory was particularly interesting in view of the finding by the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys (3 Dec. 1973 and 3 Dec. 1974) that Jupiter itself seemed totally gaseous, with no solid surface to produce a radar echo. The JPL scientists theorized that Ganymede was probably meteoritic in origin. (NASA Release 75 — 170; Goldstein et al., Science, 20 June 75, 1211-1212)
The press commented on the mission of the Viking spacecraft to Mars [see 20 Aug.]. The Washington Post said that the essence of the space program had been “to provide mankind with new knowledge, not in hopes that this knowledge will be useful immediately here on Earth but in hopes that it will expand our understanding of the universe in which we live and . . . enable us to reach better solutions to our philosophical and political, as well as practical, problems.” The Viking missions had opened a new era in which the search for knowledge was to be done largely by machines; the rewards promised to be rich, beyond measure in strictly monetary terms. The Christian Science Monitor agreed, commenting that Viking represented “an opportunity for mankind’s self-awareness to take a greater stride away from earth-centered thinking than was afforded by Neil Armstrong’s historic step on to the moon.” Discovering organic life on Mars would strengthen the conviction that life existed abundantly throughout the universe and that we were not alone. Some had questioned whether the U.S. should spend a billion dollars on such a program when resources were hard pressed on earth, but anew discovery, that life was not a meaningless chance but part of a grand design, could give new inspiration to humanity’s efforts to deal with earthly problems. Here was a challenge for the architects of detente, the Monitor asserted. The U.S. and Russia had been needlessly duplicating scientific efforts, their cooperation amounting to little more than “arm’s-length information exchange.” The two countries had much to share. “By abandoning costly competition for a truly joint program, the two countries could gain from each other’s capabilities, minimize the cost to each of them, and pursue this cosmic outreach on behalf of all mankind.” (W Post, 22 Aug 75, A24; CSM, 22 Aug 75, 28)
Astronomers in the People’s Republic of China said they had discovered two minor planets between Mars and Pluto, reported a British press delegation visiting Nanking Observatory. The press quoted the Chinese as saying that the planets, observed in January, were rarely visible because of their position in the solar system. The Chinese had named the planets Purple Mountain One and Purple Mountain Two, for the name of the mountain on which the Nanking Observatory was located. (Reuter, W Post, 7 May 75)
If NASA had unlimited funding, “I would mpve fairly quickly on a manned station because that will become an important outpost foy anything that we do in space,” Dr. Geprge M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an interview with the San Diego Union. Dr. Low added that he would move quicker in launching a space telescope and bringing back soil samples from Mars, “both enormously important from a scientific point of view.” Dr. Low expressed concern that “we really aren’t being inventive enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.” All NASA’s rockets so far, including the Space Shuttle, had Used conventional means of propulsion, and with it man was limited. Dr. Low said that the moon landing “was enormously difficult because we are tied to chemical propulsion systems.” NASA was experimenting with solar electric propulsion but to date no one had invented a fission or antigravity system. (San Diego Union, 8 June 75) On 14 June at 9:30 am local time (12:30 am EDT) Venera 10 was successfully launched toward Venus from Baykonur Cosmodroipe. Tass reported that “in design and purpose it is analogous to the ‘Venera-9’ station launched on June 8” and that all spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Venera 10 was also expected to reach Venus in October. In an interview 17 June with the Christian Science Monitor, Boris N. Petrov, chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of International Cooperation in the Study and Exploration of Outer Space, revealed that the Venera mission called for a landing rather than just a flyby. (GSFC SSR, 30 June 75;FBIS—Sov, 8—17 June 75; Pond, CSM, 17 June 75,1; W Post, 8—17 June 75; NYT, 8—17 June 75)
Twenty-five spacecraft on twenty-four vehicles were scheduled for launch by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The 25 spacecraft included 14 for NASA programs, 10 for other organizations, and 1 as a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting the year would be the 15 July launch of an Apollo spacecraft carrying Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton as the U.S. contribution to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Apollo would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19—launched 7 hr earlier than Apollo and carrying Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov—allowing both crews to exchange visits and perform joint scientific experiments. The two sets of Viking spacecraft, scheduled for 11 and 21 August launches, would journey through space for a year before arriving in the vicinity of Mars. There each set of spacecraft would separate into an orbiter and a lander to make orbital and surface investigations of the Martian environment. Other NASA spacecraft would include ERTS-B Earth Resources Technology Satellite and SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, in January; GOES-C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, in March; OSO-I Orbiting Solar Observatory, Nimbus-F experimental meteorological satellite, and Explorer 53 (SAS-C Small Astronomy Satellite), in May; GOES-A Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, in June; Explorers 56 and 57 Dual Air Density Explorers, on a single booster in July or August; Explorer 54 (AE-D Atmospheric Explorer), in September; and Explorer 55 (AE-E), in December. The 10 spacecraft to be launched by NASA for other organizations included 5 comsats for Communications Satellite Corp.: IntelsatIV F—1 in February, Intelsat-IVA F—1 and F—2 in July and October, and Marisat A and B in April and July. Other reimbursable launches would include Telesat—C (Anik 3) for Canada in March, COS-B Celestial Observation Satellite in July for the European Space Agency, Symphonie—B experimental comsat in September for France and West Germany, RCA-A (RCA —Satcom 1, in orbit) comsat in December for RCA Corp., and ITOSE-2 Improved TIROS Operational Satellite in late 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Helios— B would be launched late in 1975 as a cooperative effort with West Germany. The schedule called for 18 of the 24 launches to be made from Kennedy Space Center, 5 from Western Test Range, and 1 from San Marco. For the launches NASA would use a Saturn IB, 3 Titan-Centaurs, 5 Atlas-Centaurs, and 15 Thor-Delta launch vehicles. (NASA Release 75—5; KSC Release 180—74)
Scientists believed that light flashes observed by Skylab 4 crew members during their 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974 mission as they flew through the South Atlantic Anomaly—a slight asymmetry in the earth’s magnetic field where the Van Allen radiation belt dipped unusually low over Brazil—were a previously unsuspected form of radiation, Science magazine reported. The radiation seemed to consist of atomic nuclei heavier than hydrogen which, when stripped of electrons, would carry multiple positive electric charges. The astronauts had seen the flashes when the spacecraft cabin was dark and they were preparing for sleep. Scientists suspected that the flashes were stimulated within the retina of the eye by the high-energy cosmic-ray particles. Normally earth was shielded from cosmic rays by the magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays could reach as far into the field as the Skylab orbit. Because the magnetic-field shielding of the earth weakened toward the geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic-ray exposure as Skylab moved away from the poles. During two test periods, light-flash observations of Astronaut William R. Pogue showed a close correlation with exposure variations. (Pinsky et al., Science, 30 May 75, 928—930; Sullivan, NYT, 29 May 75, 10) The new space agency’s symbol was a rounded “e,” for European, on a globe representing earth, with fine lines suggesting both orbit and axis and a white dot representing a satellite in space. (ESRO—ESA Releases 20 May 75, 23 May 75, 2 June 75) 30 May—8 June: The 31st Annual Paris Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport in France. New restrictions on flight demonstrations by high-performance aircraft, imposed by the French government after the 1973 Air Show crash of the Soviet Tu —144 supersonic transport, had placed the show’s emphasis on displays of the latest aerospace hardware and technology from throughout the world. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the general turndown in the economy throughout the western world had caused a decline of 20% in exhibitors from the 1973 show. France emphasized the cooperative nature of its major programs, displaying the French—British Concorde SST, the French—German Alpha Jet trainer-attack aircraft, the French—British Jaguar close-air support aircraft, and the multinational A—300B twin-engine wide-body transport. The U.S. pavilion reflected the changing environment at the show, reserving 66% of its floor space for company exhibits restricted to industry visitors; the remaining 33% contained exhibits open to the general public. In 1973 60% was exhibitor space and 40% for the general public. Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. displayed aircraft that were potential replacements for the Boeing 707 and McDonnell DC— 8 on commercial airlines. The Boeing aircraft, a three-engine member of the 7X7 family, incorporated the NASA-developed supercritical wing. “Blue Planet” was the theme of the public section of the U.S. pavilion which emphasized technological fallout and practical uses on earth of space technology. Included were full-scale models of the Viking spacecraft scheduled for launch to Mars later in the year, and of Martin Marietta Corp.’s large space telescope. The 80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s capability in avionics and equipment and aerospace technology. Among the new aircraft exhibited by the British were the BN2 Islander, a floating aircraft for service between islands; the Lock-spieser LDA— 1, for cargo and agricultural uses; and a new version of the BAC 111 fighter aircraft. West Germany’s display stressed its participation in international consortiums as a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt— Boelkow—Blohm GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of its revenues in 1974 had been derived from multinational projects. (Av Wk, 2 June 75, 14-20; 9 June 75, 12-17)
Technology will be available for manned flights well before the year 2000, allowing even better research of the planet’s [Mars’] composition,” Dr. George Sands, associate Viking Project scientist at Langley Research Center, stated in an interview with the Newport News Times Herald. “The Viking missions [scheduled for August launch] are just the prelude of things to come.” Dr. Sands continued, “The results of [the] probe to Mars this month will be very significant for the future of planetary exploration and additional trips to Mars.” (Biggins, Times Herald, 4 Aug 75)
The Federal Council for Science and Technology, a committee of officials representing major research and development agencies, released “Report on the Federal R&D Program—FY 1976,” a summary of 17 R&D agencies’ efforts in applying science and technology to national issues. The report stated that the FY 1976 budget included $21 billion for R&D programs, a 15% increase over the FY 1975 R&D budget of $18.8 billion. Of this, approximately $7.4 billion was planned for civilian programs including energy, health, education, agriculture, environment, urban problems, and transportation. Approximately one-fourth the civilian R&D budget was planned for energy, with the largest share of that—$1.55 million—going to the Energy Research and Development Administration. Nine other government agencies would receive increases in R&D budgets, with NASA’s FY 1976 budget estimate increasing to $3,539 billion, up from $3,231 billion in FY 1975, an increase of more than $300 million. Space R&D would continue with projects to explore Mars, Venus, and outer planets, as well as the sun. Satellites would continue to be used for earth resources assessment, weather prediction, and surveys of potential geothermal energy sources. The Federal Aviation Administration would receive increases for air traffic safety, and Dept, of Defense increases would support development of the B—1 manned strategic aircraft, Trident missile systems, and Navy and Air Force air combat fighters. (Text; OMB, Budget of the U.S. Govt., FY 1976)
Viking 2 was successfully launched at 2:39 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range on a Titan-Centaur launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered on a trajectory toward Mars accurate to within the 3-sigma tolerance. If flown without midcourse correction, Viking 2 would reach Martian orbit 279 259 km from the target. The launch had been rescheduled from 1 Sept., after the launch crew during a 28 Aug. precountdown test discovered a degradation in the detection threshold of the orbiter’s S-band radio receiver. On 1 Sept., project officials decided to remove the spacecraft from the launch vehicle for additional evaluation. The launch was rescheduled for 9 Sept, after evaluation concluded that the anomaly had been caused by a faulty connector or conductor between the diplexer module and the high-gain antenna. Since the faulty part could not be isolated, the antenna and cabling were replaced, the orbiter and lander retested, encapsulated, and mated to the launch vehicle. After launch, all onboard systems and experiments were checked out. A trajectory correction maneuver on 19 Aug. targeted Viking 2 for a rendezvous with Mars on 7 Aug. 1976. Viking 2 was the second of two identical planetary probes [see 20 Aug.], each consisting of an orbiter and a lander, launched toward Mars in 1975 for rendezvous and orbital and surface exploration in 1976. (NASA MOR S-815-75—01—02, 16 Sept 75; Viking Science Activities rpt no. 89; Mission Operations Status Bulletins 10—14)
Preparations continued at Kennedy Space Center for the launch of two Viking spacecraft to Mars. Lander 1 was mated with its Orbiter on 8 March to test compatibility. The Lander and Orbiter were mated with the Centaur launch vehicle shroud and moved to Launch Complex 41 on 27 March to undergo a flight-events demonstration, Orbiter and Lander precountdown tests, and terminal countdown demonstration with the complete vehicle. During a complete 18-hr plugs-out test of Lander 2 on 13 March, data were transmitted to Jet Propulsion Laboratory to provide training for the Viking flight-control team. (KSC Spaceport News, 6 March 75, 6; 20 March 75, 5) April 1975
