Observations from NASA’s airborne Kuiper observatory by a group of Cornell University scientists reported the first occultation, or eclipse, of a star by a planet observed from above the lower layers of earth’s atmosphere. The occultation was observed from an altitude of 12.4 km over the Atlantic near Bermuda, using the 1 -m telescope to view the passage of Mars between the earth and the star Epsilon in the constellation Gemini. Light from the star passed through the Martian atmosphere before reaching earth; changes in the light after it passed through the planet’s atmosphere would give astronomers new information about the density and composition of that atmosphere, thought to consist of argon rather than water and carbon dioxide which had been frozen into the Martian polar caps. The two unmanned Viking spacecraft scheduled for Mars landing later this year would also measure the argon present in the Mars atmosphere. (NSF Release PR76-36)
Viking 2's lander dug a soil sample from beneath a rock on Mars and delivered it to the biological instrument package. All three experiments received a part of the sample; initial data from two of them—the labeled-release and the pyrolytic-release experiments—were sent to mission control at JPL. The third (gas-exchange) experiment was in a long incubation period that would continue through solar conjunction—a movement of the bodies which would put the sun between Mars and the earth— preventing communication with the Viking landers and orbiters. Conjunction would begin about 10 Nov. and continue through early Dec.; if the landers were revived successfully after the communications gap, more samples would be collected in mid-Jan. Leonard Clark, surface-sampler engineer, foresaw no problem in reactivating the arm mechanisms, adding that they had worked very well, “just the way they did during ground testing on earth before they left the manufacturer.” (Av Wk, 1 Nov 76, 15)
Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO—the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—had been responsible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972 noted IMCO’s interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’s Maritime Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study and recommend a program of experiments and development work that would be necessary to form a new organization. The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety committee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international conference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite system. IMCO’s secretary general was to invite all UN member states and interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agencies and other organizations. The conference set up two working committees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second working group would consider procurement and financial policy. The conference concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council, type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procurement policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters within national jurisdictions. As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organizational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The arrangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed, however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, maritime unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed” organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT. The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of governments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also developed a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31 countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on “the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions. The international conference resumed in London in February 1976 with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agencies and international organizations. Texts of two documents—a convention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)—were adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to a third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory committee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT. The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was attended by delegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia, as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the convention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the conference. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77) As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the NYT. The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking 2 lander, which Martin said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.” Meanwhile, two of Viking 1 ’s three biological instruments repeated their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting that the nutrient was being metabolized) as the first trial had. The photosynthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first sample, however. The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia, nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobiologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life, they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable. {NYT, 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A— 1; WPost, 5 Sept 76, An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled many problems. {NYT, 6 Sept 76, 14) Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept, that what had appeared to be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2 landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic disturbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity. He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less active than the earth.” {W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3) As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S. Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center for the Viking missions managed by LaRC for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21) The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temperatures on the Utopia plains—warmer than at Chryse, where the nights were longer—were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photographs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of 14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or sulfates with other minerals in the soil. (W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
The rate of production of radioactive gas from a Mars sample monitored by an instrument on Viking 1 had “plateaued,” said Dr. Gilbert V. Levin, who designed the instrument, and the slowdown in activity was puzzling from both a biological and a chemical standpoint. A biological response would generally evolve gas for a longer period, whereas the count—if recording a merely chemical reaction—“took place at a very rapid rate initially and then, uncharacteristically, slowed down and took a long time to plateau.” A special team of scientists from several fields was convened to consider all possible nonbiological explanations for the unusual readings from Viking 1, and various laboratories around the U.S. were being enlisted to help test the theories. (ATT, 3 Aug 76, 18; W Star, 3 Aug 76, A-7; 1VSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
An early burst of activity recorded by an instrument aboard Viking 1 on the surface of Mars had begun to slow down, said biologists at JPL who had been startled by the high rate of reaction indicated by the labeled-release experiment. The instrument used a sample of Martian surface, fed with a nutrient of amino acids, sugar, and vitamins, plus a radioactive-carbon tracer that would produce radioactive carbon dioxide if the sample used the nutrient to grow or metabolize. A geiger counter in the instrument had counted as many as 4500 radioactive molecules per minute being released from the sampler over 8 hr, going as high as 8000 per min over the period of a day. Dr. Harold P. Klein of Ames Research Center, head of the Viking biology team, said the origins of the activity were not clear, and scientists were not sure whether “something is metabolizing” or not. It would take a wk to reach any conclusion from these results or those of the other two biology experiments, team members said. (NYT', 1 Aug 76, 1; W Post, 1 Aug 76, 1; 2 Aug 76, C-5; W Star, 2 Aug 76, A—1; WSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
NASA Hq and LaRC announced that A. Thomas Young, former mission director for the Viking project, had been appointed Director for Lunar and Planetary Programs at NASA Hq and would begin his new duties 6 Dec. in the Office of Space Science. Young, who had worked with the Viking project since 1968 and helped develop Mars mission objectives, was most recently the mission operations manager and director of the 750-person Viking flight team at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. In his new job he would manage NASA’s unmanned planetary programs, including Viking, Pioneer, Mariner, and Helios, as well as studies in planetary astronomy, atmospheres, and geology; advanced scientific planning, programming, and technology; extraterrestrial materials research; and flight-program support. (LaRC Release 76-40; NASA Hq special anno., 5 Nov 76)
NASA announced plans for a seventh Lunar Science Conference to be held 15 to 19 March at JSC, bringing together scientists in geology, chemistry, physics, astronomy, engineering, and biology under joint sponsorship of JSC and the Lunar Science Institute of Houston. Discoveries about the moon would be applied to problems of the origin and early history of the solar system, for instance using lunar data to interpret craters and volcanoes photographed on the surfaces of Mercury and Mars. Other papers would discuss meteorites, satellites of Jupiter (about the size of earth’s moon), and use of earth-based telescopes to measure chemical composition of asteroids. Lunar science conferences had been held yearly since 1970, when the first such assembly heard scientific results from the Apollo 11 moon-landing mission. More than 700 scientists from as far away as Australia attended the 1975 conference. (NASA Release 76-25)
Venus—whose dense atmosphere had prevented observation of the surface, except by radar—might be as tectonically active as Mars, and possibly as active as the earth, researchers at JPL’s Goldstone tracking station announced. As reported in Science magazine, new high-resolution maps from 2 different radiotelescopes disclosed the planet’s surface with enough detail to permit a study of its geology. A series of 8 maps taken by the 64-m steerable dish at Goldstone revealed a 1500-km-long trough near Venus’s equator comparable to large earth rift systems such as the East African, giving “strong evidence of exten-sional tectonic activity” on Venus. Evidence of a fault movement seemed to appear in another Goldstone map showing a long arc-shaped mountain range crossed and bowed by another linear feature. A high-resolution image obtained at the Arecibo observatory in P.R. showed a large part of the Venus northern hemisphere including a basin-like feature about 1000 km across with a bright sharp rim; “the shape is wrong” for an impact basin, according to the Arecibo report. The new maps raised as many questions as they answered, Science commented. (Science, 30 Apr 76, 454)
Tests completed in flight on the two Mars-bound Viking spacecraft showed that each had 2 ovens of the organic chemistry experiment in good working order. JPL spokesmen said they were confident the instruments would carry out the investigations planned on the Mars surface later in the year. Earlier data indicated that one oven on each spacecraft might have failed, but investigators would not be certain until the Mars landings, scheduled for early July and Sept. The ovens—3 on each Viking lander—were designed to heat surface samples to 500°C to release organic matter in the soil for analysis by the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer on each lander. (NASA Release 76-43)
Something found by Viking 1 on the surface of Mars behaved as if it were alive, said 6 biologists on the science team at JPL, who nevertheless refused to confirm the presence of life on Mars until results from Viking 2 were in. Viking 2 was on its way to a landing scheduled for 3 Sept, on Utopia Planitia (the Utopian plains) above which the air was found by Viking 1 ’s orbiter to contain 5 to 10 times as much water as that over the Chryse area where Viking 1 landed. A surface sample of Chryse itself dug by a mechanical arm was found to contain a surprising amount of water that boiled off when it was heated by an instrument on the Viking 1 lander. Four other instruments, 3 built to look for life, received samples of the Mars soil: one to look for photosynthesis, the second to look for signs of metabolism, the third to detect “breathing” or “sweating” characteristic of earth-type life forms. All 3 instruments appeared to detect what they were looking for, but the biologists explained the results as an exotic chemistry not connected with biology. Having quoted odds of a million to 1 against finding life on Mars, the biologists now said they could never state with 100% certainty that Viking had found life until they could return a Mars sample to earth, which some were afraid to do: Nobel prizewinner Dr. Joshua K. Leder-berg of Stanford University had told associates that Martian life forms brought to earth might threaten the 2 million species of life here by competing in unknown ways for food, water, or air needed to survive. (Thomas O’Toole, W Post, 3 Sept 76, A-2)
NASA announced plans to launch a third maritime satellite, Marisat-C, for Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral on a Delta rocket 14 Oct. Marisat 1, launched 19 Feb., was in orbit over the Atlantic Ocean at 15°W; Marisat 2, launched 9 June, was in orbit over the mid-Pacific at 176.5°. The two Marisats currently provided communications services to the U.S. Navy as well as fulltime commercial voice and data communications to the maritime industry; Marisat-C, which would be in synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean, would be used initially only by the Navy, which planned to lease UHF capacity it found to be surplus, Comsat General would reimburse NASA for the cost of launch vehicle, launch, and other administrative expenses, and would supply all ground-station support. (NASA Release 76-156) 18-20 Sc jo (ember: The Viking 2 lander signaled to mission scientists at JPL that its sample-collecting arm was working and had moved toward the x-ray instrument that would analyze the mineral content of the Mars soil. If the collector had delivered its sample and the analysis was proceeding, the signal expected on the next relay would confirm that the arm was available for further sampling. The mission scientists said they planned to instruct the arm to turn over a rock on the surface and take a sample haler prise - Sparc Shuttle Orbiler 101—on public display for the first time at Rockwell's Palmdale, Calif., facility, 17 Sept. 1981. (NASA 70-H-854) from the underlying soil that had not been exposed to lethal ultraviolet rays. Geologists had characterized the appearance of nearby soil structure as resembling “caliche,” a calcium carbonate crust formed on earth surfaces by evaporation of water that deposited mineral salts on the soil particles and cemented them together. The cementing action might increase the difficulty of dislodging a rock with the lander arm, but scientists noted the ease with which the arm had taken the first sample. As the content of that first Viking 2 sample so closely resembled that from the Viking 1, scientists wanted to try for a sample with different properties, especially some trace of carbon-based chemicals that would indicate life processes. The caliche sample would be taken 25 Sept, and the attempt to move a rock would be made 8 Oct., a 3-hr strategy meeting decided 20 Sept. Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said the x-ray instrument had never received its sample for analysis, so a sample for it would be dug 3 Oct. An editorial in the New York Times asked whether, in the absence of carbon compounds, the mission scientists should consider the possibility of Martian life based on some chemical other than carbon. (Mission Status Bulletin 42; ATT, 19 Sept 76, 29; 20 Sept 76, 32; W Post, 19 Sept 76, A12; 20 Sept 76, A-5; W Star, 19 Sept 76, A-2)
Nine sites for the world’s first solar electric-power plant had been proposed by utility companies and government units in the U.S. in response to a request in July 1976, the Energy Research and Development Administration announced. Sites suggested were in Arizona, California, Florida, Mississippi, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, and Texas. The agency planned to complete an evaluation and negotiate a contract with the selected proposer early in 1977; the selected proposer would become a partner with ERDA in constructing and operating a plant to generate electric power from high-pressure steam produced by concentrated power from the sun. Power from this pilot plant would be distributed by the utility to its customers; the plant would produce 10 Mw (10 000 kw) under optimum full-sun conditions, enough to supply a community of 10 000 population. Construction of the plant would begin in 1978 and reach completion in 1980, at an estimated cost of $ 100 million. (ERDA Release 76-294) The Viking 2 lander’s pyrolytic-release instrument, which had been directed to look for evidence of photosynthesis activity in a dry Mars soil sample in the dark to avoid ambiguity, had returned an ambiguous reading, said Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of the Calif. Inst, of Technology, who designed the instrument. The count of radioactive molecules released during the analysis was 21 per minute, far less than the 96 per minute counted in the first similar assay by the Viking 1 lander, but more than the 15 counts per minute the instrument would show in the absence of photosynthesis. The puzzled scientists planned another sampling, this time with a moistened sample under a sun simulator, which had been omitted from the first run to prevent overheating the Viking 2 instrument, working in a location warmer than the Chryse area tested by Viking 1. Although neither of the Viking landers had turned up more than a suggestion of life, Viking 2 had confirmed the presence of water on Mars, and more than had been expected, project scientists announced at a JPL news conference 22 Sept. The permanent northern polar cap was found to be composed entirely of frozen water, not of frozen carbon dioxide as had been thought. A thin layer of dry ice covering the polar caps during most of the Martian year had suggested that both caps consisted of frozen carbon dioxide. Two Viking 2 orbiter measurements that led to the discovery were the unusually high water-vapor content in the atmosphere over the northern pole, and the average-surface-temperature readings on the icecap, which were too warm for frozen carbon dioxide to exist. Dr. Hugh Kieffer of UCLA predicted that a survey of the south polar cap would find it also made entirely of water ice. The new evidence suggested that, when first formed, Mars might have had twice as much water as the earth had at a similar period in its development; even now, scientists described Mars as “a planet-size iceberg.” Other Viking instruments had detected traces of krypton and xenon in the Mars atmosphere. This discovery was the first clue that the planet once had a considerably denser atmosphere that could have supported liquid water and even rainfall. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief Viking scientist, said that the krypton finding was a “major marker” that would permit deductions about the origin of the Mars atmosphere. On Saturday, 25 Sept., mission scientists at JPL were “relieved” to see photographs transmitted by Viking 2 showing that the lander had followed an order radioed from earth to dig a trench and dump the soil sample into the organic analyzer to screen it for 2 wk in a search for microorganisms. (Mission Status Bulletin 44; NYT, 21 Sept 76, 18; 26 Sept 76, 5; W Post, 23 Sept 76, A-2; 24 Sept 76, A-2; 26 Sept 76, A-6; W Star, 23 Sept 76, A-3; 26 Sept 76, A-14)
The U.S. Navy launched an experimental ocean-surveillance satellite—part of the Whitecloud system developed by the Naval Research Laboratory—on 30 April from Vandenberg AFB aboard an Atlas launch vehicle, reported Defense/Space Business Daily. The satellite was in a near-circular orbit of 1122-km apogee, 1100-km perigee, inclined 63.5°, with a period of 107.5 min. (SBD, 20 May 76, 21) NASA Hq conducted a news conference on the Viking mission to Mars, with Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science; Robert Kraemer, director of planetary programs; Walter Jakobowski, Viking program manager; James Martin, Jr., Viking project manager; and Dr. Gerald S. Soffen, Viking project scientist, to review the mission and answer questions. Dr. Anthony Calio, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science, opened the session by recalling the work done on Viking over the past 7 yr that would culminate in Viking’s reaching Mars within the next few weeks. The U.S. for the first time would be operating 4 spacecraft simultaneously, 2 in orbit and 2 on the planet’s surface. Kraemer mentioned Galileo’s sighting of Mars in 1609, the detection of “eanali” on the planet’s surface by Schiaparelli and others in the 1800s, and Percival Lowell’s founding of the Lowell Observatory in 1894 followed by his publication of reports on “Mars and Its Canals” and “Mars as the Abode of Life.” Edgar Rice Burroughs, author of the Tarzan stories and “grandfather of science fiction writers,” began writing stories about civilization on Mars that had kept the public “waiting ever since to get down to the surface and see what is there.” Although, as Kraemer pointed out, 4 Mariner missions had shown that civilization did not actually exist on Mars, nothing had ruled out the existence of life, and that was a purpose of the Viking mission. Jakobowski reviewed the history of Voyager, Surveyor, and Viking, especially the 1971 Mariner flyby that revealed Mars as a dynamic planet. Martin, Viking project manager at Langley Research Center, said the 2 Viking spacecraft had been flying for a long time and had turned in “exceptionally good” performance; this would be the first mission to use optical navigation to confirm radio-tracking data, and the first set of results had shown the spacecraft to be “right on course.” Martin added that—as an expression of confidence in his team—a quiet period had been declared the coming week when most of the flight team would be on vacation; “the team needs that time off to get ready for a pretty active and hectic summer,” he said. A.T. (Tom) Young, Viking mission director at LaRC, showed slides of mission operations and possible landing sites, reviewing the reasons for site selection and what NASA hoped to learn in both scientific and engineering areas, concluding with a summary of expected activities during the first 20 days on Mars. Viking-mission audio from JPL would be available starting about 15 June. Dr. Soffen noted that the scientific questions about Mars covered more than the presence of life there, which was only one of 13 investigations to be conducted by Viking, and suggested that the press representatives “ought to prepare yourselves from an educational point of view about all the experiments other than just the biology.” The first question raised by the press was on the indicators of a safe landing; Martin replied that there would be 5—telemetry from a footpad switch; startup of the lander computer, accompanied by turnoff of the descent-engine heaters; drop on equipment-power bus with shutoff of entry equipment; and switch in data rate from the orbiter-to-lander 4-kilobit rate to a 16-kb rate for sending pictures to the orbiter. A question about turning on the backup lander computer got a detailed response involving detectors and switches in a complex procedure that occur when “the second computer hollers for help,” as Young put it. Other questions concerned dust storms, camera resolution, and chances of success; Soffen concluded by noting “if we knew the answers, we wouldn’t have to do this mission.” (Text, 20 May 76; NASA Releases 76-90, 76-98)
Eight nations located on the equator had claimed sovereignty over the orbital locations of space satellites stationed above their territory, the Washington Star reported. The foreign ministry of Colombia listed the nations as Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Zaire, and Indonesia. (WStar, 11 Dec 76, A-4) , of the formation after an airlift to the site from the McMurdo Sound station. The body of rock in the Pensacola Mts., first reached by explorers in 1957 and first studied in the 1965-66 season, was a layered structure produced by eruptions from earth’s interior and “strikingly similar” to productive formations elsewhere in the world, such as the Bushveld complex of S. Africa, the Stillwater formation of Montana, and the Sudbury region of Ontario. A Soviet party in the Shackleton Range to the northeast, a similar area, reported findings which the leader of the USGS group, Dr. Arthur B. Ford, hoped to visit by air. Dr. Edward S. Grew of UCLA, who had spent the Antarctic winter at the Soviet Molodezhnaya base, had been working with the Russians from a temporary camp in the Lambert Glacier, near which “a mountain of iron” was reported recently. Meanwhile, a Natl. Science Foundation project that aimed at drilling a hole through the Ross Ice Shelf was proceeding with the participation of 10 nations, seeking to explore the depths below the ice for data on the Antarctic bottom water, indirectly responsible for much of the world’s oceanic food, and to learn whether the ice sheet might eventually slip into the sea, raising global sea levels by as much as 10 meters. Countries participating with the U.S. in the Ross Ice Shelf Project (RISP) were Australia, Britain, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, and West Germany. The NYT commented editorially that the Antarctic continent posed a number of scientific problems still unanswered in the age of space that had seen visits to and returns from the moon; close photographs of the moon and planets; and regular reports by man-made instruments on the surfaces of Mars and Venus. The RISP—an example of “continued, steady, quiet international cooperation” in Antarctic research—was “one of the great success stories of the post-1945 world,” encountering temporary setbacks that would be overcome in time as were those of the space program, the NYT added. {NYT, 12 Dec 76, 1-1; 19 Dec 76, 26; 20 Dec 76, A-22)
President Ford proclaimed 20 July as “Space Exploration Day” to coincide with the date 7 yr ago when U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to set foot on the moon. NASA’s Viking 1 lander was expected to touch down on the surface of Mars about 8 am 20 July,, reported nationally on network television; transmission of the first picture from the lander should be completed before 9 am. In his proclamation, the President said, “We begin our third century with ... the most ambitious of all deep space explorations . . . Wherever we reach, we will have come in peace for all mankind.” In an accompanying statement to NASA employees, Administrator James C. Fletcher said “the President has in effect commended all of you who work (for) the national space agency.” (Text; NASA Release 76-133; Fletcher anno, 20 July 76) First panoramic view of Mars surface from Viking 1, 20 July 1976: upper half of picture is Left half of view, lower photo joins it on the right. Upper view shows housing for Viking sampler arm; lower view shows (at right) high-gain antenna for direct communication with earth. (NASA 7§-H~557)
Radio links with the Viking landers on Mars were reestablished, ending a month of silent hibernation during which communications had been blocked by the passage of the sun between Mars and earth. Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena sent a “wake-up call” to the robot laboratories on Mars that had been collecting a month’s supply of data during the blackout period; these data, to be played back beginning 20 Dec., would include images of the area around the two landers, inorganic chemical analysis, additional biology data, and any records to support the (thus far unsuccessful) search for marsquakes, using the seismometer on the Viking 2 lander. Resumption of activity would begin Viking’s 18-mo “extended mission,” which would provide more images of the Mars surface and polar regions, as well as measurements of water vapor and temperature, some at twice the resolution of previous observations; process more samples of the surface for life-detection tests and inorganic chemical analysis; photograph Deimos and Phobos, the moons of Mars; and monitor daily and seasonal weather changes, origins of planetwide dust storms, and any seismic activity that might occur. As Mars entered its closest approach to the sun in the spring of 1977, scientists would be watching for signs of the dust storms thought to be triggered by perihelion; when Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in 1971, the entire planet was engulfed in the greatest dust storms in the history of Mars observations and surveys from orbit were limited for several months. Such storms could endanger the Vikings on the surface of Mars, besides impeding the view from orbit. (W Post, 15 Dec 76, 2; NASA Release 76-208; W Star, 16 Dec 76, A-7; NYT, 21 Dec 76, 21)
A 2-yr comparative study of data on dust storms on Mars and earth revealed that Martian dust storms were much like severe ones on earth, “only more so,” the Jet Propulsion Lab. announced. JPL investigator Peter M. Woiceshyn used Lowell Observatory data to conclude that a wall of dust more than 50 km high swept down the slopes of the Hellas area on Mars in July 1971 at speeds greater than 480 km per hr. Mariner 9 occultation data verified that winds of extreme velocity would be required to raise surface dust in the low atmospheric pressure of Mars, where the air density was only 1/100th that on earth. When Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in Nov. 1971, another dust storm had been raging for several weeks, and dust-cloud tops were estimated to be 50 to 70 km above the surface. The JPL report said the two 1971 storms and another detected by astronomers in 1956 began in the same location on the slopes of Hellas, triggered by a cold jet stream from the Martian north pole funneling down a long valley across the planet’s equator. Similar storms on earth in Russia, in Iran, and on the U.S. plains east of the Rockies caused great damage from soil erosion, similar to that on Mars revealed by Mariner 9. More storm data from Mars would be sought by the Viking spacecraft scheduled to land there in July and Sept. 76. (JPL release 13 Apr 76)
Moon rocks—prime celebrities 5 yr ago—had become has-beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astronauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg of lunar material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments returned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 51 U.S. governors; chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is. had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said, although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwindled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved. Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and 2, Sterba wrote. (ATT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
Enticing hints but no firm answers” to the question of life on Mars were the product of an increasing volume of scientific data from the Viking 1 lander; “practically faultless operation” for more than 5 wk had produced enough information to keep the Viking scientists busy, especially the data from the 3 bioexperiments and a related molecular analysis of Martian soil. Results were “certainly not what would be expected” if earth-type organisms were present, but they were not explainable in terms of “simple” nonbiological chemistry, said Nature magazine. The labeled-release (LR) instrument added a small amount of water containing nutrients “labeled” with carbon 14 to its Mars sample, and incubated it at 15°C, warmer than the surface temperature of Mars. “Totally unexpected” was a massive and rapid release of radioactivity into the gas phase—presumably carbon monoxide or dioxide—and the radioactive count reached 4500 in 10 hr, leveling off at about 8500 in 48 hr. A second dose of radioactive nutrient produced an initial burst followed by a drop in radioactivity, and the graph “almost” flattened out for the remaining 4 days of the experiment; however, scientists were surprised to discover a possible trend to very slowly accelerating release of radioactivity. “Unfortunately,” said Nature, “the experiment (was) stopped for performance of a control test...” A repetition of this experiment later would extend incubation over wk or mo rather than days; “results certainly do not look like anything one would expect” from an earth sample in the same situation. Most popular explanation for the initial burst of activity was oxidation of the labeled nutrients. The gas-exchange (GE) experiment used gas chromatography to monitor a Mars sample wetted with a “soup” of nutrients to detect any changes in the instrument’s content of gas. First dampening of the sample produced “a remarkable burst of oxygen” that leveled off after several hr but remained stable for days. The experiment would continue “for some time,” to see if further changes occurred. Viking scientists were trying to duplicate results of the LR and GE experiments in earth laboratories using simple catalysts and oxidizing agents. The pyrolytic-release (PR) experiment, most technologically complex, proved “least equivocal when it comes to interpretation” of the results, Nature reported. A Mars sample incubated in a “Martian atmosphere,” with added water vapor and irradiation from a xenon lamp to simulate solar radiation, was heated to 625°C to drive off and account for unreacted carbon monoxide and dioxide and to pyrolyze any organic compounds trapped as vapor. The vapor trap, heated to 700°C, would release and oxidize any remaining organic compounds. A sterile sample should provide a peak ratio of about 500 to 1; the results from the Mars sample were about 75 to 1, “several times more active” than non-sterilized soil from the dry valleys of Antarctica. Results from the control experiment with heat-sterilized soil would be “crucial” because a high peak ratio would indicate that biological, rather than chemical, processes were going on in the soil that could fix atmospheric carbon monoxide or dioxide in the presence of light. If life were present on Mars, science would expect a high peak ratio from a surface sample strongly illuminated in atmosphere of about 90% carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, the initial run of the organic-chemistry analysis was spoiled by a failure of the surface-sampling arm to deliver a full load to the gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer. A further analysis would be performed on a full load obtained subsequently. Lack of detectable organic compounds in this sample would further complicate interpretation of the 3 biology experiments. (Av Wk, 30 Aug 76, 22; Nature, 26 Aug 76, 734)
Johnson Space Center employees Herbert A. Zook and Richard W. High received a patent this week for invention of a “capture cell,” a device to capture meteoroids traveling through space and preserve them for scientific analysis. The cube-shaped cell had an open side covered by a thin membrane; a meteoroid striking the membrane would enter the cell and shatter, but the remnants and any vapor created by the heat of impact would remain inside the cell, which was constructed of a material like polyethylene. Large arrays of the cells would be exposed on a spacecraft for a long time, up to a year, to allow time for a number of strikes to occur. Interest in the composition of meteoroids springs from the possible information on larger bodies such as comets or asteroids on which they originated. (NYT, 31 July 76, 27) Daring July: Scientists at JPL completed a list of “purple pigeons”—bright birds of the future—as unmanned planetary missions considered feasible for the period 1980-1990. In hopes that Viking l’s successful landing on Mars might prompt wider support for such missions, JPL proposed 7 advanced missions that would probably be reduced to 3 or 4 to be forwarded to NASA Hq. The list includes: return to Mars with rover vehicles to extend exploration of the Martian surface; a lander for one of Jupiter’s moons, accompanied by a satellite around the planet; a similar mission to Saturn and its moon Titan; asteroid rendezvous and near-range photographic mission; a radar-mapper satellite for Venus; flight to Halley’s Comet with a solar-sailer satellite (propelled by solar radiation); and establishment of an automated station on the moon for extended study of the lunar environment, probably by an international scientific group. (Av Wk, 26 July 76, 16)
The Tass news agency reported the soft landing of “the automatic interplanetary station” Viking 1 on the surface of Mars, adding that the first pictures of the surface showed “a foot-pad of the craft on . . . dust-covered terrain strewn with small sharp stones . . . According to the preliminary assessments, the ground consists of basalt rocks and volcanic lava. It is believed to be comparatively soft.” Tass noted the postponement of the Viking landing, originally scheduled for 4 July, and the search for bacterial life on Mars which was “one of the aims of this exploration.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 July 76)
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
The $100 million spent by the U.S. on a search for life on Mars had produced only disagreement over the findings, Viking project scientists said at a JPL press conference. Four of six Viking scientists said they did not know whether life existed on Mars; one denied that Viking had found life; the sixth said he felt Viking had found “primitive microbes” in the Mars soil samples. All six agreed that Viking had found nothing at either the Chryse or the Utopia landing site representing fossils that would have confirmed a previous existence of life on Mars, Washington Post writer Thomas O’Toole reported. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, who designed the instrument to look for dead organic matter, noted that nothing had been detected, and explained readouts from other instruments as the result of an exotic chemistry catalyzed by some superoxidant in the surface of Mars and activated by solar ultraviolet rays that penetrated the Mars atmosphere all the way to the surface. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. disagreed, saying that the failure to find dead organisms did not outweigh the activity detected by the biology instruments, which produced readings at a lower temperature and lost them when the sample was heated. This result “smells more like biology than any chemistry I can think of,” Sagan added. Vance Oyama of ARC favored a chemical explanation; Dr. Gilbert V. Levin of Biospherics said he leaned toward a biological explanation. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of Calif. Inst, of Technology, who designed the photosynthesis experiment, favored the biology explanation but regretted the absence of fossils. Dr. Harold P. Klein of ARC said the Viking results “do not rigorously prove there is life on Mars, nor do they rigorously disprove it.” New York Times reporter John Noble Wilford described the failure to detect on Mars the organic compounds essential to life processes on earth as “a major surprise,” causing most of the confusion over interpretations of the data; a NYT editorial noted that the Mars findings had forced a new look at theories about the origins of life on earth, which “seems neither so certain nor so inevitable as it did before the Viking landings . . .” (IV Post, 10 Nov 76, A-9; NYT, 10 Nov 76, A— 16; 18 Nov 76, 42)
Viking 2 apparently touched down at about 6:39 EDT in a field of windswept sand dunes on the Utopian plains of Mars at the edge of its northern polar cap, after a communications breakdown that left JPL scientists without contact during the last 3 hr of the spacecraft’s journey of more than 650 million km through space. The stabilization system on the orbiter, which served as a relay link between the lander and the deep space tracking network on earth, lost power 26 sec after separation of the lander at 3:40 pm EDT, and the high-power antenna on the orbiter no longer pointed at the earth. The blackout lasted nearly an hr, while mission personnel tried to reestablish communications. A low-power transmitter on the orbiter, installed to provide limited 2-way communications with earth, finally sent engineering data at 6:59 pm indicating that the lander had touched down. Lander signals were strong for 17 min until the orbiting relay link passed out of range. First pictures from the lander would be relayed about 3 am EDT on 4 Sept, as the first step in a “recovery plan” to put the experiments and systems back on schedule. All pictures and data taken by the lander were being stored on tape in the orbiter for later playback. Except for the orbiter malfunction, the pictures would have been available within 2 hr of the touchdown. The landing date of Viking 1, originally 4 July, had been postponed for 2 wk in order to ensure a safe site; the spot for Viking 2 was chosen because indications of frost or fog in the area made it likely to encourage the presence of life, scientists said. Results from Viking 1 suggested either that chemical processes never observed in earth laboratories occurred on Mars, or that life forms existed on Mars that were unknown on earth. Life search by Viking 2 would not begin for a wk; the 2 landing craft were about 7400 km apart on the surface of Mars, Viking 1 at Chryse near the equator (at a latitude comparable to that of Mexico City) and Viking 2 in a warmer area (at a latitude comparable to that of Montreal) more than 1600 km northeast of the Viking 1 site. (IVStar, 4 Sept 76, A— 1; B Sun, 4 Sept 76, A-l; ATT, 4 Sept 76, 1; WPost, 4 Sept 76, A-l)
As Viking 2’s lander was preparing for its scoop-and-analyze sequence on the rocky Utopia site of Mars, the Viking 1 orbiter fired its engines to shift orbit around the planet in 40° longitude jumps each day for 9 days before taking over the relay of communications from the Viking 2 lander. Viking 2's orbiter would then begin a polar-orbital scan of Mars to search for traces of organic materials—carbon-based molecules found in all life forms on earth—not yet detected by Viking 1 experiments. Viking 1 ’s lander would remain in standby mode after its weeks of testing at the Chryse site. Project scientist Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, commenting on the confusing results of the Viking 1 experiments (which hinted at the existence of life but offered no evidence of organic chemicals), said he had been prepared for the discovery of organic chemicals without life, but the suggestion of Martian life without organics was totally unexpected. Just after 6 a.m. EDT on 12 Sept., the 3-meter arm of Viking 2 dug its first sample of Mars soil and dropped it into the hopper leading to three biology instruments. First cycle of the pyrolytic-release experiment began when the soil reached the test chamber, to be incubated in a carbon monoxide-carbon dioxide atmosphere containing a radioactive tracer; after 5 days, the atmosphere would be flushed out and the soil sample heated to vaporize any organic material. A detector would measure the radioactive carbon that had been ingested by any organisms. The gas-exchange detector—looking for signs of photosynthesis in the dark— would reveal the presence of organisms that might exhale gases Such as oxygen or carbon dioxide through the night as well as in the daytime. (The first results of the same experiment on Viking 1 at Chryse had showed the soil was releasing six times as much gas as it would have in the absence of photosynthesis; a second trial had produced a signal a third as strong as the first, but still twice what it would have been if no photosynthesis were going on. Neither the readings nor their differences had been explained to everyone’s satisfaction.) The third biological instrument—the labeled-release experiment—would add a nutrient liquid to the test chamber on Tuesday and monitor over 10 days the release of radioactive tracer from any metabolized nutrient. A second soil sample would be used beginning Monday, 13 Sept., for an organic-chemistry analysis to detect carbon molecules, and for an x-ray fluorescence experiment to learn the composition of inorganic chemicals in the Mars soil. Scientists believed chances of finding definite traces of life would be better at Utopia, where five times more water had been measured in the air than at Chryse. They also planned to reduce chances of ambiguity in the Utopia readings by conducting the photosynthesis search at night, and by moving a rock to take a sample of Mars soil that was shielded from the killing solar ultraviolet constantly impinging on the planet’s surface and that was deeper than the sample taken at Chryse. (WStar, 12 Sept 76, A-14; W Post, 13 Sept 76, A-5; C Trib, 13 Sept 76, 6-16)
President Ford would name Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of the National Science Foundation for the past 4 yr, to head the recently reestablished White House Office of Science and Technology, the New York Times reported. The post had been abolished by President Nixon 3 yr ago “amid reports that he did not like the advice he was getting from it, particularly concerning antiballistic missiles and supersonic planes,” the Times said. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine had reported earlier that 4 conservative Republican senators had warned President Ford that Stever’s nomination would be an “affront” to Congress; the NSF had been a target of some congressmen because of funding projects that Congress considered questionable, Av Wk said. Other candidates for the position had shied away because of a possible change in administration after the forthcoming elections. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) urged quick action on the nomination; the Senate Appropriations Committee had just cut $1 million from a $3.3-million budget estimate for the Office of Science and Technology. (NYT, 22 July 76, 37; Av Wk, 5 July 76, 13) with pleasure at the accomplishment,” when “it was commercial time . . . and the 9 a.m. programs.” Viewers were “left wondering whether there was really an event of such magnitude being televised or more science fiction,” the Star commented. (WStar, 21 July 76, B-l) Commentary on the Viking landing on Mars: The Chicago Tribune hailed the mission as “an epoch-making success . . . The achievement is the greater because the world has known from the beginning what we were attempting to do. There would have been no way to hide a failure.” (C Trib, 21 July 76, 1-7) The Phila. Inquirer called the landing “another giant leap for mankind” that “underscores the sophistication of unmanned spacecraft . . . Risks can be taken . . . that could not be justified with persons aboard ... Its performance in the first hours on Mars speaks more eloquently than words.” (P Inq, 21 July 76, 5-A) The NY Times said the TV networks were criticized for their coverage; Dr. J. Richard Keefe, former NASA scientist now at the Univ. of Louisville, said the coverage was “downright disgusting . . . Talk about being blase about space exploration, this was just incredible ... I think the population has become apathetic about the whole space program. It’s kind of sad, I think.” Spokesmen for the network told the Times they had given 20 to 25 min of coverage, showing the 2 pictures transmitted by Viking 1 and released by JPL where the transmission was received. NBC said its New York City switchboard had about 30 calls asking for more; ABC reported 25, and CBS reported 8 or 10. ABC said the number of calls was significant “for the time of day.” “What they may not have understood was that we showed whatever we had,” the spokesman said. “That was it.” (NYT, 21 July 76, 12) The Wall Street Journal said in an editorial that it could not “speculate with any confidence on why yesterday’s Viking / landing on Mars was important. And yet we are confident that it was.” The TV networks that “spent tedious hours broadcasting the dullest political convention on record” a wk ago “were preoccupied with game shows” while Viking was sending back its first pictures of the surface of another planet. However, those who said the $1 billion cost of the project was wasted unless Viking’s cameras pick up “ something interesting, like a local resident,” would be missing the point, WSJ added. The project demonstrated application of the most advanced technology to a single objective, advanced managerial skills as “a triumph of human organization,” and left mankind with the psychic effects of the visit to another planet. “ . . . After each leap deeper into space, nothing is quite the same again.” (WSJ, 21 July 76, 22) A Washington Star editorial said that Viking 1 may have “ended generations of fanciful imaginings” about life on Mars, and asked if it was worth 7 yr of effort and $1 billion “to get a rather sobering view of what our imaginations told us was a fascinating planet.” Although it was much too early to predict the “ultimate scientific harvest,” the Star said “we have no doubt that the ultimate payoff will be more than adequate in scientific if not in fictional terms.” (W Star, 22 July 76, A-14) The first color photograph of Mars, showing a dramatic blue sky against a rust-red soil surface, was in error, Viking project scientists announced. Astronomer Carl Sagan said that someone had given the wrong weighting to the color filters in reconstructing the electronic image on earth, and that corrected photos would show a pinker sky. The seismometer on the Viking lander had apparently jammed and would impair detection of “marsquakes” unless corrected; Lou Kingsland, deputy mission director, said the proper command might not have been issued or the problem might be in the electrical circuits. {WStar, 22 July 76, A—1) Having successfully set down the Viking 1 lander in a safe spot, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., announced that Viking 2 would be sent to a region likely to be more scientifically interesting even with less assurance of safe touchdown. Cydonia, a region halfway between the Mars equator and north pole, was considered because of a greater likelihood of water, required for the presence of life as we know it. Viking project scientists said they were eager to survey a site as different physically from the desert Chryse site as possible. Viking 2, still more than 1.6 million km from Mars, would arrive in orbit there early in Aug. and land about 4 Sept, if all went well. Debate on the second landing site focused on possible hazards in the northern region, out of range of the radar signals that led to choice of the first site. Astronomer Carl Sagan said the first landing was “reasonably lucky,” with chances of success calculated at only 60%, and the northern site would be less promising. However, he and the other scientists voted overwhelmingly for Cydonia because, as Sagan said, “it is not only the probability of success but the significance of success” that merited consideration. (WStar, 22 July 76, A-6) Asked about the role of luck in the successful Viking 1 landing on Mars, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., replied, “I don’t plan on luck .... I believe that most of what you call luck you make yourself. It’s people doing that extra job ...” Martin’s management approach during his 8 yr with the Viking project had been to “get into the details of everything .... I’ve never known any other way to be successful .... It inspires and motivates the next level of management to get involved.” (ATT, 22 July 76, 24) The “most electrifying new information” received from Mars since the Viking 1 landing was that the Martian atmosphere contained 3% nitrogen, an element essential to life as we know it, said the NY Times. Until this week, the absence of nitrogen on Mars had been the most compelling argument against existence of life “in any form” on Mars; now this argument had been removed. (ATT, 22 July 76, 30) JPL scientists were still hedging on the color of the Martian sky, after announcing that photographs released earlier showing a blue sky might have been processed wrongly. Astronomer Carl Sagan noted that the “boos given to (the) announcement about a pink sky reflect our wish for Mars to be just like the earth.” Dr. Thomas Mutch, leader of the Viking imaging team, said computer verification of the filtered signals for color reconstruction could take another wk or two. (WStar, 23 July 76, A-l) Viking Mission Director A. Thomas Young told a news conference that the problem with the lander’s soil-sampling arm was probably an error in the computer command that failed to drop a locking pin near the arm’s “wrist.” A new set of commands to extend the arm further and free the pin would be sent 24 or 25 July. The arm would scoop up soil and drop it in a hopper on the spacecraft that would distribute it to 3 biology experiments aimed at detecting signs of life on the planet. Other scoops would be used for chemical analysis. (ATT, 24 July 76, 1) Besides the trouble with its soil sampler, the Viking 1 lander was having radio problems, said Project Manager Martin. One of two receivers getting direct communications from earth was not working properly, and the radio for relaying data from the lander to its orbiter was operating in a low-power mode. Also, the instrument for detecting “mars-quakes” had not been released from its “caged” position on the lander despite repeated commands. A special scientific team was checking to see if all the problems were related, perhaps in the computer signals to the electrical circuitry. ( W Star, 23 July 76, A-3) Mars was a very much richer and larger planet than the airless and waterless moon, said a NY Times editorial, with a firm surface and virtually every essential required for life. Barring the catastrophe of a nuclear war, Mars could be sustaining a human population “by the time of this nation’s Tricentennial,” the paper said. (NYT, 25 July 76, A— 16) “I really do not know what the fuss is all about—landing on Mars, I mean. I landed there 40 years ago,” said Buster Crabbe, who played both Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers in movies of the 1930s. Crabbe, who won the 400-m freestyle swimming gold medal in the 1932 Olympic games, was hired by Paramount Pictures to do a Tarzan film, and wentron to star in space pictures. “People still remember old Flash,” the 68-yr-old Crabbe said. “Here I am still around, no ill effects from my space travel .... I do feel sorry for our space people though, having to go through all the things we did years ago. I don’t think they know what’s in store for them. Just wait till they run into the clay men and the hawk men and the shark men.” (NYT, 25 July 76, E17; Tucson Ariz. Daily Star, 30 July 76, A-19) Viking 1 did not relay any picture of life-sized Martians to earth because it landed in the wrong place, charged columnist Art Buchwald in the Wash. Post. Buchwald reported his friend, a science-fiction buff, as saying the scientists were interested only in finding “a smooth place to set down the camera.” If the/Martians sent a camera to earth, the smoothest place to land it would be the Sahara desert. “If you lived on Mars you wouldn’t pitch a tent on some barren spot where nothing was happening,” argued the friend. “If Viking had landed next to one of their canals, the Martians would have sailed their tall ships up to it and given us the greatest show ever seen on television.” (WPost, 25 July 76, H-l) A series of simple commands from earth freed the mechanical arm on the Viking 1 spacecraft reported to have jammed 22 July. The extendable arm would be able to dig into the Martian soil as planned, and the second Viking spacecraft would be able to land in Cydonia now that the Chryse area could be explored. The Viking was commanded to extend its arm twice as far as previously and to rotate it several times to free a locking pin inserted to protect the arm from vibration during its flight in space and landing on Mars. The command was timed to precede transmission of a spacecraft camera image taken soon after receipt of the command; the boom would not be in the picture if it had not responded to the order to extend itself in front of the camera eye. When the picture came in a half hour later, the mechanical arm was in clear view, and a surface shot clearly showed the locking pin had fallen free. Flight directors had not succeeded in uncaging a seismometer, composed of 3 delicate balancing beams to detect movements in the planet’s crust, that had been wired together for protection from vibrations. Spacecraft computer signals to electrify and burn the wire were not received, and a second command bypassing the computer apparently failed also. Detection of marsquakes might have to depend on Viking 2, scheduled to land in the Cydonia basin about 4 Sept. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) The atmosphere of Mars was once 10 times thicker and richer in gas than it is today, and “we could breathe that atmosphere” if it were richer in oxygen, said Dr. Tobias Owen of the State Univ. of N.Y., a member of the project science team at JPL, where the first samplings by the Viking 1 mass spectrometer were analyzed. Mars’s atmosphere was now 95% carbon dioxide, 2 to 3% nitrogen, 1 to 2% argon, 0.3% oxygen; earth’s atmosphere is 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9% argon-40, and 0.03% carbon dioxide. “Mars is an intermediate planet between the earth and the moon,” said Dr. Owen. “We do not see a hugely abundant biology, but that doesn’t say there’s none at all.” Color pictures of the Martian surface near the Viking lander revealed a soil even redder than in the original picture received last week. Rocks strewn over the desert sands exhibited a red coating laid down years ago when Mars’s atmosphere was richer in oxygen and water, “through oxidation of the iron and hydration of the minerals,” said Viking geologist Alan S. Hinder. “We propose to test the hypothesis by cracking open one of the red rocks ... to see if there is any rust inside.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-l; W Star, 27 July 76, A-3; C Trib, 27 July 76, 5) Viking 1 ’s mechanical arm scooped its first sample of the Mars surface 28 July, leaving a sharp-edged trench clearly visible in a picture transmitted afterward by the unmanned lander. The 3-m arm, a tube about 38 mm in diameter, ended in a sharp-edged scoop that could dig into the surface with a force of about 13 kg if necessary. When the cover snapped shut on the sample, the arm retracted and swiveled to sift the sample into a funnel feeding into the “biology box.” This container, about the size of a large milk carton, encased the 3 experiments designed to detect life. Two other experiments, also located under funnels, were the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to detect organic molecules and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer to identify inorganic materials, Sensors inside the funnels would tell whether the samples were sufficient. The 3 biology experiments were the “pyrolytic release” experiment of Dr. Norman Horowitz, to look for microorganisms that used the sun as a source of energy like photosynthesis on earth to build organic compounds, through exposure of the sample to radioactive carbon dioxide under artificial sunlight; a “labeled release” experiment by Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., to look for signs of microbial metabolism by tracing radioactive organic compounds injected into the Mars sample to see if they were consumed, releasing gaseous wastes that could be detected; and a “gas exchange” experiment by Vance Oyama of NASA’s Ames Research Center to provide a rich variety of foods in a liquid form—“chicken soup”—to the Mars sample and iook for changes in gas composition inside the experiment chamber that would indicate the food was being used. The biology-box samples would incubate for from 5 to 12 days before results were announced, and a positive finding would be confirmed by subsequent control experiments. The science team anticipated a long wait for any kind of answer, as well as the possibility that the answers might be contradictory. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief scientist for Viking, pointed out that results would be difficult to interpret: “you have to put yourself on the level of a microbe,” he added. The microbes might drown in the liquid, ingest the wrong food, or burn up in the warm experiment chambers. (W Star, 28 July, A-l, A-5) One of the five soil-testing experiments on Viking 1 did not receive enough soil to actuate it, project officials announced, and two attempts to start the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer working on a sample apparently failed. Project Manager Martin said the flight engineers were not yet able to determine what went wrong, because the sampling arm apparently worked as planned but the sample never got into the instrument. The motor driving a stirring rod to brush particles through a strainer did not come on, and scientists speculated the sample might still be sitting on the strainer. A photograph of the trench dug to obtain the sample had shown that the soil was surprisingly cohesive, “like wet sand,” according to Princeton Univ. scientist Dr. Robert B. Hargraves. After delivering soil to the experiments in the biology box, the mechanical arm made 2 attempts to dig and deliver a sample to the mass spectrometer but the instrument did not signal receipt of the sample either time. It was not clear, Martin said, whether the arm lost the soil on the swing back or was off the mark when it deposited the soil, or the soil in the hopper never filtered down to the instrument. The arm responded properly to the following command and delivered a spoonful of soil to the x-ray spectrometer with no difficulty. (ATT, 29 July 76, 1; W Post, 29 July 76, A-3; W Star, 29 July 76, A-3; WSJ, 29 July 76, 1) Viking project scientists debated the makeup of the Mars soil sample that might have been too thick to filter into an instrument opening. Dr. Ronald Scott said that, although the material was somewhat cohesive, “certainly something must have gotten through.” Deputy Mission Director Kingsland said the most likely causes of the apparent malfunction were failure of the mechanical scoop to obtain a full sample, or failure of the “level full” indicator in the instrument to signal properly. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, chief of the gas chromatograph experiment, said the arm might have come up empty from the trench after scooping for the biology experiments, and that a repeat attempt next week would take both possible explanations of the problem into account. Kingsland said the material seemed to have a consistency “something like wet clay.” Dr. Scott emphasized that this did not indicate water in the soil. The other instruments seemed to be processing their samples normally, and results from the inorganic-chemistry sampling in the x-ray spectrometer should provide the first assay of Martian soil as early as tomorrow. (ATT, 30 July 76, A-22; WStar, 30 July 76, A-5; CTrib, 31 July 76, 2) The first experimental results from Mars, returned 30 July by Viking 1 ’s lander, showed that the surface consisted of iron, calcium, silicon, titanium, and aluminum, in amounts that would be determined within a few days. The entire surface around the lander was covered with a very thin coating of vivid orange-red iron oxides that gave the plant its red or rusty appearance. “Mars is a painted desert,” said Dr. Gerald Soffen, one of the project scientists. Dr. Priestly Toulmin, leader of the inorganic-chemistry team, noted that Mars soil up to now could be analyzed only by long-distance methods such as light reflections from the surface; Viking had “picked up a piece of Mars and put it into an analytical instrument.” Dr. Benton Clark, also of the inorganic-chemistry team, said that Viking had not detected trace elements like vanadium or molybdenum considered essential for plant growth on earth; this did not mean the elements were not present, nor had elements like arsenic been detected that would make earth soil sterile. The results “do not rule out the possibility of some form of life,” Dr. Clark added. Results from the 3 biology experiments would be transmitted to earth within a few days. (NYT, 31 July 76, A—1)
Alternative “super safe” landing sites for the second Viking spacecraft scheduled to arrive on Mars were being investigated by NASA, Dr. Harold Masursky told the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington. Masursky, an astrogeologist with the U.S. Geological Survey, said the prime landing sites had been carefully selected and should present no problem. However, in case of trouble with the first lander, scheduled to touch down early in July, the second lander now scheduled to descend in a less well known area would proceed to a less challenging site to ensure salvaging the mission. The prime site, in the Chryse region at the mouth of the largest channel system identified on Mars, was of special interest because scientists thought areas with highest probabilities of water would be most likely to harbor life as known by man. The scheduled second landing area, called Cydonia, had the highest recorded atmospheric water content during the season when the Viking would land, but was in an area not accessible by radar from earth and was therefore not as well known. Giant radar telescopes in the U.S. and at Arecibo, P.R., were scanning areas near the Mars equator that would be safer than the prime sites, even if not as scientifically productive. (NYT, 18 Apr 76, 25)
Three products developed by Lewis Research Center had appeared in a list of the 100 most significant products developed during the year, published by Industrial Research magazine, said the Lewis News. The magazine yearly considers about 1000 entries from industries throughout the U.S., and presents the IR-100 award for the products selected by a panel of nationally known technical judges. The 1976 award brings to 16 the number won by LeRC since it entered the competition 11 yr ago. Products cited were: a continuous-production cyclotron target, used in producing radioactive isotopes for diagnostic nuclear medicine; a thickness-measuring radar that could measure lake-ice thickness direcdy beneath an overflying aircraft, used by the Coast Guard to help extend the shipping season on the Great Lakes; and a ceramic thermal-barrier coating that would increase the life of metal parts by protecting them from very high-temperature erosive and corrosive gases, used to prolong the usefulness of turbine blades ten times beyond that of uncoated blades. (Lewis News, 1 Oct 76, 1) A letter to the IVY Times had emphasized that the absence not of carbon but of “the extremely complex molecules of carbon that are characteristic of earth life” was the puzzling factor in the Viking findings at Mars. (ATT, 2 Oct 76, 24) Project scientists had offered three possible explanations for the negative results of the attempts to identify organic compounds. First, any organic compounds left on Mars by the solar wind, by meteor fall, or by past life processes could have been destroyed by agents such as ultraviolet radiation, oxygen, or oxidants such as nitrates or metal oxides acting independently or synergistically; “certainly,” the project report published in the Oct. issue of Science said, “continuous exposure to short-wave ultraviolet light in the presence of oxygen will cause rapid chemical decomposition of most organic compounds.” Second, organic compounds might exist in Mars soil in amounts too dilute to be detected by the Viking instruments. Third, organic compounds might be forming on Mars and undergoing rapid destruction. The traces of organic molecules seen in a second Viking 2 lander chemistry test could well have resulted from contaminants known to have been in the test chamber before the spacecraft left earth, Dr. Biemann said. (ATT, 2 Oct 76, 28) The Viking 2 lander pushed at a rock on the surface of Mars but was unable to move it, JPL scientists reported. The shove was preliminary to an attempt to sample soil shielded from solar radiation and more likely to contain organic material. Dr. Louis Kingsland, deputy mission director, announced the lander would be ordered to try again and to turn over a smaller rock if the first choice failed to move. Dr. Priestley Toulmin, director of the inorganic analysis experiments, said the iron-rich topsoil tested by the Viking 2 lander had a striking resemblance to that tested at the Viking 1 site; results of the assay were almost a duplicate of those sent to earth 2 mo ago. The similarity lead scientists to think the soil had been affected by ancient weather conditions that swept over large portions of the planet; however, the results could not show whether the material below the surface was likewise uniform around the planet, (iWStar, 6 Oct 76, A-5; NYT, 8 Oct 76, A26) The third of three Viking 2 lander tests for dead organic matter in the soil of Mars had shown no sign of fossilized life, Dr. Biemann said at JPL. The last test would use soil exposed by turning oveT a rock on the Mars surface that scientists said might have been undisturbed for as long as a million yr. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of Caltech, who supervised experiments on both Viking 1 and Viking 2 sites that looked for signs of biological activity, said that the results he had obtained “would be convincing for life on Mars if we had found the dead organic matter.” The sample from under the rock would be held for chemical analysis until scientists could examine photographs of the trench where it was dug to make sure the sample was taken from the proper protected place. Another under-rock sample would be dug for biological analysis later, the second Viking 2 test for synthesis of organic matter to be conducted at the Utopia site. (WPost, 12 Oct 76, A-8; NYT, 12 Oct 76, 18) Meanwhile, the seismology instrument on the Viking 2 lander had recorded no marsquake activity in the 2 wk it had been monitoring the planet’s surface, said Dr. Don L. Anderson, seismology team director. The detector, turned up to full sensitivity, could detect a quake as small as a 3 on the Richter scale (enough to cause only slight damage on earth) as far away as 200 km from the lander; Dr. Anderson said it was working well, recording breezes and even picking up vibrations from tape recorders on board the lander. A similar instrument on the Viking 1 lander never was freed from its packaging. (W Star, 15 Oct 76, A-3) The scoop of soil taken from under a rock on the Mars surface also failed to yield a trace of organic molecules, Dr. Biemann announced. However, mission officials planned to go ahead with biological experiments using a sample from under another rock later in the week; the sample would be tested for signs of life processes—growth, metabolism, and respiration. (C Trib, 21 Oct 76, 4-22)
The Great Galactic Ghoul struck again, reported Washington Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole, when one of the unmanned Viking spacecraft (Viking 2) approached the orbit of Mars and lost one of its three ovens designed to heat samples of the Martian surface and look in the gases for signs of Martian life. Space scientists found that almost all the accidents with Mars-bound spacecraft—three failures and four nearfailures—had occurred in the same region, which had no unusual features such as extra cosmic dust or increased solar wind, magnetic field, or background radiation. First “victims of the Ghoul” were Soviet spacecraft—Zond 2 in 1964, and Mars 1 a year later—whose batteries died when they crossed the area and never came on again. One Mariner lost its radio in the Ghoul’s orbit but came back on when it reached Mars; another lost one or two instruments to cosmic dust; two others lost their guidance stars when they reached the Ghoul’s orbit, but locked on them again when they left it. Most costly casualty of the Ghoul was Mariner 7, whose battery exploded the day in 1969 when it crossed the Ghoul’s orbit, damaging the rest of the spacecraft so that it was useless by the time it flew past Mars. The area was about 56 million km from earth and 209 million km from the sun, and Viking 2 would not leave it until some time in February; scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory were hoping for no further damage to it or to the other Viking, which was coming along a month behind the first. (W Post, 25 Jan 76, A-3)
Blueprints for future Mars explorations, triggered by the Viking 1 landing on Mars, included not only the dispatch of roving robot vehicles to the surface of Mars but also collection and return of Mars samples by a “sailing ship”—a spacecraft carrying an onionskin-thin sail of aluminum-coated plastic measuring more than 185 m' and powered by the pressure of solar electromagnetic radiation. Space flight would become possible with less reliance on heavy and expensive rockets, said John Noble Wilford in the New York Times; a space-sailer could be launched from an earth-orbiting Shuttle, deploy landers to collect and return samples, and return to earth with larger amounts of Martian samples than possible by other methods. JPL’s plans for future missions might include a fleet of the sailers (to be called Yankee Clippers) “flying the routes from earth orbit to the vicinity of Mars, hauling supplies and portable habitats, and finally explorers, to a Mars base.” (NYT, 25 July 76, 44)
First microwave observations of carbon monoxide in the upper atmospheres of earth, Venus, and Mars were reported by a team of scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena. Establishment of carbon monoxide as a common component of the upper atmospheres of the planets should lead to a better understanding of the delicate balances in earth’s atmosphere, said Dr. Joe W. Waters, who headed the team. Carbon monoxide at lower altitudes on Venus and Mars, as well as on earth, had previously been measured by infrared techniques that had also detected CO on Jupiter last year, according to JPL’s Dr. Reinhold Beer. JPL microwave observations used a radiotelescope at Aerospace Corp.’s electronic research laboratory to detect the carbon-monoxide absorption frequency at high altitudes, well above the smog layer over Los Angeles; calculations indicated that the same technique could measure CO in the upper atmospheres of the other planets. The Mars experiment used the larger radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., to record the identifying signal. CO occurred in 20 parts per million at 80 km altitude on earth, and about 1000 parts per million at 100 km above Venus; the Mars readings were still being analyzed. (NASA Release 76-40)
The Viking 1 on its way toward Mars might have lost the use of one of its ovens just as Viking 2 was reported last week to have done, project officials said. Each of the Mars landers carried three ovens to heat surface samples for analysis by a gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer that would determine atmosphere elements and search for organic material that would indicate biological or nonbiological activity. Loss of one oven on each craft would not affect the operation of the instruments, but would mean that only two instead of three soil analyses would be done. A separate biology instrument on each lander would search directly for life forms in soil samples. A monitoring device on the ovens was suspected as the cause of the test-data anomaly. (NASA Releases 76-14, 76-15)
A lunar scientist in Johnson Space Center’s Division of Lunar and Planetary Sciences had suggested that low-viscosity lava rather than water could have caused the large channels seen on Mars, JSC announced. Ernest Schonfeld, in a paper to be presented at the annual meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union, said that the abundant large channels—one of the most puzzling landforms on Mars—were more easily explained by lava than by water; scientists had not been able to identify thick deposits of sediment that should have resulted from channel formation by water. Viking 1 had landed near the mouth of a large channel where thick sediments should have been deposited, but rocks at that site appeared to be volcanic. Schonfeld proposed that thin basaltic liquid melted below the Mars surface had flowed freely to erode the surface, and said that the coincidence of the age of volcanic activity on Mars and the erosion of the channels supported his idea. (JSC Release 76-72)
Scientists at JPL, where the Viking 1 mission was being directed, were startled at responses from 2 of 3 instruments reporting on the first Mars surface samplings. The labeled-release instrument, designed to count radioactive molecules released by a process feeding tagged nutrients to a soil sample, had counted 4 times as many radioactive releases as would have resulted from a similar earth sample: 4537 per min for the first 9 hr 20 min it counted, compared to about 100 counts per min from Calif, soil sampled in a prelaunch test, and no more than 750 per min from soil gathered in the dry valleys of Antarctica. The rapidity and magnitude of the response were “quite surprising,” said Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., which built the instrument. Another Viking instrument, the gas-exchange experiment that dampened a surface sample with nutrients and monitored the resultant release of gas, detected an increase in oxygen released by the sample 15 times greater than was explainable by the Mars atmosphere or by oxidation of minerals similar to earth soils. The same instrument 24 hr later reported an increase in oxygen release 30% greater than that detected the first day. Scientists said the results might be attributed to superoxides, produced by intense ultraviolet solar radiation on the Mars surface, reacting with the extemely iron-rich Martian soil, not shielded by atmosphere as earth’s surface is. Further information would be needed to reach firm conclusions, said Dr. Harold Klein of Ames Research Center, chief Viking biologist. (WPost, 1 Aug 76, A-l; NYT, 1 Aug 76, 4-8)
A press briefing following the 7th lunar science conference at Johnson Space Center [see 22 Feb.] featured the cochairmen, Dr. Larry Haskins, chief of planetary and earth sciences at JSC, and Dr. Robert Pepin, director of the Lunar Science Institute, and Dr. Deter Hayman of Rice Univ. Dr. Haskins said the conference aimed at broadening the planetary view of people working with lunar samples and data; a substantial interest was developing in the lunar polar-orbiter mission among people more interested than before in planetology, and aware that orbiting and remote-sensing missions would be the principal source for studying geoscientific evolution of these bodies. As an example, long-range operation of the lunar-surface packages had produced information that resulted in a lowered value for lunar heatflow; this in turn “constrained” the composition of the moon and its evolutionary history—“Whatever history it has, the amount of heat in the interior has to match the present heat loss from the body.” Also, said Dr. Haskins, lunar data were being used widely by scientists not previously concerned with lunar research: for example, archived data would be used to tell whether the moon was differentiated only in its outer extent, or more than 50% of it had undergone chemical separation or even developed a core. Another example would be the matching of seismic with magnetic data to get a better overall picture of lunar evolution. Dr. Pepin noted that 740 people had attended the conference, many more than the previous year; the program committee had purposely included discussions of other planetary and meteorite investigations that revealed much about the first 500 million yr of solar-system history, whose clues still exist in the moon (although hard to interpret) but no longer exist on earth. Experience with other planets had been insufficient to say if they had preserved early solar-system records; “best chances are not,” he added. Early solar-system history, especially of the inner planets, was characterized by enormous bombardment of all solid surfaces by objects now referred to as meteorites, but on a scale in those days “that almost suggests we should call them something else.” These huge objects clearly left their mark, with evidence that the bombardment took place more than 4 billion yr ago, then rapidly tapered off. Data from Mercury, Mars, and Venus would be expected to show that the historical record had been erased by time, constant impact, and geological activity in which the surface was pounded, dispersed, or remelted. The intense bombardment had wiped out earth’s early geological record too; terrestrial geologists had tried to put the age of the oldest earth rocks farther and farther back, getting in gradual stages as far back as 3.7 billion yr in a large anorthosite deposit in Greenland.This boundary condition for earth geology was one reason for the growing interest in lunar and general planetary studies: the flow of information had been not only from planetary to terrestrial scientists, but also in the other direction. Lunar scientists had begun to examine terrestrial craters such as the 60-km impact phenomenon called Manicouagan: what would have been referred to 5 yr ago as remnants of a Manicouagan volcano had now been established as an impact, mainly because the ease of sampling (greater there than on the moon) had permitted study of energy partition and formation of rock, glass, and melt material in a large-scale impact. Comparative planetology means applying results of studying one planetary surface to explain phenomena on other planetary surfaces. Earth, unlike other planets we know about, continued as a thermally active planet with volcanism, mountain upheaval and wearing down, and had obliterated much of its earlier record. The early stages of the lunar and planetary program focused attention outward; now these studies had provided knowledge applicable to earth, and the generation and development of lunar-surface morphology as a result of external bombardment was only one example of this application. Over the next 2 to 3 yr, a group of 50 to 100 scientists would be studying in detail the phenomenon of volcanism on all the terrestrial planets as a fundamental stage of planetary development, in a pilot project to define comparative planetology and relate it to a specific aspect. Mercury apparently had basalt flows; Venera pictures suggest recent activity on the surface of Venus that produced what seem to be basalts. Mars clearly had basalts: it had the largest volcano in the solar system, “an enormous structure that would . . . cover the state of Kansas if . . . plunked down there.” In 2 or 3 yr, Dr. Pepin said, we should be able to give an integrated picture of the issuing of basalts from the interior onto the surface, an extremely important process in the development and evolution of a planet. Life in the solar system was an exciting subject now, said Dr. Hayman, and discoveries were coming in at a pace that would make today’s theories outmoded by the time they got into print 6 mo from now. The task of scientists, he said, was to include the general public in the excitement, and to make it filter through to the colleges and universities, to high schools, and even to grade-school levels. One thing that had changed in the past 20 yr since the days of Harold Urey and Hans Seuss was the concept of the solar nebula and the formation of planets and satellites by accretion. The problem was the noncondensable material in the nebula, and where it went: the solar physicists explained its absence by the theory of a solar upheaval that cleaned out the inner parts of the solar system by a superstorm of ions. Applying thermodynamics to this theory made it possible to calculate which compounds would condense out at what temperature. The Allende meteorite that fell in Mexico in 1969 contained compounds similar to what had been predicted as a result of condensation of the solar nebula at high temperatures. Then, 2 or 3 yr ago the idea arose that the sun and planets had formed not only from gases but also from so-called presolar grains, which had not been specifically identified; their identity on the earth and moon would have been lost over time because of geological processes. So the search shifted to meteorites. Although none of the grains had been definitely identified, the conference had heard 2 reports that might be interpreted as finding presolar grains. Metallic nuggets in the Allende meteorite were found to consist of platinum-group metals in extraordinarily small fragments, a millionth of a meter, that did not vaporize or melt readily and might be presolar grains (although it would take a lot of work to settle the question, Dr. Hayman said). Also, a group from Berkeley had dissolved carbonaceous meteorites in hydrofluoric acid to get rid of the silicates; the carbon residue was found to be full of gas called “planetary” because its composition differed from that of the sun and was much more like that of earth. The question was how carbon material could have been of planetary origin under the solar-nebula theory: speculation was that the carbonaceous material might predate the formation of the sun and have originated elsewhere. It could not have undergone great heat without being destroyed, so the objects containing the material must have been created farther out, not in the inner region of the sun and terrestrial planets but in the region of the giant planets. If the heavier elements were synthesized in the stars by nuclear processes, especially in explosions of novas and supernovas that produced all sorts of elements as they blew away their outer envelopes, all the elements are probably represented in this expanding envelope. With rapidly dropping temperatures, the condensation of presolar grains would occur within 10 yr. It would be possible to look at the product of a single event to extrapolate the total of many such events of which all the elements around us would be the product. Dr. Haskins said in summary that developments in methodology and the availability of more precise measurements would make it possible to supplant earlier measurements. Geophysicists were learning to extract information from bits of material instead of bucketsful or large chunks as they had done in the past. The Apollo program had been responsible for a steady progress in the field of measurements: “there simply was not the funding and interest correlated together to do it prior to that time.” Asked what the scientific community had learned about the moon in the 3 yr 3 mo since the last moon mission, Haskins said they were beginning to understand the major stages in the evolution of every planetary body composed of rocky material; the moon had passed through stages that the earth had not reached, and had preserved a record of what had happened—for example, a preview of the kind of rock that would be formed later in earth history. The findings provided a broad framework in which more and different questions could be asked, not just investigation of the more obvious characteristics of the many materials brought back. Queried on the lunar-sample curatorial facility, Dr. Haskins said that moon rocks from the Apollo expeditions were housed in a leaky, flimsy facility that would not protect them for use of future generations of scientists. A new facility was desperately needed, because the present building was not fireproof and the roof leaked; within the building, the rocks had been kept in nitrogen-filled cabinets and handled only in clean-room conditions, to prevent contamination. However, moisture in the surroundings might have led to erroneous deductions regarding the moon environment when scientists analyzed the lunar samples. (Transcript, 7th lunar science conf. press briefing, 19 Mar 76; NASA Release 76-25; JSC Release 76-15; Science, vol. 185, 346; W Post, 21 Mar 76, A-3)
Dr. Bruce T. Lundin, director of Lewis Research Center, received the 1976 Astronautics Engineer Award from the National Space Club at its 19th annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard memorial dinner in Washington. The award, made by a group of judges including former NASA scientist Dr. Wernher von Braun, was for outstanding leadership in development and operation of the Centaur high-energy rocket stage, and the Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur launch vehicles. The Atlas-Centaur launched all NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft in the 1960s and many others such as OAOs, the recent Intelsats, Mariners, and Pioneers. The Titan-Centaur, largest U.S. rocket, launched West Germany’s Helios spacecraft toward the sun and the Viking spacecraft to Mars. A NASA employee since 1943, Dr. Lundin became director of LeRC in 1969 after a year and a half at NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator and Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. As leader in the development and operation of the Centaur vehicle, he built the Centaur staff at Lewis and made the decisions that set the character and style of the whole project. (Lewis News, 19 Mar 76, 1; LeRC Release 76-11)
The boost given by the Viking Mars missions, now nearing an end, to those concerned with the space program might persuade Congress of the virtues of possible future projects, Science magazine reported. Describing 15 Sept, testimony of Dr. John E. Naugle, acting associate administrator of NASA, before a House subcommittee, the magazine said “some of the juicier projects the agency has in mind for the 1980s” might include a roving-vehicle mission to Mars, shipped aboard a Solar Sailor, “the closest thing the agency has ever proposed to a genuine space ship.” The Solar Sailor would be driven by solar pressure—light reflected from the sun, collected by huge lightweight sails—and was referred to as “a reusable interplanetary spacecraft,” Other future projects would be a Global Information Services satellite system to combine earth sensing, meteorological and pollution observation, data transmission, and navigation uses, all such information to be available to the public at receiving stations or home terminals; some sort of solar-energy collection system, either on the ground or in space; and moving “a segment of our industrial society into space . . . where there is abundant solar energy and an almost inexhaustible vacuum to act as a sink for thermal and chemical pollution.” Naugle and other agency spokesmen had noted that such plans were still in the design stage and the agency was not ready to discuss them in detail; however, Science commented, the Viking success might mean that for NASA “perhaps the sky will be the limit, after all,” (Science, 1 Oct 76, 39)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, who had retired in 1972 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Long-Range Planning at NASA Hq, said in a Washington Star interview that he had been brought to Washington in 1970. to “lend clout to NASA’s ability to get its appropriations.” His assignment had been to present to Congress the program of a manned expedition to Mars; “so many national problems” had arisen that Congress would not commit itself to another multibillion-dollar space program, and the reusable space shuttle was the only element of the concept that survived. Dr. von Braun recalled that NASA’s resources were cut to about a third during his last 2 yr at NASA, and the new organization with which he was associated—the National Space Institute—was created to “reach large numbers of people” and broaden public support of basic science, “where it is much more difficult to predict the payoff.” “Remember,” he added, “nuclear energy, which ultimately was used in the hydrogen bomb, was discovered because some astrophysicists were interested in what keeps the sun hot.” (W Star, 20 Jan 76, A—1)
The Viking 1 orbiter photographed a tiny moon of Mars called Phobos at a distance of just over 8000 km, providing a picture so clear that more than 100 craters were visible on the surface only 22.5 km across. At least 6 craters measured nearly 2 km across, meaning that meteorites the size of small towns had crashed into Phobos during the last 3 or 4 billion yr. The face of Phobos in the picture released by JPL was the same one photographed in 1971 and 1972 Mariner 9, first spacecraft to orbit Mars. “This means that Phobos always shows its same side to Mars,” said Dr. Thomas C. Duxbury of JPL, as earth’s moon always shows the same side because of the pull of earth’s gravity. Another Viking 1 picture showed small channels in the Argyre basin of Mars’s southern highland that were the best evidence yet for heavy rainfall on the planet in past ages. Present atmospheric pressure on Mars was only about 7.7 millibars, 1/200th of that on earth and insufficient for liquid water to form or rain to fall. (W Post, 28 July 76, A-8)
The Viking 1 lander touched down safely on a plain at the western edge of the Chryse region of Mars at 7:53 am EDT, 11 mo to the day after its journey of more than 700 million km through space began at KSC Launch Complex 41. Landing was within 17 sec of the predicted time; velocity at impact, predicted to be 2.4 ± 0.9 kps, was actually 2.49 kps. Within minutes of the landing, the Viking began relaying a photograph of one of its footpads on the nearby surface up to the Viking orbiter for transmission to earth; a panoramic view of the landing site followed. Distance from earth to Mars at landing time was more than 322 million km, and radio waves took 19 additional minutes to travel back to earth to signal touchdown. Spacecraft controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory broke into applause and cheers when the data arrived showing a successful landing; telemetry showed the descent curve fitting preplanned values as the lander’s aeroshell, supersonic parachute, and terminal descent engines braked the descent to the surface of Mars. The site at Chryse Planitia was chosen for the landing after Viking orbiter data and the giant telescope at Arecibo, P.R., showed that the primary landing site and the first alternative were too hazardous. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, who was at JPL for the landing, said that the intensive search for a safe landing site “really paid off.” The Mars landing came on the 7th anniversary of man’s first landing on the moon 20 July 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. President Ford, who telephoned JPL with congratulations after the landing, asked Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC if there were plans for a Viking 3. Martin replied that there were not, but that his team was “ready to take on Viking 3 plus Viking 4, 5, and 6.” The Viking 2 was expected to go into orbit around Mars about 7 Aug. (Mission Status Bulletin 35, 20 July 76; Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 1)
NASA announced that its Viking Undergraduate Intern Program, permitting U.S. college students to participate in the Viking mission to Mars, was under way at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. Fifty-eight students from about 600 applicants had been selected to spend 30 days during the summer working with Viking scientists in a number of scientific areas at JPL, where more than 72 science teams were conducting a detailed examination of the planet, including a search for life. The program was the idea of Prof. Thomas Mutch of Brown Univ., leader of the Viking imaging team, who was assisted by a teammate, Prof. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ.; the 2 professors reviewed each of the applicants’ qualifications and selected the 58 students for the summer’s work. The program, designed to directly involve undergraduates with a strong interest in planetary science, was funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and by NASA’s Planetary Geology Office. (NASA Release 76-139)
Study of earth’s climate to permit predictions of global climatic changes by the end of the century should be the top space priority, said a study group formed by NASA last year to assess U.S. progress in space and where it should go next. The 3-vol report of the study group did not mention manned exploration of Mars, which had been the prime recommendation of a forerunner study 7 yr ago. Citing the dependence of the world’s population on a complex system producing food and fiber where climate is favorable, the report said the entire system was predicated on a constant climate. Understanding of climatic processes would help solve earth’s most pressing problems: food shortages, and worldwide weather changes caused by pollution. The report estimated that a 1-degree cooling of earth’s annual temperature would mean loss of $1 billion in grain production, $2.2 billion in timber and fiber output, and $1.4 billion in fish catches; the drop would also increase the demand for electrical energy by $700 million, with a $2.4 billion rise in health costs other than treating skin cancers caused by alterations in earth’s atmosphere. The group recommended development of 6 satellites to identify and assess worldwide crop conditions; other satellites to study chemical changes in the atmosphere and to watch for solar changes affecting earth’s weather; and a network of 4 to 6 large geostationary satellites to observe ice and ocean conditions and keep tabs on the earth’s radiation balance. Manned flight should develop along the lines of Space Shuttle and space station— to be used partially for climate study—and instrumented craft should be sent to explore every solar-system planet except Pluto, the report said. Cost of the weather-satellite program was set at $1.7 billion, with operating costs over 20 yr estimated at $4.6 billion; the planetary exploration program would cost a total of $5.1 billion to the year 2000. (WPost, 22 Feb 76, A-3)
A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences, named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a 2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regulate fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15% a year, about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal. An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone, meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the Univ. of Mich, report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr. The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone reduction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the Univ. of Mich, had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons. Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Lawrence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H. Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the chemistry were pinned down, the effect of SST operations could not be determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratospheric processes, the team said. (NYT14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14; W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-l; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49) The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity. Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms. After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated 180° instead of 45° as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday, 17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument. At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33% more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20 times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample, apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber. Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accompanied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, considered the least ambiguous of the detectors. Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest, earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher, therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother, considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared on the moon and on earth. {WStar, 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2; WPost, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-l; 17 Sept 76, A-4; ATT, 17 Sept 76, A14; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
Return of the USSR’s Luna 24 to earth with a load of material drilled from nearly 2 m below the surface of the moon might be a dress rehearsal for a round-trip Mars probe to offset world headlines gained by Viking 1, said the Christian Science Monitor. The question why the Soviets would expend more effort on moon samples when they already had three sets (two from previous probes, Luna 16 and Luna 20, and one from the U.S. Apollo program) would be answered if the Luna 24 mission were being used to perfect techniques for obtaining Mars samples, a move “which would vault the Soviet Union back into the lead in planetary research,” said the CSM. The USSR had landed unmanned spacecraft on the surface of Venus and obtained information for a short period, and had sent to the moon in 1973 an unmanned vehicle Lunokhod 2 that crisscrossed the Lemonnier crater for 6 mo, reporting back data on magnetic fields and laser direction-finding. The CSM noted that, although the USSR automated machines worked well, the Soviets still lacked boosters to propel cosmonauts to the moon. (CSM, 30 Aug 76)
A mysterious radio signal apparently emanating from the Soviet Union had been so powerful that it had disrupted maritime, aeronautical, telecommunications, and amateur radio operations throughout the world for months, the New York Times reported. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission had forwarded four complaints to the USSR Ministry of Post and Telecommunications since 25 Aug., but had not received an answer. Colin Thomas of Leeds, England, worldwide coordinator of interference reports for the Inti. Amateur Radio Union, said that amateurs in Sweden, Norway, West Germany, the U.S., and Australia had complained of the interference; protests by the British Home Office to the USSR had not received a reply, he said. The Inti. Telecommunications Union in Geneva, Switzerland, to which the matter was referred, said it had no power to enforce treaties against interference but tried to mediate such situations. An FCC spokesman said complaints had been received almost daily since early July; direction-finding equipment had confirmed the source of the signals as the eastern side of the Baltic Sea. An extremely wideband signal pulsing 10 times per second was causing the interference, which had generated complaints from every type of shortwave user. What generated the signals, what type of intelligence they might be carrying, and what the purpose was, remained unanswered questions, the ATT said. (NYT, 30 Oct 76, 5) During October: Numbers of ham radio operators had received pictures transmitted by the Viking lander from the surface of Mars more than 370 million km away, the Associated Press reported in a story reprinted by the New York Times. Retired printing foreman Bob Walton of Des Moines, la., said that a third of the 260 000 hams in the U.S. might be capable of receiving the pictures if they spent about $700 on equipment. Last July the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena broadcast on its 20m band that off-duty personnel would relay Mars pictures through their amateur radio station; Walton found a junked TV set, replaced some parts, and began receiving the Mars pictures. The JPL signals, tape-recorded and put through a converter, turned the sound into pictures when played back. Vocal explanations of the pictures could also be taped for playback. Storms in Iowa had prevented Walton from receiving some of the Mars pictures, but ham operators in Tex. and Fla. sent him the ones he had missed, he reported. (NYT, 7 Oct 76, 10 C) Video transmissions of Viking lander pictures from the JPL ham radio station N6V (NASA 1976 Viking) at Pasadena had bypassed ham radio operators in San Diego County nearby, wrote Cliff Smith, science writer for the San Diego Union. The shortwave radio signals, good for longdistance communications, had been received by “about 13 000 hams around the world equipped to receive the pictures,” but not by the score of ham operators around San Diego. The locals pointed out that special converter devices N6V used for picture transmission and reception had been made by a company in San Diego, and that the local ham organization had donated to N6V the converter used by the station for its Viking transmissions. After a representative of the San Diego Reporter Assn, called the situation to the attention of the N6V broadcasters—all hams employed as technicians at JPL, the Viking control center—N6V corrected the omission by beaming its broadcasts to a repeater station on Otay Mt. that most area hams could receive. Pictures received since the change had included shots of the Viking 2 mechanical arm trying to turn over a rock; closeups of the Martian moons, Deimos and Phobos; and a weird-looking alien whose image the JPL station transmitted as a joke. (San Diego Union, 8 Oct 76)
The board of governors of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that, at its recent meeting in The Hague 19—27 May, it adopted a 10-m class Standard B ground station to supplement the Standard A station long the foundation of INTELSAT’s global system. Currently, 114 Standard A ground stations with 30-m antennas were operating throughout the world, as well as 29 smaller stations used for domestic service, telemetry, tracking and control, monitoring, and limited telecommunications between 2 or 3 destinations. Broadest use of the Standard B station would be in developing countries that had limited telecommunications requirements. Under study for some years, the Standard B.station would use single-channel-per-carrier (SCPC) equipment that allowed routing of traffic on a circuit-by-circuit basis instead of in large groups or bundles, minimizing the capacity loss associated with smaller antennas; it also worked with voice activation, which would be mandatory, using satellite capacity for telephone service only when activated by voice signals. Adoption of the second standard for international service would mean a 40% drop in rates paid for use of the satellites, plus ability to route traffic to any ground stations equipped to receive the user’s signals, with no restriction on the total amount of traffic. Previously, the drain on satellite power limited small ground stations to providing service to only 1 or 2 other points. (INTELSAT Release 76-17-1) Viking 1 would scan and map the surface for 2 wk; its cameras would photograph the prime landing site near an ancient rift valley, and other instruments would measure surface temperatures and search the Mars atmosphere for signs of water. The new orbit would bring Viking over the planned landing site once each 24.6-hr Mars day (called a sol). The 2 wk of photographs and measurements were needed so that scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where the flight had been directed since launch in April 1975, could choose the safest and most interesting spot for their 4-ton bird to alight. The landing attempt would be the first U.S. try at putting a spacecraft down on another planet; the USSR had made 5 unmanned attempts, 3 on Venus and 2 on Mars. The 2 Venera spacecraft had survived on the surface long enough to send back 1 picture each; the third crashed. One Mars spacecraft had crashed, and the other was blown over after it landed by winds clocked at more than 300 kph. After Viking’s braking engine was fired, the main job of flight directors would be to navigate it into a path where its orbit would be lowered again, with apogee reduced from about 19 000 km to 12 500 km. The firing was successful 19 June, and the Viking neared the end of a 690-million-km voyage that began 10 mo ago. William J. O’Neill of JPL said the precision of the flight could be likened to “shooting a basketball in Los Angeles and putting it through a hoop in Madison Square Garden in New York City.” Viking was following a northeasterly path around Mars that would bring it within 1450 km of the planet’s surface; flight directors planned a second maneuver to bring it still closer over an area 20°N of the equator, called Chryse, where Viking would attempt to land 4 July, selected as a good place to search for signs of life or fossilized life that thrived when a river flowed there a billion years ago. Harold S. Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey, chief geologist for Viking, said that Chryse resembled California’s Death Valley or the water-worn dry valleys of Nevada or Wyoming, where ancient rivers overflowed their banks millions of years ago to deposit alluvial soils on the valley floors. Rock and soil in the Chryse valley appeared red from millions of years of iron oxide deposits brought down by the river overflow; Masursky and his colleagues hoped that the red soils would contain organic molecules, signs of a once-existent life on Mars. A photograph taken 19 June and released by JPL on Sunday, 20 June, showed the “awesome” Valles Marineris from about 360 000 km up— parallel canyons south of the Mars equator that, if extended together on earth, would reach from Calif, to Penna. The smaller was about 3 km deep, 64 km wide, and 645 km long; the larger was 6 km deep, 96 km wide, and more than 3200 km long. (Arizona’s Grand Canyon, largest on earth, is about 2 km deep, 21 km wide at its greatest breadth, and only 350 km long.) The northern hemisphere of Mars appeared covered with haze, which scientists said was probably from water vapor misting out of the cold surface as the sun warmed it during the longer summer days. Successful firing of the braking engine at 1:25 pm EDT Monday, 21 June, put Viking 1 into a lower orbit so that its cameras could begin to photograph steep slopes, craters, boulder fields, and other potential obstacles. On 27 June, Viking project manager James S. Martin announced that the 4 July landing was off; pictures of the primary landing area showed “too many unknowns,” and the site appeared too hazardous to risk landing without investigating other sites. As the Viking 1 cameras could not distinguish objects “smaller than a football field,” objects as yet invisible could endanger the landing. However, as there was no assurance of any hazard-free area roughly 20 km by 100 km anywhere on Mars, some scientists had wanted to go ahead with the planned landing. Previous closeups taken by Mariner 9 were not as detailed as those from Viking, and dangerous details of the primary landing site became more obvious with photos from Viking 1 coming in more clearly. The New York Times reported that the first alternative site was an area called Chryse Phoenicia, a basin about 30 km northwest of the original site; if that site appeared too rough, scientists would look at Tritonis Lacus, about 6400 km east of Chryse, although if this happened, the landing might be delayed until as late as the first wk of August. Project Manager Martin suggested delaying the Viking 1 landing, if it were not down by 25 July, until the Viking 2 (now 8 million km away) arrived in Mars orbit; possibly 2 Viking spacecraft might be orbiting simultaneously. JPL said flight tracking and control facilities there were insufficient to handle full operations of both spacecraft simultaneously, and a number of preorbital maneuvers for Viking 2 would be required starting about 27 July. John Noble Wilford said in the New York Times that the earliest possible Viking 1 landing would be 9 July, and other alternatives would take longer. Scientists, he said, were “dismayed by the rugged Martian terrain”—the primary landing area being heavily pocked with craters, steep escarpments, and a sprinkling of knoblike features probably remnants of erosion like that in the Grand Canyon. On 28 June, Viking 1 photographed a site about 300 km northwest of Chryse—the “northwest territory”—after pictures of the prime site showed it to be far more rugged than expected; the scientists wanted a landing as close as possible to the original site because they thought it offered the best chance of finding signs of existing or fossil life. The alternate site would be somewhat flatter and safer, but less interesting scientifically, O’Toole said in the Post 29 June. Photographs released 29 June at JPL showed a plateau in the Chryse valley originally picked as the Viking 1 landing site, where a curving and rugged coastline at the plateau’s base could have been formed only by an ocean-like surf. Pictures taken from an altitude of about 1450 km showed a crater with lava-flow traces more than 30 km wide, “a truly enormous scale” according to chief geologist Masursky. “The biggest lava flooding ... on earth are the basalt floods on Iceland, which are no bigger than a few kilometers across.” Temperature changes mapped by Viking were also dramatic: instruments on Viking registered differences of more than 60°C (140°F) between day and night in the same parts of the planet. Dr. Hugh H. Kieffer, atmospheric scientist on the Viking team, said that the atmosphere on Mars was almost perfectly transparent to sunlight, as little water was present to absorb it; “whatever sunlight reaches the planet gets right to the surface, which then radiates the heat back to the atmosphere to warm it up.” An instrument aboard Viking could tell when day broke on the Mars surface although it had no way of “seeing”; it measured water vapor in the atmosphere, and registered its presence when the sun warmed the permafrost that “literally pops [water] into the atmosphere when that sun hits the surface first thing in the morning,” according to Dr. Barney Farmer of JPL. Besides surveying possibilities for its own landing, Viking 1 was photographing potential landing sites for Viking 2 to give scientists an idea whether they might have to shift sites for that spacecraft also. (W Post, 12 June 76, A-12; 19 June, A-3; 20 June, A—1; 21 June, A-9; 22 June, A—17; 28 June, A-3; 29 June, C-4; 30 June, A-27; ATT, 21 June, 10; 28 June, 17; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 14)
plane that flew around the global poles had previously been carried around the world on a balloon that came down in Central Africa, where a French member of the World Health Organization found it hanging in a tree and returned it to NASA; after the airplane trip, the unit served another year on a buoy before being retired from service. A 1914 Model T Ford originally scheduled to carry the tracking device [see 15 Feb.] was withdrawn from the race by its owner. (NASA Release 76-126) 17-19 July: Project scientists said the high proportion of argon in the Mars atmosphere might damage the life-detection instruments on Viking 1. In March 1974, a spectrometer pump on a Mars-bound spacecraft failed to work properly and Russian scientists concluded the problem was caused by argon, an element reluctant to form chemical compounds; the Russian pump apparently could not handle the high argon content of the Mars atmosphere. Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer contained filter material to screen out carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide in the search for organic compounds in Mars air and soil samples, which would be heated in the instrument to produce gas for analysis by the chromatograph; the high argon content might interfere with the readings. (NYT, 17 July 76, 24) JPL flight directors were checking out the instruments on Viking 1 for its Mars landing scheduled for 20 July. Immediately upon landing, the spacecraft would measure air temperature and pressure and wind speed and direction, and would detect any interior motions of the planet such as moving lava or shaking of the crust. It was also scheduled to take 2 photographs, one downward to record the terrain of the landing site and the other a panorama shot to show the general surface of Mars. Life-detection experiments would not begin until about a wk after the landing. (W Post, 18 July 76, A-10) Commands from JPL to turn on the $ 153-million instrument package to be landed by Viking 1 on the Plains of Chryse took between 17 and 18 min to reach the spacecraft nearly 346 million km away from earth. First spacecraft responses to the signals indicated the instruments and navigational equipment were in working condition. Landing was scheduled for 8 am EDT on 20 July; Viking 1 would separate early in the morning into 2 components, 2300-kg orbiter and 590-kg lander. The orbiter, powered by purple solar cells on panels, would remain in orbit to serve as a radio relay for the lander and to photograph nearly half the Martian surface over the next 12 mo. The lander, powered by an atomic battery, would coast for about 3 hr, slowed by a parachute and braking engines, and land on 3 aluminum legs at about 8 kph, more gently than most parachutists land on earth. (W Post, 19 July 76, A-3) Odds were heavily against existence of any form of life on Mars, said a Washington Post editorial, and against Viking 1 ’s finding evidence of it even if it were there. The Viking flights were “in some ways more remarkable an undertaking” than the Apollo flights because the spacecraft was on its own with no humans to correct errors and a sizable time lapse between sending and receipt of radioed instructions. The mission, said the Post, was “already a stunning accomplishment.” (W Post, 20 July. 76, A-16) The Viking spacecraft was “a breed apart,” the Wash. Post reported, as different from previous spacecraft “as a Cadillac from a Pinto.” Almost nothing on the lander had flown in space before; almost everything had to be built super-small to save weight. As the first tl.S. spacecraft to land on another planet, the Viking had to be designed to withstand chemical and heat sterilization to avoid contaminating Mars with earth organisms. The tape recorder, for instance, had to be made of bronze coated with phosphor, because no plastic tape could have survived the heat. (W Post, 20 July 76, A-2)
An all-systems simulation of landing Vikings 1 and 2 on the surface of Mars, to exercise the entire 750-person Viking flight team so that everyone knew exactly what to do when the time came later this year, began 20 Feb. and built up to a “Mars landing” 22 Feb., concluding today as a “fantastic success” according to James S. Martin, Jr., project manager at Viking Control in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory installation in the San Gabriel Mts. near Pasadena. The computer program had to be redesigned to facilitate uplink command to the spacecraft cameras, and more time had to be allowed for certain ground-control and data-processing procedures, but no major problems developed. In the room where a full-scale model of the Viking lander complete with operational cameras stood on a simulated Martian surface, prankish team members had put three tiny marine fossils from earth’s Paleozoic period on the sand within the camera field-of-view. When the camera came on to transmit after the simulated landing, the first picture was startling, but the fossils were immediately recognized, and the joke demonstrated that even tiny objects near the landing site would appear in the pictures transmitted from Mars. (NYT, 4 Mar 76, 32)
MSFC announced development of a new system of vehicle mobility that could greatly extend unmanned explorations on the surface of Mars and other planets. The concept grew out of work on the successful lunar roving vehicle that carried astronauts and equipment on extended exploration of the moon, far from the lunar module’s landing site. Scientists had regretted the lack of mobility of the Viking landers on the surface of Mars, because the data on atmosphere and terrain had been limited to the landing site. The new idea, called Elastic Loop Mobility System (ELMS), would use a continuous elastic-loop track in place of the landing pads; the track would distribute lander weight uniformly over a relatively large area, with suspension and drive systems on the spacecraft combined into a single lightweight package. The geometry of the loop would serve to provide “excellent mobility” on soft soils and smooth rides over hard and rough terrain. Tests on models revealed slope-climbing capability, high maneuverability, and power to surmount obstacles and cross crevasses. Combining the ELMS with existing Viking hardware would produce a mobile laboratory that could conduct scientific missions on the Mars surface for 6 mo along traverses up to 150 km. Recent reviews of a possible mobile-Viking mission to Mars, using the ELMS concept, considered extending the mission to 2 yr along traverses up to 500 km. The low ground clearance of the Viking spacecraft, together with the low ground-pressure tolerances on soft Martian soil, ruled out the use of wheels for mobility, as well as the use of conventional tracks because of high energy consumption and low operational reliability. Besides use of the MSFC-developed ELMS for planetary exploration, the U.S. Marine Corps had considered the system for a new generation of amphibious landing vehicles for the 1980s, a MSFC spokesman said. (MSFC Release 76-191)
