President Carter’s first budget proposal contained additional funds for NASA, Nature magazine noted. The new administration had recommended $13 million for studies of potential missions to Mars after Viking; the previous administration had requested $5 million. Planetary scientists, pleased with the increased budget request as well as with Carter’s recent remarks on the Space Shuttle, viewed these actions as presidential support of the space program. (Nature, Mar 3/77, 5; Spaceflight, Mar 77, 8)
The rapid approach of the Martian winter, whose temperatures would fall below - 123°C, had halted science experiments using the Viking 2 lander, NASA announced. Problems with the lander’s sample arm had forced controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to cancel a final biology experiment. The meteorology station and the seismic instrument would use power to gather data during the winter; all other power would go toward maintaining survivable heat levels inside the lander. (NASA Release 77-69)
NASA’s upcoming 5yr plan (1978-1982) had projected annual budgets for fiscal yrs 1980-1982 in excess of $4.7 billion, Aviation Week reported. The plan, an internal document used to guide the agency, would allow NASA as many as 7 major new mission starts in FY 1979, including a Mars rover and a Halley’s Comet rendezvous. (A v Wk, Mar 7/77, 47)	•
AvWk reported that the seismometer carried on the Viking 2 lander might have recorded the first seismic event since the spacecraft touched down Sept. 3, 1976, on the Utopia Planitia area of the planet Mars. Beginning about 7pm local time for the lander, on Sol 60 (Nov. 7, 1976), the activity continued for about 30min. Viking project observers said the data seemed to have the “proper signature” of a seismic event, similar to data recorded on the lunar surface during seismic events. Donald Anderson, leader of the Viking seismology team, said rough estimates put the center of the activity several thousand km from the lander, but cautioned against labeling the activity a “marsquake” until further studies were done. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 21)
NASA planned to send a roving laboratory over the Martian surface during the next Mars landings, Nature reported. Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, chief Viking project scientist, said that, although no future Mars missions were officially scheduled, the outlook was favorable given the scientific success of, and public enthusiasm for, the two Viking landers. Speaking at a Paris conference to disseminate Viking information, Soffen invited U.S. and foreign scientists to participate in examining Viking data and in developing experiments for the next generation of Mars missions. (Nature, Mar 10/77, 112)
NASA announced it had commanded the Viking 1 lander on Mars to dig a ft-deep trench in the surface and bring up soil samples to use in finding out more about the complex chemistry of the planet. The sequence, which would continue through March 15, would include pictures taken by the lander to show mission controllers how the digging progressed. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory had sent commands to the Viking 1 lander Feb. 10 and would start the Viking 2 lander’s digging sequence about Feb. 16. Viking 7’s orbiter would make a series of close passes near Mars’s satellite Phobos to take pictures and measure its temperature, while observing the effect of its gravity on the course of the spacecraft. Afterward, mission controllers would drop the orbiter to about 300km altitude over Mars from the current close-approach altitude of 1500km. (NASA Release 77-24; JPL Release Feb 10/77)
NASA announced that Pioneer 11 would fly just outside the rings of Saturn during its first encounter with the giant planet in 1979. The spacecraft would pass 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the edge of the outermost ring and would swing in under the plane of the rings to a distance of 25 000km (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, and A. Thomas Young, director of planetary programs, had made the decision to fly the Pioneer outside rather than inside the rings mainly because NASA wanted to use it as a pathfinder for the two Voyager spacecraft headed for Saturn encounter in 1980-81. The Pioneer would cross the ring plane at about the same distance as the trajectory that would use Saturn’s gravity to propel Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The uncertainties regarding a ring crossing even at 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the outer edge of the rings called for NASA “to do everything we reasonably can to ensure Voyager’s success,” said Young. Should the Pioneer not survive the rings, NASA would have to revise its plan of sending Voyager 2 on to Uranus; however, a successful pass by Pioneer 11 would increase confidence in committing Voyager 2 to the Uranus option even if Voyager 1 had not achieved all its objectives at Saturn. An outside pass offered much better odds for success than an inner one, which would bring the spacecraft as close as 6000km (3700mi) to Saturn’s surface. The 1979 flyby by Pioneer 11 would be the first close encounter with Saturn; until the rings of Uranus were discovered, Saturn was considered the only ringed planet in earth’s solar system. The origin of the rings remained unknown, but their composition was defined by astronomers in 1970 as ordinary water ice, and radar readings in 1973 detected snowball-size chunks of solid material. (NASA Release 77-250)
The NY Times reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, testifying at the Senate hearing on confirmation of his nomination as NASA administrator, had told the committee that no U.S. manned landing on Mars could occur before 1990. If NASA had an operating Space Shuttle by 1980 that could be used to assemble a vehicle in space and to store the fuel needed for a trip to Mars, work on a manned Mars ship could begin in 1984 or 1985 at the earliest, Frosch said, with completion a year or two later. (NYT, June 7/77, 13)
Recent photographs of the inner Martian satellite Phobos, obtained by the Viking 1 orbiter in Feb., had revealed “the nature of that satellite in unprecedented detail,” said Scientific American. Earlier pictures by Mariner 9 or the Viking 2 orbiter were at a distance of 880km; the new pictures were taken at a distance of 660km to as little as 100km, with resolution that permitted distinguishing objects smaller than 10m across. The surface of Phobos was known to be pitted with craters from the impact of meteorites; the new images showed chains of irregular craters like those seen on the surface of the moon, although Phobos’s crater chains paralleled the plane of its orbit around Mars. Pictures from Viking 2 had shown grooves on Phobos concentrated near its northern pole; the new pictures defined the grooves as crater chains possibly caused by objects hundreds of meters across. Further study of the images should reveal more about the nature of Phobos, the magazine said. (SciAm, Apr 77, 57)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
Despite NASA’s failure to win FY 1979 funding for a new Mars mission, such a mission remained the major planning element in the agency’s planetary programs office, Aviation Week reported. A Mars rover/orbiter mission had strong support from the Natl. Academy of Sciences, to lay the groundwork for a sample-return mission using either Martian-orbit rendezvous or direct ascent from earth to Mars. At a KSC briefing, A. Thomas Young, NASA’s director of planetary programs, said the highest priority missions NASA might implement “in the near term” would include the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR), a lunar-polar orbiter, a Saturn orbiter probe, and a rendezvous with comet Halley or Encke, or both, or possibly with an asteroid. “As we go through the budgetary process, on one side I wish Mars would go away,” Young said. “But when you stop and think about rivers, volcanoes, enormous Mars icecaps, the chemistry potential for life, and the atmosphere, you realize that understanding Mars is so important toward understanding where earth has been and is going that you’ve got to treat it in a responsible manner.” He said NASA planning should benefit from the 2.4m-diameter space telescope, aimed primarily at bodies outside the solar system but sure to provide significant data on objects nearer earth. {AvWk, Nov 14/77, 55)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
JSC and the Lunar Science Institute announced plans for the 8th annual lunar science conference in Flouston, March 14-18. More than 600 scientists from around the world would discuss new data about the moon, derived from studies of lunar samples and from Apollo surface and orbital experiments, as well as new interpretations of previous models of lunar origin and history. Several Soviet scientists would attend, to give NASA materials from the Luna 24 mission for analysis. Dr. Michael G. Duke, acting chief of JSC’s Lunar and Planetary Sciences Division, and Dr. Robert Pepin, outgoing director of the Lunar Science Institute, would cochair the conference. The conference would also be the second meeting on “planetary” science, continuing the practice of the 1976 conference, where planetary interests were discussed for the first time as a result of the accumulation of data from NASA and USSR missions to Venus, Mercury, Mars, and the outer planets. The assembled data on planetary origin and evolution had proved of primary interest to lunar scientists. (JSC Release 77-09)
AvWk reported that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project, would receive the Goddard award for “brilliant leadership of the Viking project to land an instrumented, automated spacecraft on the planet Mars.” (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that President Carter had declared July 16-24 as a U.S. Space Observance, the dates chosen by Congress to coincide with the anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing as well as Apollo-Soyuz and the Viking 1 landing on Mars. Dr. Frosch said that the president’s recognition of NASA achievements “should serve as inspiration and encouragement to all of us.” (NASA anno July 14/77)
NASA revealed the contents of the space and aeronautics exhibit that would appear in the U.S. pavilion at the 32nd Paris Air Show, under the theme “The Continuous Challenge: 50 Years Since Lindbergh.” NASA planned to display concepts of space communities and their construction; living, farming, and manufacturing in space; and solar-power stations in space, together with a 3-screen presentation of the 50yr of flight since Lindbergh. A 2.4m Shuttle model would include the European Space Agency’s Spacelab, part of a major international cooperative space program, in its cargo bay. Also on display would be the Galileo 2 flying laboratory, its interior configured to simulate the reusable Spacelab with facilities for space experiments in medicine, manufacturing, astronomy, and production of pharmaceuticals. A life-size model of Mars landscape viewed by the Viking lander would demonstrate space exploration, and Landsat stereo photographs of earth would show the increasingly routine use of space to survey crops and natural resources, monitor pollution and weather, and collect global weather data. Other models and presentations would show the scope of NASA programs such as government-industry work to halve fuel consumption by transport aircraft and to develop safer, more efficient, and more environmentally acceptable civil aircraft. (NASA Release 77-20)
Defense had been at odds over the Mojave desert airspace, and “the military is winning,” the paper said. Twice in the past 6mo a B-l bomber had narrowly missed the multimillion-dollar tracking antennas, and over the past yr USAF planes with electronic devices had been jamming space signals to and from Goldstone. In the July 8 incident, all bombs from the USAF planes had fallen no more than half a mile from the 5 big-dish antennas serving as the sole links to satellites in orbit around the earth, the sun, and the planet Mars and to one spacecraft headed for the planet Saturn. The commandant of the Marine base at El Toro, where the planes came from, had grounded the pilots for 2wk, blaming the incident on “navigation error” and misreading of the target. However, on July 22, the B-l bomber that had previously buzzed the Goldstone station flew with its chase plane low over the heads of station technicians to check the sky for radio interference from other military craft. According to JPL officials, the B-l was “far off the course it normally flies on a test run.” Fighter planes from the Georgia air force base had interfered “no fewer than 60 times” with Goldstone radio links to its space vehicles. Last Oct. a fighter pilot had “accidentally” turned on an electronic device and disrupted contact with the Viking orbiter at Mars for more than an hour. Had the spacecraft been in a maneuver or an emergency, the mission would have been lost, the Viking scientists said. {Today, Aug 20/77, 1A) NASA later reported the gyro was working and data transmission was satisfactory. The boom, which was supposed to deploy 53min into the flight, had not extended and locked. To determine its position, controllers 12hr after launch had activated a plasma instrument on the scan platform and combined its readings relative to a known axis and the direction of the solar wind (data supplied by GSFC) to show that the boom had extended to within 2° of full deployment. JPL reported Aug. 22 that the spacecraft had been stable since 3pm EDT Aug. 20, except for a pitch and yaw disturbance at 5am Aug. 21; flight controllers were investigating. It reported Aug. 25 that the craft had undergone another disturbance like that of Aug. 21; controllers had ruled out the propulsion module’s having bumped the spacecraft. On the morning of Aug. 29, JPL calibrated the sun sensors and removed the dust cover on the infrared interferometer spectrometer. It had tried Aug. 26 to move the science boom to the locked position, but the computer system had aborted the command, showing that a problem existed. Controllers tried jettisoning the dust cover while reorienting the spacecraft, to jolt the assembly enough to open the boom hinge and lock it into position, but this was unsuccessful. JPL had decided to put Voyager 2 on hold to allow controllers to concentrate on the launch of the other Voyager Sept. 5. (Voyager mission status bulletins 3 through 6)
Radio signals between the four Viking spacecraft on Mars and earth-based antennas had provided the most accurate confirmation so far of Einstein’s theory of relativity in an experiment conducted Nov. 25, 1976, when Mars moved behind the sun relative to the earth, causing a total blackout of communications with the Viking spacecraft. Radio signals transmitted to the Viking spacecraft from antennas at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia, had produced “incredibly precise” measurement of the radio transmission. According to Adam I. Braufman of the Mass. Institute of Technology, the “uncertainty” over a space of some 322 million km was less than 2m, an accuracy of five parts in 10 million millionths. The Viking radio science team was trying to confirm Einstein’s prediction that the sun’s gravitational force would bend and delay radio signals (or any form of radiation) traveling close to a massive body such as the sun. Previous tests using the spacecraft communications systems tended to confirm the theory, but the Viking test proved much more accurate than the previous ones. (NYT, Jan 7/77, A-8; W Post, Jan 7/77, A-l)
The W Post reported that NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher would resign effective May 1. Appointed by President Nixon in 1971, Dr. Fletcher had headed the agency during the end of the Apollo project; the successful Skylab missions; the Apollo-Soyuz test project; and numerous unmanned missions including the launch of the earth resources monitoring system, Landsat, and the Mars probe Viking. Dr. Fletcher planned to return to private life after his resignation. (WPost, Mar 11/77, A3; NASA Release 77-48)
Launch preparations had begun for the 2-spacecraft mission to outer planets Jupiter and Saturn scheduled for late summer 1977, KSC announced. The center described them as “almost a replay” of the Mars Viking launches in 1975. Launch date for the first Mariner Jupiter/Saturn (MJS) at complex 41 would be Aug. 20, with the second scheduled 10 days later. Preparation for two major launches within a 10-day timeframe had required “the choreography of an intricate ballet,” the center said. Checkout of the Titan Centaur rockets 6 and 7 was in progress; operations personnel expected arrival Apr. 11 of a pathfinder spacecraft to be used for pad tests, along with 2 flight craft expected Apr. 25 and May 23. The MJS spacecraft would weigh 3 times more than the Pioneer 10 and 11 that reached Saturn in 1973 and 1974, respectively, and would carry additional instrumentation such as narrow- and high-resolution wide-angle TV cameras, cosmic-ray detectors, and infrared spectrometers and radiometers to study the outer planets and satellites. John Noble Wilford reported in the NYT that the new vehicles would have a new name—either Voyager or Discovery—fitting the new design for outer planet environments characterized by pale sunlight and great radio distances. The new craft looked like “a giant round ear,” Wilford said, consisting of a dish antenna with struts and booms resembling spider legs. The powerful lightweight radio-transmitter tubes that had been the major problem in building the spacecraft had arrived from the contractor a year behind schedule, reducing the time for “life tests” of their durability and performance. Each of the spacecraft would also carry a 3-computer system to handle failures during flight, in view of the 2.5hr required for round-trip radio signals between earth and Saturn. Trajectories chosen should provide data on particles and magnetic currents (magnetosphere) around Jupiter and Saturn, and if possible Uranus; on the atmospheres of those planets, believed to have gaseous rather than solid surfaces; and on the surfaces of any solid moons of the outer planets. The Uranus encounter would occur in Jan. 1986, nearly 8.5yr after launch from earth. (KSC Release 65-77; NYT, Feb 22/77, 15)
NASA announced that Thomas C. Duxbury, a guest investigator at JPL, would use the shadow of Martian moon Phobos on Sept. 20, 24, and 28 to pinpoint the exact location of the Viking 1 lander on the planet’s surface. JPL explained that the spacecraft had landed within a known area but was too small for detection by orbiter cameras, which had been unable to tie in photographs of the site to the lander’s position. Duxbury had programmed both the lander and the orbiter to take a picture as the shadow of Phobos passed over the landing site; the time of the photograph and the exact position of the shadow on 3 occasions would permit calculation of the lander’s position. Duxbury was one of 20 chosen to participate in the Viking guest investigator program set up by NASA to offer experimenter opportunities beyond those originally planned for the mission. (NASA Release 77-199)
Distant planets Uranus and Neptune had turned out to have spin rates similar to earth’s, so that their days correspond to earth days and they had probably come from the same debris that earth did, reported Kitt Peak astronomers Michael J.S. Belton and Bethanne Hayes. Using the observatory’s just-over-400cm telescope, world’s second largest, the astronomers found that (contrary to previous theory) spin rates of the outermost planets (except for Pluto) resembled not those of Saturn and Jupiter but rather those of earth and Mars. The discovery indicated they were solid ice-like bodies, not big balls of gas, Dr. Belton said. Using a smaller telescope at Kitt Peak, a separate 4-member team of scientists had reported the first observation of weather patterns in the upper atmosphere of Neptune. Dr. Richard Joyce and 3 scientists from the Univ. of Hawaii had found a marked increase in Neptune’s reflectivity between April 1975 and March 1976, suggesting the presence of thin transient clouds high in that planet’s atmosphere. Astronomers had been using the planet as a standard measure of brightness, thinking that it experienced no atmospheric changes. (W Post, Feb 20/77, F16)
Nature reported that a May 13 meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in London had discussed Mars’s moons Phobos and Deimos, the 100th anniversary of whose discovery would occur in Aug. Observations, both ground-based and from satellites, had revealed oddities: Phobos, the only satellite in earth’s solar system that circled its central body faster than that body could spin on its axis, would appear to an observer on the planet’s surface to rise in the west and set in the east, whereas its fellow Deimos would appear to rise in the east and set in the west like earth’s moon. Also, the orbit of Phobos was coming nearer to the surface of Mars (a body approaching within 8700km would be pulled apart by differential tidal forces, the article said). A Soviet astrophysicist, I.S. Shklovsky, had claimed in the 1950s that the low density of Phobos indicated it was a hollow artificial satellite produced by an advanced civilization on Mars. Viking spacecraft images had shown that the moons were blackish gray rather than the red of Mars, indicating different composition; astronomer Joe Veverka of Cornell Univ. concluded that the moons had originated in the asteroid belt. Viking had found that the lOkm-diameter Stickney crater on Phobos covered 40% of the maximum diameter of Phobos itself. The two Mars moons had almost identical shapes (triaxial ellipsoids) and both rotated synchronously with their orbital periods and their long axes pointing directly at Mars (Nature, June 30/77, 758)
The Chicago Tribune reported that A. Thomas Young, NASA’s head of lunar and planetary programs, had presented to the Washington, D.C. meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union a planetary-exploration plan to launch two roving vehicles to Mars in 1984, a possible robot-vehicle landing on Mercury, and flights to Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Halley’s Comet, and four asteroids. The plan also included launch of automated ships to Mars in 1990 to collect samples of rock and soil and return them to earth. (C Trib, June 7/77, 4-16)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that the USAF industry team that produced and demonstrated the B-l aircraft system was 1976 recipient of the Collier trophy, rather than the NASA Viking project with its “spectacular success” in landing spacecraft and instrumentation on Mars. The AFSCNewsreview said that the B-l team represented the Air Force, Rockwell Inti. Corp., General Electric, Boeing Co., Cutler-Hammer’s airborne instruments laboratory division, and more than 3000 other subcontractors and suppliers. The NAA noted that 50yr earlier the solo flight of Lindbergh across the Atlantic, considered a shoo-in, had failed to receive the trophy given for “the greatest achievement in aviation in America, the value of which has been demonstrated by actual use during the preceding year”; that trophy committee had unanimously awarded it to Charles L. Lawrence, designer of the Wright Whirlwind aircooled radial engine that had powered not only Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, but also a number of other notable flights in 1927. (NAA newsletter, May 77, 1; AFSC Newsreview, May 77, 4)
NASA formally adjudged the Viking 75 mission, launched toward Mars on Aug. 20 and Sept. 9, 1975, successful, according to the post-landing mission operations report. All Viking instruments except the seismometer on the first lander (which failed to uncage itself) operated successfully and were continuing to send data to earth. The prelaunch mission objectives (advancing knowledge of Mars by orbital observation and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the planet’s surface) had been realized, the report said. (MOR S-815-75-01/02)
JPL reported it had assisted DFRC with an engine problem on a possible Mars reconnaissance plane, a small remotely powered vehicle (RPV) called the Mini Sniffer developed by DFRC’s Dale Reed for environmental research at 100 000ft above earth’s surface. The 13ft aircraft with a 22ft wingspan, powered by an airless 30hp engine running on hydrazine, was the first propeller-driven plane designed to operate above 50 000ft. JPL had taken a hand when asked by DFRC to help with an engine-catalyst problem; Dr. Jose Chirivella, who solved the problem, saw the possibilities of using the miniplane on Mars. Deployment of 16 mini RPVs, 8 from each of 2 carrier spacecraft, over Mars so that each could make 5 or more separate takeoffs and landings in different locations, could achieve a total of 80 possible missions. The carriers, orbiting about Mars, would serve as comsats to collect data from the mini RPVs for relay to earth. The Martian RPVs would be instrumented to collect seismographic, meteorological, and geochemical data; they would conduct aerial magnetic and gravity surveys, take high-resolution photos, look for subsurface water, and study the speed and direction of winds and the pressure and density of the atmosphere. They might also collect surface samples from widely separated areas, storing them at a central location for return to earth by later missions. The small craft could be folded into 3m-long canisters protected by coverings that would fall away when parachutes unfolded to support the vehicles as they opened out to flight configuration for descent and cruise through the lower Martian atmosphere, landing like helicopters under power from variable-thrust retrorockets. (JPL Universe, Dec 9/77, 1)
NASA announced resumption of communication with the four Viking-mission vehicles—two landers and two orbiters—at the end of the “conjunction” period during which contact was degraded and temporarily lost because of the changing position of Mars, behind the sun with relation to the earth since Nov. 1976. The Viking mission extended into the post-conjunction period would use the functioning spacecraft to obtain seasonal-variation data, do long duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and gather additional information not possible during the primary mission because of time or observational constraints. No known limitations would preclude completion of at least a year of extended mission and probably more, the announcement said, as the orbiters had made minimal use of their consumables during the early mission and had performed a minimal number of battery-recharge cycles. Lander B’s location at Mars 44°N would encounter temperatures below the qualification limits in the winter season, but the effect of this was unpredictable because lander tests had not gone beyond qualification limits. Extended-mission data collection had actually begun last Nov. when controllers had used the spacecraft transponders passively to measure ranging, tracking, signal-time delay, and solar-corona-induced perturbation. The extended mission would continue through May 1978, the announcement said, and data analysis would continue through Sept. 1977; requirements for data analysis beyond FY 1978 were under study. (MOR-S-815-75-01/02)
NASA reported that Dr. Herbert Frey, a NASA-Univ. of Md. scientist working at GSFC, had prepared a paper for presentation June 2 at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., suggesting that asteroid bombardment more than 4 billion yr ago that created earth’s ocean basins had resulted in the development of life on this planet. Building on the work of other scientists, including that of GSFC’s Dr. Paul Lowman on earth’s crustal evolution, Dr. Frey used data from Apollo lunar landings and photography from spacecraft studies of the moon, Mercury, and Mars to show that during the reference period all the inner bodies suffered heavy asteroid impacts which must have affected earth as well. The impacts led to geological changes on earth that resulted in plate tectonics and the formation of seabeds. If the presence of life had eventuated from catastrophic bombardment by asteroids, the paper noted, then life elsewhere might also depend upon such events. (NASA Release 77-105)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
A short-circuit in the power supply of Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer (GSMS) had forced controllers at JPL to turn off the instrument Mar. 12, NASA reported. JPL received confirmation of the command from the Viking system Mar. 14. NASA had shut down the GCMS, which had analyzed the composition of Martian atmosphere and soil early in the mission, to avoid damage to other instruments such as the onboard computer and communications system. (NASA Release 77-51)
ERDA announced that the longest space mission ever planned—a lOyr trip by two Voyager spacecraft to the outer planets—would get power from RTGs (radioisotope thermoelectric generators) developed by ERDA as successors to nuclear systems that had powered earlier missions to Mars and Jupiter. ERDA’s predecessor, the Atomic Energy Commission, had begun the research on nuclear power for space missions. ERDA plans included developing high-efficiency thermoelectric materials and dynamic converters for NASA missions such as a Jupiter orbiter in 1982 or a Mars rover in 1984, and DOD satellites in the 1980s. (ERDA Release NF-77-20)
