NASA announced that Voyager 1 on its way to Jupiter and Saturn had completed transit of the asteroid belt, leaving the region Sept. 8. The belt, a band of rock and dust 360 million km (233 million mi) wide between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter with its inner edge about 105 million km (65 million mi) from earth’s orbit, was formerly believed an impassable hazard to spacecraft bound for outer planets and beyond. Voyager 1, launched after Voyager 2, had entered the asteroid belt Dec. 10 a few hours behind Voyager 2 on a master trajectory that would carry it steadily beyond Voyager2, which it would overtake Dec. 15. Voyager 1 would make its closest approach to Jupiter Mar. 5, 1979, at 286 000km (178 OOOmi); Voyager 2 would pass 643 000km (399 OOOmi) from Jupiter in July 1979. Both spacecraft would continue on to Saturn where Voyager 1 would arrive in Nov. 1980, Voyager 2 in Aug. 1981. (NASA Release 78-137)
JSC announced plans for the week-long ninth annual lunar and planetary science conference focusing on the moon and other worlds, with the Lunar and Planetary Institute of Houston as co-host. Topics of presentations would include the formation of the solar system; new discoveries in moon rocks; the histories of planets; meteorites containing material from ancient stars; and comparative studies of Mars, Venus, and the earth. For the third consecutive year, the USSR would send a delegation. A number of topics would be emphasized: constraints on structures; composition and history of planetary interiors; characteristics and movement of material on lunar, planetary, and asteroid surfaces; characteristics and evolution of volcanic landforms; characterization and evolution of planetary crusts; nature and effect of impact processes; extraterrestrial materials; solar, interplanetary, and interstellar probes; and earliest history of the solar system. JSC had scheduled special sessions on industrial development of near-earth space, on origin of the solar system, on the future of planetary exploration, and on Mars and Mercury. (JSC Release 78-40)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had fabricated and displayed a prototype roving ball planetary explorer, an instrument-laden reinforced-fabric ball capable of inflating and deflating automatically or on remote command from earth during possible Mars exploration. Driven by high winds known to prevail on the planet’s surface, or powered and steered by an inner drive system much like that of a bicycle, such balls or balloons could roam freely and conduct scientific experiments and measurements over a vast area. A ball could partially deflate if necessary for additional study of a particular area. This “bouncing ball” would offer the advantages of low cost, long life, and extended traverse of the planet’s landscape. As a Mars explorer, a ball would constitute a payload of 20 to 30kg (about 44 to 661b) capable of a traverse of 100 to 200km (60 to 120mi). The “skin” of the ball, “sandwiched” or laminated Mylar and Kevlar (both registered DuPont products), would be strong enough to cover some of Mars’s most difficult terrain. Schjeldahl Corp. designed and built the ball for the Aerospace Corp. for the ATMOSAT project. Jacques Blamont of France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) had proposed the concept. (JPL Universe, Mar 3/78, 1)
NASA announced that scientists working for NASA and NSF had discovered living organisms inside rocks on the frozen deserts of the Antarctic. The discovery, made in a region called the Dry Valleys whose harsh climate resembled conditions on Mars, would significantly extend the known limits of life on earth, and would have important implications in a search for extraterrestrial life. Dr. E. Imre Friedmann and Dr. Roseli Ocampo-Friedmann, a husband-wife team who had searched for more than 15yr for microbial life in rocks, had made the discovery. They had isolated the newly discovered microorganisms (bacteria, algae, and fungi) and were growing them in laboratory cultures for clues to their endurance. Although the Dry Valleys of Antarctica had appeared lifeless, and the region’s freedom from snow and ice, combined with constantly blowing winds, had produced an environment among the world’s harshest, the Friedmanns had found in the Dry Valleys a widespread rich microbial vegetation under the surface of rocks, in the airspaces of porous rocks, or in fissures. Rocks broken open had revealed the presence of organisms as a dark-green layer a few millimeters deep. Dr. Richard Young, NASA’s chief of planetary biology, said the Dry Valleys in many ways resembled the environmental extremes found on Mars by the 1976 Viking landers, which searched the Martian soil unsuccessfully for signs of microbial life or organic molecules. “If Martian life forms exist only in the interior of Martian rocks, as is principally the case in the Antarctic, that could easily serve as an explanation for the lack of evidence on Mars,” Young said. “This interesting (if speculative) analogy is of considerable interest to NASA in designing future attempts to study planetary surfaces for evidence of life.” NASA and NSF research grants had supported the Friedmanns’ work. (NASA Release 78-14)
NASA reported the U.S. Postal Service would commemorate the Viking missions to Mars by issuing a special postal stamp Thursday, July 20, second anniversary of the Viking 1 landing on Mars. LaRC and the Postal Service would hold a First Day of Issue ceremony in LaRC’s activity center, and Dr. Donald Hearth, center director, would buy the first stamp. Robert McCall, whose two large murals were on display in the National Air and Space Museum, had designed the stamp. NASA had launched two Viking spacecraft toward Mars in Aug. and Sept. 1975; the Viking 1 lander had touched down on Mars at 8:12am EDT July 20, 1976, and the Viking 2 lander arrived at 6:59pm EDT Sept. 3, 1976. During the mission ending in Nov. 1976, the landers and their partner, the orbiter spacecraft, had conducted experiments in 13 scientific disciplines. NASA had extended a reduced Viking mission until May 1978 to gather more information on Mars’s weather, seasonal variations, and soil characteristics; a further reduced mission controlled by JPL would continue through Feb. 1979. The Viking high-resolution photographs of the planet from the surface and from orbit, numbering more than 30 000, had mapped most of Mars and had provided scientists with valuable information. (NASA Release 78-106; LaRC Release 78-34; Langley Researcher, July 14/78, 1)
NASA had been considering FY81 and 82 missions to send a probe toward Halley’s comet and land it on Tempel 2 comet, and one that would return a sample of Martian soil to earth, AvWk reported. Return of a Mars sample—to be studied first aboard the Space Shuttle in earth orbit—had become the key mission sought by scientists planning Mars strategy for NASA, who viewed a sample mission as a direct follow-on to the Viking mission in progress. NASA would have to make its decisions this summer on specific missions for FY82. NASA might request the comet mission for FY81, in view of the determination by NASA planners and scientists to send a spacecraft near Halley’s comet, even though a plan to rendezvous with the comet had disappeared when NASA was unable to obtain a Halley mission in FY79. The Halley/Tempel 2 comet mission would consist of a 1985 Space Shuttle launch of a vehicle using solar-electric propulsion to encounter Halley’s comet in Nov. 1985 about 93 million mi from earth, eject a probe that would dive into the head or nucleus area of the comet, and return atmospheric data. The mother spacecraft would continue a high-speed flyby of the comet, either passing through the comet’s tail or flying a safer trajectory in front of it. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 14)
Despite the wealth of data on Mars provided by Mariner 9 and the Viking missions, some mysteries remained, including the “White Rock,” a unique topographic feature nestling inside a crater not far from the Martian equator, JPL Universe reported. White Rock’s discovery by Mariner 9 had intrigued scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory because of the reflectivity of its unknown basic material, and the fact that no other formation on Mars resembled it. At first glance White Rock looked like the paw-print of some manytoed animal, as it was rounded on two-thirds of its perimeter and on the remaining sides had great serrated formations like claws, referred to as “reentrants” and “dunes,” reaching into the floor of the surrounding Martian crater. Scientists believed the ridged area had been eroded by ORIGINAL PAGE IS ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978 Q£ POOR QUALITY NOVEMBER White Rock, strange topographic feature inside a crater on Mars whose composition had puzzled scientists: not snow or ice, because of its proximity to the equator, the formation exhibited high reflectivity first noticed by Mariner 9 in 1972. This photomosaic came from the Viking orbiter in Sept. 1978 (straight lines on the image resulted from assembly of the photographs into a mosaic). (NASA photo 78-H-634) ever-present Martian surface winds. The possibility of ice cover on its surface had been rejected early on because of its proximity to the equator. Speculation on its mineral composition had included salt and/or sand theories. Roughly 18km across, White Rock appeared to rise from the floor of an impact crater some 93km in diameter. Very small impact craters on the floor of the larger crater and on the feature itself might suggest the age of the formation in relation to its surroundings. Although labelled “white,” general opinion was that the feature had a very light orange or pink tint. After Mariner 9 discovered the unique feature, Viking had been programmed for a closer look; Viking's more sophisticated vidicon would offer five times better resolution at a similar altitude. Computer processing of Viking data could produce information to help solve the mystery of White Rock. {JPL Universe, Nov 10/78, 2)
AvWk reported NASA’s announcement that it would send Pioneer 11 to fly just outside the rings of Saturn as a pathfinder for two Voyager spacecraft scheduled to reach Saturn in 1980 and 1981. Passing 15 OOOmi rather than 3700mi from Saturn’s surface, the new course would place Pioneer 11 at about the same distance from Saturn as the trajectory of Voyager 2, if NASA should decide to use Saturn’s gravity to hurl Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The outside trajectory would permit NASA to achieve the maximum science return for all three spacecraft. Pioneer 11 should reach Saturn in Sept. 1978. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 15; Lewis News, Jan 6/78, 2)
DFRC and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had joined in a study of the “Mars airplane” (a derivative of the Mini-Sniffer), the DFRC X-Press reported. The idea of a Mars airplane resulted from a January 1977 meeting between David Scott, former director of DFRC, and JPL director Dr. Bruce Murray, who had offered JPL’s assistance in perfecting the hydrazine engine of the Mini-Sniffer remotely-piloted vehicle (RPV) designed to fly at 70 000 to 100 000ft. The plane was originally a low-cost alternative to the U-2 for atmospheric research; DFRC’s Dale Reed and JPL personnel had recognized the possibility that the Mini-Sniffer could cruise halfway around Mars in the planet’s low gravity and thin atmosphere, using its unique nonairbreathing hydrazine engine. Developmental Sciences, Inc. had received a $60 000 contract for designs to send four Mars airplanes folded into capsules to conduct low-altitude surveillance flights down Martian canyons and volcanoes and over icecaps. The researchers believed technology was advancing so quickly in lightweight solar cells, beamed-microwave energy, lightweight electric motors and batteries, and lightweight radioisotope electric generators, that it would soon produce a generation of high-flying long-endurance long-range aircraft, the paper noted. (DFRC X-Press, Dec 15/78,3)
A new gallery, “Exploring the Planets,” opened Nov. 7 at the National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Star reported. Melvin Zisfein, acting museum director, said the gallery was “jammed full of information and contains more facts and figures and concepts than any other gallery in the museum. Yet the information is easy to digest. We tried hard to make sure you didn’t need a degree in astronomy to understand it.” Keeping up with new information on the solar system (the gallery would be updated continuously) was one of the challenges. The gallery, designed by Lucius Lomas, had succeeded in teaching without neglecting imaginative features visitors had come to expect at the museum. Visitors could make a “Descent to Venus” in a simulated cockpit of an interplanetary spaceship circa 2150. A “Flight over Mars” from an altitude of 100 000 to 200 000ft (actually relief maps of the Martian landscape sculpted on to rotating cylinders and viewed through special windows) was based on photos taken from Mariner 9 and Vikings 1 and 2. A full-scale replica of the Voyager spacecraft was the largest single object in the gallery. The relative sizes of Jupiter and 21 other planetary bodies was conveyed in a corner by brightly colored spheres made to scale: Jupiter was 10ft in diameter; Ceres, the largest asteroid, linch; the earth, 1ft. Six computer terminals offered “Space Academy exams” where visitors could test their knowledge of the solar system. (W Star, Nov 7/78, F 3)
The most extensive study ever made of Venus would begin in December when Pioneer Venus 1 and 2 arrived at the planet, NASA announced. Pioneer Venus 1 would swing into orbit around the planet Dec. 4, taking pictures and making measurements for one Venusian yr (225 earth days) or more. On Dec. 9 the four probes and transporter bus constituting Pioneer Venus 2 would plunge into the Venusian clouds at widely separated points to make detailed measurements of the dense atmosphere from top to bottom. These flights, the first devoted to studying the atmosphere and weather of another planet on a global scale, would use the largest number of vehicles so far for such a study, and would make measurements at the greatest number of locations. They also would seek information on characteristics of Venus’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as the lower atmosphere, and would study the interactions of these regions with the solar wind. At periapsis (orbital low point) the Pioneer orbiter would come as close as 150km (90mi) to the planet’s surface, dipping into the thin ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978 ORIGINAL PAGE IS rJOVEMBER OF POOR QUALITX Venus upper atmosphere, sampling its composition, and making radar measurements of surface elevations and roughness. It would also take daily ultraviolet and infrared pictures of the thick clouds and atmosphere. The orbiter’s primary mission was designed to cover the time it took Venus to make one revolution on its axis; the slow rotation of the planet under the periapsis of the orbit would permit closeup radar mapping of the entire circumference. The four probes of Pioneer Venus 2 would enter the atmosphere at points 10 000km (6O00mi) apart over the planet’s earth-facing hemisphere: the large probe would enter Venus’s atmosphere near the equator on the day side; the day probe would enter Venus’s southern hemisphere Artist’s conception of Pioneer Venus arbiter and multiprobe investigating the cloud-covered planet on their arrival in late 1978. The orbiter (left) v/ould circle Venus for 8mo, relaying images of the clouds and measurements of the atmosphere, while making radar maps of the surface. The probe (right) would split into five entry craft, four to sample the atmosphere down to the surface at widely separated points; the transport bus would continue to sample the upper atmosphere until it burned up from friction. (NASA photo 78-H-20&) on the planet’s day side; the night probe, the night southern hemisphere on the night side; and the north probe, the north polar vortex on the night side. The transporter bus would enter in the southern hemisphere on the day side. Critical operations on arrival near the planet would be to inject Pioneer Venus 1 into orbit while it was out of radio contact behind Venus, and the entry and descent through the atmosphere of the four probes and bus. On Dec. 2, controllers at ARC would orient the orbiter for orbit insertion, and the next day would load command-memory sequences. On Dec. 9, the probes would be in position to make their hr-long descent through Venus’s atmosphere. Major operations problem would be retrieving probe data; during the critical lhr 38min of probe and bus operations at Venus, all the Pioneer spacecrafts would be transmitting simultaneously. Radio frequencies of the probe signals would shift rapidly because of huge entry decelerations — from 42 OOOkm/hr (26 OOOmph) to about 65km/hr (40mph)—and signal distortions caused by Venus’s dense atmosphere. One consequence would be that, after the 10- to 15-sec communications blackout during entry, signals would reappear again at new frequencies. To ensure recovery of the data, NASA had installed special equipment in DSN stations at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia. To avoid loss of data, both DSN stations would use newly developed receivers and recorders with a frequency band wide enough to ensure receipt of the four shifting signals. The real-time system would use automatic tuners, but would lose some data. Scientists believed that the coordinated Pioneer Venus atmospheric data, combined with similar data from Mars, Jupiter, and other planets, would aid understanding of atmospheres in general. Studies of the interactions of temperatures, pressures, composition, clouds, and atmospheric dynamics different from those of earth should define mechanisms on another planet that would improve scientists’ understanding of earth’s complex weather processes. (NASA Release 78-181)
Preliminary analyses of Viking Orb iter 1 (VO-1) data on the Mars satellite Phobos revealed low density and a spectral reflectance and low albedo that suggested a composition similar to type I carbonaceous chondrites, reported Science magazine. VO-1 had obtained a spectacular picture sequence at 100km, an encounter by far the most demanding navigation performance of any interplanetary-spacecraft exploration to date. Since Phobos had a mean radius of only 11km and was only partially illuminated when viewed during the flyby, the VO-1 position relative to Phobos had required accuracy of within a few kilometers. Imaging data had revealed small positive features (hummocks), small craters with bright ejecta blankets, dark material on the floors of some craters, large variations in topography, and an abundance of linear features resembling crater chains. Further analysis would refine density estimates to determine Phobos’s origin. (Sci, Jan 6/78, 61) Corp had fired the apogee kick motor Jan. 7, putting the satellite into near-geosynchronous orbit. After initial positioning at 74°E the satellite would be moved to 60°E as backup to Intelsat IVA F-6, and was scheduled to be on station at 63 °E by mid-June. Intelsat IVA F-3 had an overall height of 6.99m and a diameter of 2.38m. Height of the solar panel was 2.82m. Liftoff weight was approximately 1515kg (33401b); in-orbit weight after apogee motor firing, 825.5kg (18201b). Design life was 7yr. Ten Intelsat IV and IVA satellites were currently in synchronous equatorial orbit over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans, providing full-time telephone, teletypewriter, data, and television services to 107 countries, territories, and possessions. The Intelsat IVA had almost two-thirds greater communications capability than the Intelsat IV series, with about 6250 two-way voice circuits and 2 television channels in its system configuration. The number of operating transponders had increased from 12 to 20. Improvement of the antenna system had produced greater effective bandwidth through frequency reuse by beam separation: for Indian Ocean service, the east-pointed beam of Intelsat IVA F-3 would illuminate Japan and Southeast Asia using a 320MHz bandwidth, and would reuse the same 320MHz bandwidth in the west beam illuminating Europe and Africa. In addition to eight east-beam transponders and eight west-beam transponders, four transponders connected to an earth-coverage antenna would illuminate all stations in the Indian Ocean region. The Communications Satellite Corp. (ComSatCorp), U.S. member of INTELSAT, would be management services contractor for the satellite system; ComSatCorp on behalf of INTELSAT would reimburse NASA under a launch-services agreement for costs of the Atlas-Centaur and the launch. The Intelsat IVA program represented an investment by 101 nations of approximately $295 million (US); this launch had cost approximately $47 million ($18 million for the satellite and $29 million for the launch vehicle and related services). (NASA Release 77-250; MOR E-491-633-78-5 [prelaunch] Jan 5/78, [postlaunch] June 23/78; W Star, Jan 7/78, A-5)
NASA announced that JPL engineers had commanded the shutdown of the Viking 2 orbiter on July 25, when it ran out of attitude-control gas after circling Mars 706 times over the past 2 yr. Several mo previously, orbiter 2 had sprung a leak in one of its attitude-control jets; engineers had slowed the leak but could not stop it completely. Viking 2, launched Sept. 9, 1975, had traveled more than 643 735 000km (400 million mi) to reach Mars orbit Aug. 7, 1976. The Viking 2 lander, riding piggyback on the orbiter, had landed Sept. 3, 1976, in the Utopia Planitia region of Mars’s northern hemisphere. Plans called for the Viking 1 orbiter and both Viking landers, functioning well almost 3yr after launch, to operate through Feb. 1979. The Viking project would continue through Sept. 1979 to allow scientists and engineers to process a backlog of data from the spacecraft and experiments. NASA had designed the orbiters to operate for 150da after planetary encounter and to orbit for at least 50yr, in hopes of avoiding planetary contamination before they disintegrated. (NASA Release 78-115)
