NASA’s Pioneer 11 had encountered Saturn’s bow shock (where the solar wind—a stream of electrified particles from the Sun—bent around Saturn’s magnetic field), project manager Charles Hall reported from ARC, adding that solar storms during the past few days had played havoc with Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was not designed in 1967 to fly to Saturn; that mission arose only after a successful Jupiter flyby in 1974, calling at first for Pioneer to fly through Saturn’s rings on what the Washington Post called a “kamikaze mission.” The most dangerous moment of the 6.5-year 2-million-mile journey would be crossing September 1 through belts of unknown material beyond the ring systems around Saturn that had been visible from Earth, during which Pioneer would risk a potentially fatal collision. Because of intense radiation (solar-particle interference was degrading the quality of Pioneer images), mission controllers at ARC had reduced the data transmission rate by half. Solar storms had occurred late in July and in midAugust, and high-energy particles from the second storm had reached Saturn at the same time as slower particles from the first storm. Reducing the transmission rate would diminish effects of interference and also the quality of the images. Pioneer would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring system at 10:44 a.m. EDT, but scientists would not know for 86 minutes whether it had survived (the time the signals needed to reach Earth). No one knew the composition of the 2 minute-wide third ring; if it consisted of boulders, Pioneer could probably get past it safely, but a ring of dust particles could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr. John Wolfe said chances for survival were half and half; pictures already transmitted by Pioneer were better than any yet taken from Earth telescopes. The Washington Post reported September 1 that solar storms had increased the noise level in space to 10 times normal. In early afternoon, Pioneer had flown into a detectable magnetosphere, showing that Saturn was surrounded by a strong and sizable magnetic field estimated at 700 to 1,000 times the size of Earth’s but roughly equivalent in strength. The New York Times reported September 2 that, as of 12:31 p.m. EDT September 1, Pioneer 11 had survived a hail of fine particles to get within 13,000 miles of Saturn for a 4-hour first encounter. During the approach, scientists were keeping watch on the plane of the visible rings through which Pioneer was descending: Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa was first to note Pioneer’s approach to “dangerous ring debris” in its path. However, the 10:30 a.m. crossing at a speed of 48,000 mph had taken only a second, though ARC had to wait until 2:02 p.m. to learn what had happened; when the radio signals continued past that moment without interruption, “a cheer went up.” LaRC’s Donald H. Humes said that Pioneer 11 might have had a close call, as the micrometeoroid detector had registered two impacts during the crossing: this was the limit of the instrument’s counting ability, and more impacts might actually have occurred. The impacts apparently caused no damage. The sharp rise in radiation encountered by Pioneer before it flew under the rings had fallen as abruptly as it rose, and by the time Pioneer was under the rings (closer to the planet) the radiation reading had disappeared completely. Dr. John Simpson of the University of Chicago said the rings were big enough to “scour out” nearly all the radiation trapped by the planet’s magnetic field. (The New York Times quoted Dr. Van Allen as saying that the radiation count while Pioneer flew under the rings was even lower than while the spacecraft was sitting on its launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 6.5 years ago. Saturn’s radiation, although it would be lethal to an unprotected human, posed no hazard to spacecraft, Van Allen added.) After its close approach, Pioneer swung behind the planet, out of radio contact for 78 minutes, during which its on-board instruments recorded data for later transmission. Upon reemerging, the spacecraft had to cross the ring plane again on its outward journey; the outbound crossing came at 2:32 p.m., and controllers again had to wait for indication that the spacecraft was safe. At 3:55 p.m. the signals affirmed that Pioneer 11 had survived another crossing. This was the last predicted hazard for the spacecraft, which would continue past Saturn to the outer edge of Earth’s solar system and enter interstellar space in 1993, by which time its radio would no longer be audible. The safe passage meant that Pioneer could spend September 2 and 3 photographing Titan and measuring Saturn’s rings from the dark side of the planet; also, that the two Voyager spacecraft following Pioneer could approach without fear of damage. In its two-hour passage, besides recording impacts, Pioneer had photographed a new ring previously undetected by Earth telescopes, called the F ring: scientists already knew of four rings called A through D (in order of discovery, not location), three of them bright enough to be seen from Earth telescopes, and a fifth (or E) ring had been suspected close to the A ring although Pioneer did not report it. Pioneer had also tracked what might be a new Saturn moon orbiting about 70,000 miles out; some thought it might be a known moon, Janus, but it was in a position indicating that it was an entirely new satellite that would bring Saturn’s count to 11, one short of Jupiter’s 12. Pioneer 11 photos of Saturn showed dark blue and green stripes across it just below the north pole; the colors, not so vivid from Earth, probably came from sunlight scattering in upper-atmosphere clouds. Jet streams like those seen on Jupiter appeared to whirl around Saturn at speeds of 300 mph. Pioneer images could give a better idea of the dimensions and composition of the rings when compared with Earth-based photographs. In the six years it had taken to reach Saturn, Pioneer 11 had reported a space-particle strike only once every two months or so, LaRC’s Humes recalled. Once past Saturn, Pioneer was to photograph Titan from about 221,000 miles, record its temperature and atmospheric methane, and try to detect “life chemicals”; as no life was evident on Venus or Mars, this might be the last chance to find extraterrestrial biology in the Earth’s solar system. First images of Titan had shown a fuzzy ball of light indicating a stratospheric layer of orange smog with blue streaks that might denote an atmosphere beneath the smog and clouds. The closest approach at 2:04 p.m. September 2 was 220,000 miles, and Pioneer had taken the first pictures at 260,000 miles. The pictures would be enhanced by computer before scientists could make detailed analysis. On September 3, Pioneer was already more than a million miles from Saturn, relaying no ill effects from the planet’s rings or radiation belts. Early on the morning of September 2, NASA reported loss of about two hours of Titan data from Pioneer transmissions to the Madrid station; ARC controllers did not know whether the loss occurred between spacecraft and station or between Spain and the control center about 40 miles south of San Francisco. A loss between spacecraft and station would be irretrievable: Pioneer had only the one opportunity for Titan observations after its close approach. It was not sending images at the time, but about 15 minutes of a CalTech infrared sensor’s readings on Titan temperature were lost. The cause might have been electrical storms in space or on Earth, or passage of the signals close to the surface of the Sun on their way to the Earth, any of which would make it difficult or impossible for the Madrid station to lock on to the signals. A dramatic difference in day-night Titan temperatures would suggest a thin atmosphere; a thicker, warmer atmosphere might be more hospitable to life forms. Project manager Charles Hall reported September 4 that the Titan data loss previously attributed to radiation disturbances was now thought to result from radiofrequency interference by a Soviet satellite. Both Pioneer 11 and three USSR satellites had been operating on a frequency reserved for scientific use. The Soviet Union had twice agreed to shut down during Saturn encounter, and Hall said NASA had “no doubt the Soviets would have acted” if they had been asked; “we did not request them to turn off their satellite on Monday,” U.S. scientists did not realize at first that signals from a recently launched Soviet satellite might interfere with reception of Pioneer data, being “between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than the signals we were receiving from our spacecraft.” Aerospace Daily said September 6 that the three Soviet satellites that had stopped transmitting September 1-2 for the benefit of Pioneer’s Saturn flyby were early-warning satellites designed to detect U.S. ballistic missile attacks on the Soviet Union. Cosmos 1024, 1109, and 1124 had suspended transmissions September 1 and 2 at NASA’s request; however, no request was made regarding September 3, and Cosmos 1124 had operated as usual. Western analysts questioned, Aerospace Daily noted, “whether the U.S. would suspend communications with any of is early-warning satellites if the Soviets made such a request” during a planetary mission. Pioneer project officials told a September 6 news briefing that the loss of Titan data was not the fault of the Soviet satellite, which was broadcasting before but not during the lost transmission. Poor data had resulted from the combination of solar storm and poor transmission from Madrid. Some data had in fact reached ARC, but was so “noisy” as to be useless. Scientists said the moon discovered by Pioneer was inside the orbit of Janus, previously the innermost known satellite of Saturn; the new ring (labeled G) was between the orbits of Rhea and Titan, beyond the rings visible to Earth telescopes. (NY Times, Sept 2/79, 1; Sept 3/79, A-l; Sept 4/79, C-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; W Post, Sept 1/79, A-3; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 5/79, A-10; W Star Sept 1/79, A-4; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; A/D, Sept 6/79, 17; Today, Sept 1/79, 4A; Sept 2/79, 1A)
Pioneer 10 had become the first U.S. craft to fly beyond Mars, Today reported. An Associated Press (AP) story said Pioneer 10, now 2 billion miles from home, had crossed the orbit of Uranus July 11 on its way out of the solar system. Launched in March 1972, Pioneer 10 sent back the first close-up views of Jupiter 21 months later and continued to transmit “valuable data about unexplored space and the outer solar system,” said NASA spokesman Duke Reiber. A spokesman for TRW, which built both Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11, said Pioneer 10 would cross Pluto’s orbit in 1987. (Today, July 13/79, 10A; NASA Release 79-84)
NASA announced that MSFC had appointed a board to investigate the automatic cutoff of a test firing July 2 at NSTL of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article (three main engines mounted in an orbiter aft section and attached to an external tank). A liquid-hydrogen leak from a main fuel valve caused the cutoff after 18.5 seconds; no explosion occurred, and the gaseous nitrogen and water fire-control systems put out an external fire resulting from hydrogen accumulation around the test article’s aft area. Inspection revealed damage to the aft heat shield and charring of external-tank insulation, but the engines appeared generally in good condition. (NASA Release 79-92) 570 million miles a flood of scientific data and “stunning photographs of the planet and some of its moons,” as the New York Times described them. Scientists at the JPL, control center for the mission, said that the flight was continuing to provide them with “new surprises.” They had modified observing sequences on Voyager 2 to benefit from discoveries by Voyager 1 on its encounter in March. Changes included more darkside images of the planet to measure lightning and aurora; images of Jupiter’s ring, taken away from the equatorial plane; and about nine hours of continuous imaging of Io for volcanic activity. Voyager 2’s inward track past three of the four “Galilean” satellites had let it see regions not viewed by Voyager 1; its path was “more conservative,” as it passed 10 Jupiter radii above the visible clouds compared to Voyager i’s 4.9 radii, for “complementary observations.” Voyager 2 studies began April 25 and would continue for a seven month look compared to Voyager Ts three month look. Voyager 2 had been launched August 20, 1977; Voyager 1, launched September 5, 1977, on a faster and shorter course, had overtaken its sister ship before the end of the year. Scientists found that Jupiter and its moons did not resemble planets or satellites nearer the Sun, nor one another. Surprises in the findings were due, they said, to real differences between the outer and inner solar system and lack of previous knowledge, a result of the distance separating Earth from Jupiter. Before Voyager 1, “we thought we had some idea of what planets were like,” said Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey after seeing Europa images from Voyager 2. Instead of a sphere heavily pocked such as Earth’s moon and Mars from meteor impacts, Voyager 2 images showed Europa “as smooth as a billiard ball,” with hardly any craters on a surface covered by a mantle of slushy snow and ice up to 60 miles deep, with far-reaching shallow marks like cracks in an eggshell. The spacecraft passed Callisto and Ganymede on its way toward Europa and, after its encounter with Jupiter, had begun a 10-hour watch for Io, where it photographed six volcanoes erupting. On its approach to Jupiter, Voyager 2 had encountered radiation so intense that JPL had turned off a sensitive ultraviolet (UV) detector six hours earlier than planned; however, project director Ray Heacock declared “no problems and no failures in any of our instruments.” (JPL Release 901; NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, June 26/79; NY Times, July 10/79, C-l; W Post, July 10/79, A-10; W Star July 11/79, A-4; July 13/79, A-10) The PRC news service told of the difficulties encountered by Skylab and the U.S. government’s offers of assistance and compensation in case of damage or injury, noting that some airlines had suspended flights during the critical period. Tass said that western Australia authorities had “warned the population that some parts of Skylab might be radioactive and urged. .. caution in approaching them.” At a NASA press conference a few days earlier, a reporter asked how NASA could tell if someone brought in a piece of debris claiming falsely that it was part of Skylab. Richard G. Smith, deputy associate administrator, space transportation systems, who had been “actively in charge of Skylab activities for NASA,” replied that “it is very easy to identify an object that’s been in space. The high-energy particles that penetrate it in orbit give an extremely low-level but characteristic radiation background—no radiation for anybody to be worried about.. .But it’s very easy to determine that.” United Press International (UPI) reported July 13 that the Kalgoorlie town hall had squeezed into its lobby the biggest fragment recovered so far, a 6.5-foot by 3.25-foot cylindrical piece of metal bearing a stamped number 102: “very good for the tourist industry,” said Mayor Ray Finlayson. (NASA press conf July 6/79; coord ctr bltns July 9, 10, 11/79; NASA Dly Actv Rept July 12/79; W Star, July 12/79, A-l; UPI, July 14/79, A-7; FBIS, Xinhua in Chinese, July 12/79; Tass in English, July 13/79; AvWk, July 16/79, 22)
NASA set June 30, 1980, as the date of the first Shuttle launch, depending on several milestones: Columbia rollout from the orbiter-processing facility to the vertical-assembly building in late March 1980; rollout of the complete Shuttle stack (orbiter, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank) from the VAB to launch pad 39A in mid-April; and a flight-readiness (20-seeond) firing of the Shuttle’s main engine on the launch pad in mid-May. Also needed to make this schedule was certification of the Shuttle main engine by June 30, 1980. Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch said that “some time in August or September” would be a much more likely date as unforeseen problems could delay the launch. NASA planned nine unmanned launches in 1980, eight of them reimbursable by other organizations. (NASA Release 79-162) During November: NASA announced appointment effective immediately of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of JSC’s Shuttle payload and integration development program, as acting associate administrator for STS operations at Headquarters. Lunney would set up the new office that resulted from NASA’s decision to separate STS acquisition from operations, reporting to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. Lunney had been with NASA since 1959, serving at LeRC and LaRC and going to Houston when the MSFC was created. There, he was technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz test project 1972-1975 and was deputy associate administrator for space flight at Headquarters before taking the position at JSC in August 1977. (NASA Release 79-156; NASA anno Nov 16/79) —NASA announced’appointment of A. Thomas Young as director of GSFC, succeeding Dr. Robert Cooper, who left government service in June. Young, deputy director of ARC since February 1979, had been with NASA since 1961 and had worked at LaRC as mission director for the Viking mission to Mars and mission-definition manager for the lunar orbiter project. Before assignment to ARC, he had headed the Headquarters Office of Space Sciences planetary program. (NASA Release 79-164; NASA anno Nov 30/79) —NASA announced that John W. Boyd, on detail as deputy director of DFRC since January 1, would return January 1, 1980, to his post as associate director of ARC. He had begun working at ARC in 1949 as an aeronautical engineer, becoming research assistant to the director of ARC in 1966 and deputy director for aeronautics and flight systems in 1970, serving in that position until his detail to DFRC. He was named associate director of ARC in July 1979.	(NASA anno Nov 19/79) —DFRC announced that Robert R Johannes would become deputy director of DFRC, effective December 1, replacing John W. Boyd. Formerly with the U.S. Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Johannes joined NASA in 1979 and had been director of engineering at DFRC. (DFRC Release 79-40)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
DOT announced that Secretary Brock Adams had sent to Congress proposed legislation to provide $6.6 billion for improving U.S. airports and airway systems over 5 years, beginning October 1, 1980. The proposal emphasized aviation safety measures to meet expected 1980s growth in air transportation. Financed by a 10 year continuation of the airport/airway trust fund and related aviation user taxes, the bill would include airport development and planning; acquisition and upgrading of airway facilities and equipment; research to reduce congestion and delays at large U.S. airports; improvement of air traffic control, instrument landing systems and radars, and other navigation aids; reduction of aircraft noise; and funding for smaller airports to reduce the load on larger ones. (DOT Release 51-79) During April: NASA reported new data on Venus From the Pioneer mission and the radar at the Arecibo observatory in Puerto Rico. Radar had given best information on the surface of Venus, not visible through optical telescopes because of heavy cloud cover. Radar images covering an area 80 million square kilometers showed craters on Venus as large as 320 kilometers in diameter; like lunar craters, which they resembled, they apparently resulted from meteorite impacts. A circular area 1,120 kilometers in diameter called Alpha, first noticed because of high radar reflectivity, consisted of many parallel ridges identifiable for great distances. This area had no Earth counterpart except extensive dune systems in the Arabian peninsula; Alpha showed a central dark object, possibly a volcano. Another radar feature known as Beta, with long rays of rough material extending out as far as 48 kilometers, also had a central dark area like a volcano crater. The radar also detected parallel ridges about 2,100 miles high, extending more than 960 kilometers across the surface of Venus, forming a structure exceeding the Grand Canyon in scale. A report on Pioneer Venus orbiter and multiprobe mission findings included discovery of the largest canyon in the solar system, bigger than Mar’s Vallis Marineris, previously thought largest. Lightning activity detected by USSR Venera spacecraft was continuous from altitudes of 32 kilometers down to 2 kilometers, with discharges as frequent as 25 per second. Pioneer’s orbiter apparently saw this lightning also; experimenters Dr. Boris Ragent of ARC and Dr. Jacques Blamont of the University of Paris now theorized that a glow measured by Pioneer instruments was continuous indistinguishable lightning on Venus, rather than an occurrence on the spacecraft. The orbiter also found an 1,100-kilometer-wide hole containing few or no clouds in the North Pole cloud cover, suggesting a downflow of atmosphere there. (NASA Release 79-47; ARC Release 79-12)
NASA reported that the Viking 2 lander cameras had photographed a new layer of frost on the Utopia Planitia site, creating “a scientific puzzle” for researchers. In September 1977, the lander recorded frost on the surface of Mars during its northern winter (one Mars year and almost two Earth years ago); scientists had explained the frost as the result of a major dust storm, during which atmospheric particles picked up moisture that wound up as frost on the surface. However, latest observations of Mars showed the atmosphere clearer than it had been since the Vikings arrived in 1976, so that the frost could not be explained as before. (NASA Release 79-107; JPL Universe Aug 17/79, 1)
