NASA said that investigators at GSFC and the University of Maryland had discovered a natural infrared laser on Mars, a find that could help detect new planets in the universe and require rewrites of books on general physics of the planetary atmosphere. Members of the team were Dr. Michael J. Mumma, Dr. David Buhl, Dr. Gordon Chin, Dr. Drake Deming, Fred Espenak, and Dr. Theodore Kostiuk, all of GSFC, and Dr. David Zipoy of the University of Maryland. The discovery was reported in Science magazine. Optical lasers since their 50-year-ago invention had proved extremely useful not only in scientific laboratories but also in everyday life; for example, as price scanners in supermarkets. However, the investigators said, no naturally occurring laser had ever been reported, although “the extreme variety of physical and chemical environments of extraterrestrial objects.. .arguefd] that natural lasers must exist.” In theory, “natural” lasers would occur whenever atoms or molecules were stimulated to release photons in transition from higher to lower energy states. A Goddard-developed device (an infrared heterodyne spectrometer) used with the McMath solar telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona had detected such a process in the Mars atmosphere (made up almost entirely of cabon dioxide) between January and April 1980. The new device let the scientists confirm occurrence of a molecular-population inversion, necessary for lasing. The natural laser on Mars, identical in principle to man-made lasers with commercial, scientific, and military applications, had a total continuous power output of more than a million megawatts, equivalent to that generated by a thousand large hydroelectric-power projects; in fact, the Mars laser generated more than five times the total power output of the United States. The investigators said orbiting satellites might eventually be able to extract power from the natural laser and beam it wherever needed. (NASA Release 81-78)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that it had awarded four contracts totaling more than $7 million for design and development of a modified Centaur launch vehicle and components to be used as a Shuttle upper stage. A $1,545 million contract with Teledyne Industries called for five digital computer units and nine remote multiplex units. A $1,593 million contract with Honeywell was for three inertial-measurement groups, part of an automatic navigation and guidance system. A $3,412 million contract with General Dynamics was for design and development of two modified Centaur vehicles. A $.933 million contract with United Technologies Corporation would cover building four RL10-3-3A rocket engines, two of which would provide primary thrust for one Centaur. Work under these contracts would con PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED tinue through September 1981; they were all to support the Galileo mission to Jupiter, scheduled for launch in 1985, and the international solar-polar mission in 1986. The Centaur for these missions would resemble the one used over the past 15 years as an upper stage for Atlas and Titan boosters on Mariner missions to Mars and Venus, Pioneer missions to Jupiter and Venus, Viking and Voyager missions, and the cooperative Helios missions with West Germany. It had carried low Earth-orbit missions for NASA, such as the Heao series and commercial and military geosynchronous satellites. (LeRC Release 81-26; NASA Release 81-75)
