A Solar System Exploratory Committee, representing the science community and NASA, concluded a two-year study by recommending that the agency undertake “moderately priced missions” to Mars, Venus, Titan, and a comet before the end of the century. NASA had sent 32 unmanned spacecraft to other worlds in the 1960s and 11 in the 1970s; only 2 in this decade. Proposals were a Venus radar-mapper in 1988, a Mars orbiter in 1990, flyby of an asteroid and rendezvous with a comet in the mid-1990s, and a probe of Saturn’s moon Titan between 1988 and 1992. Other missions of interest to the group would be sampling Mars and comets; robot rovers on Mars; and probes to Neptune, Uranus, and Saturn. (W Post, Apr 17/83; A-9; NY Times, Apr 17/83, 22)
Final attempts to contact the Viking 1 lander on Mars failed, and JPL spokesman said that they would try no more “unless NASA Headquarters changes its mind.” The craft outlived its 90-day guarantee by years; it was survivor of a pair of two-part spaceships, each including an orbiter that circled Mars while its robot laboratory sampled and photographed the planet’s surface. Viking 2’s lander and Viking l’s orbiter went mute in April 1980. The $500-million project returned data on Mars, including pictures of rust-red rocks and boulders, dust storms, and periodic layers of frost; recorded temperatures ranged from 124-24°°F below zero. (NY Times, May 23/83, A-17; W Post, May 23/83, A-8)
The Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched on January 25, 1983, as a joint project of the United States, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, depleted its supply of helium at 1:30 a.m. GMT. The superfluid helium refrigerant cooled the telescope, which would cease operations in about a week, mission officials said. Throughout the mission, the telescope’s focal plane was cooled to a temperature of about 2.5° above absolute zero (—■455 °F), making the instrument the coldest manmade object ever flown in Earth orbit. The telescope surveyed more than 95 % of the sky, pinpointing the locations and intensities of more than 200,000 infrared objects. During its 300 days of observations, IRAS carried out the first complete survey of the infrared sky and made many discoveries, including the detection of a ring of solid material around the star Vega and seven comets and bands of dust around the Sun between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. More than 200 billion bits of data came from IRAS, and results announced to date represented only a hurried look at a very small proportion of this data. It was evident, however, that IRAS would have a major impact on many areas of astronomy and that astronomers would be making new discoveries from its data for years to come. On November 9, NASA announced two IRAS findings: a new object in the solar system—possibly an asteroid or a dead comet—that passed closer to the Sun than any planet or known asteroid and three giant rings of dust that circled part of the solar system. The unknown object, temporarily designated minor planet 1983TB, appeared to be less than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) in diameter and about 30 million kilometers (19 million miles) from Earth. 1983TB passed within 15 million kilometers (9 million miles) of the Sun, closer than any planet or known asteroid and 10 times closer than Earth. And its orbit almost PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED BlTFMTtOWMTT WAKK 445 exactly matched that of the Geminid stream of meteoroids, which were visible as a shower of meteors (shooting stars) in December 1982. Astronomers were planning additional observations with photometers and spectrometers in an effort to clear up the mystery of the identify of 1983TB. The three dust rings were 100 million miles wide and were circling the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter 200 to 300 million miles from the Sun. The dust bands appeared to defy the laws of physics by encircling the asteroid belt in three extremely stable and symmetrical rings. Particles making up the dust bands “this small can only survive in stable orbits for a few ten-thousands of years before they are pulled apart by the sun,” said Dr. Frank Low of the University of Arizona. “There must be something that replenishes the rings because three stable bands that large cannot exist any other way.” In addition, NASA announced that same day that astronomers studying IRAS data at the University of Groningen, the Netherlands, had discovered three giant dust shells that were asymmetrically placed around the star Betelgeuse. It was already known that the red supergiant star lost material, but IRAS data showed evidence of the presence of dust shells that extended more than four light years from the star. At that distance, the material must have left the star 100,000 years earlier. The IRAS observations thus allowed astronomers to study the earliest stages in the episode of mass loss. (NASA Release 83-162, 83-171, 83-172, 83-181; W Post, Nov 10/83, A-l)
NASA transferred operation and management of its Landsat system to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) during ceremonies at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Beginning in 1972 with the launch of Landsat 1 (Erts 1, the Earth-resources technology satellite), the Landsat program was a research and development effort to determine the usefulness of satellite multispectral data from synoptic views of the Earth’s surface for agricultural and urban planning, geologic exploration, land management, and snowmelt and flood-runoff analysis. Over the following 10 years NASA had operated four Landsats, including Landsat 4, launched in July 1982, and a ground system at GSFC. Landsat 1 and Landsat 2 were no longer operating; Landsat 3 would be retired later in 1983 because of degradation related to age. In 1979 the Reagan administration told NASA to transfer operation to NOAA so that the latter agency could work toward eventual commercialization of the system. NASA had relinquished operation of Landsat 4 (except for the thematic mapper, which NASA would continue to use), the control center at GSFC, and the multispectral-scanner data-processing facility, also at GSFC, and would hand over control of the thematic mapper early in 1985. NOAA would also take over the Landsat 4 backup spacecraft (the Landsat D now in final checkout by General Electric) that would replace Landsat 4, probably in mid-1985. NOAA would reimburse NASA for the use of buildings and utilities. (NASA Release 83-7) JPL would go ahead with efforts to reestablish contact, which would be unsuccessful if the lander had multiple problems. No telemetry dala were available to diagnose the situation. The 64-meter Deep Space Tracking Network antenna, near Canberra, had bombarded the lander on Mars with 80-to 100-kilowatt signals, said George Gianopulos, Viking team leader at JPL. Gianopulos said that commands from JPL through Australia could be up to 40° off the receiving line into the leader’s antenna dish and still be picked up. Getting into the lander to reset the switch “is going to be a neat trick,” he added. Launched August 20, 1975, and designed for a 90-day mission, Viking 1 had shown “incredible stamina” in the harsh environment of Mars. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) could provide power for years, but in 1982 its four nickel-cadmium batteries began to show their age. Viking could be instructed to charge or discharge batteries to keep them functioning longer. A command sent November 19 to repeat this exercise apparently got into the antenna-pointing subroutine and switched the crucial communications antenna to point away from Earth. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 28/83, 1)
After months of unsuccessful effort to communicate with Viking lander 1 (the Mutch Memorial Station on the surface of Mars), engineers at JPL decided that they probably could not reestablish contact. Launched in August 1975, the lander reached Mars July 20, 1976, ami was joined by lander 2 September 3 of that year for the most thorough examination of another planet ever undertaken. When contact was lost in November 1982, engineers vainly transmitted command series based on studies of possible failure modes. However, lander l’s internal program could initiate signals to Earth without being commanded; if the lander were still operating, it might transmit in May. Lander 1 was renamed the Mutch Memorial Station to honor Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, former leader of the Viking imaging team, who disappeared in
