NASA announced that Rockwell Internatl. Corp. made significant additions to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to accommodate three research experiments that would measure orbiter aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics as it reentered earth's atmosphere. Researchers would use the flight data to develop future generation space transportation systems. The most obvious change was a cylindrical housing that replaced the fintip atop the vertical tail. The new experiment pod, containing equipment for the shuttle infrared leeside temperature sensing (SILTS) experiment, was approximately 20 in. in diameter and was capped at the leading edge by a spherical dome. SILTS would obtain high-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of Columbia's port wing and fuselage as the orbiter reentered the atmosphere, providing detailed temperature maps at the surface of the leeside thermal protection materials and indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating of surfaces in flight. Tape recorders would store experiment data. Infrared cameras mounted inside the dome would view Columbia's left wing and fuselage through two windows protected during launch from debris by plugs that filled the window cavities and that fell away when the experiment began about 400,000 feet above earth at reentry. Injection of gaseous nitrogen into the cavities would cool the cameras during that period. For the shuttle entry air data system (SEADS) experiment, a new nosecap had 14 penetration assemblies distributed about its surface, each containing a small hole through which local surface air pressure was measured from an altitude of about 56 miles through landing. This would allow precise postflight determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming air-stream and the density of the atmosphere through which the vehicle was flying. The shuttle upper atmosphere mass spectrometer (SUMS) would complement the SEADS experiment by providing atmospheric density information at altitudes above 50 miles. SUMS would sample air at Columbia's surface through a small hole, located just aft of the nosecap, to measure the number of molecules of various gas species in order to determine the atmospheric density that, with vehicle motion information, would allow determination of orbiter aerodynamic characteristics at altitudes where the atmosphere was extremely thin. NASA originally developed the SUMS mass spectrometer for the Viking spacecraft that landed in 1976 on Mars and modified it to operate in the orbiter's reentry flight environment. NASA' Langley Research Center developed the experiments as part of the orbiter experiments program managed by NASA's office of aeronautics and space technology. (NASA Release 85-127)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
Dr. John Billingham, chief of the Extraterrestrial Research Division at Ames Research Center (ARC) and founder of the ARC-based Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), said at a Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ALERT colloquium that study of the earth's part in the 15-billion-year cosmic evolution held the key to searching for life beyond the solar system, the Lewis News reported. "By studying how our own planet formed and how basic elements required for life evolved, we can theorize that a similar life-structuring process may be occurring or had occurred elsewhere in the universe," Billingham said. As an example, he mentioned the collection of microorganisms scientists observed in 3.5-billion-year-old rock formations discovered in the marine environment of Western Australia. Scientists could use that data to study rock-like formations on other planets that might display a similar evolutionary process. Billingham believed that it was reasonable to assume that life, including intelligent life, existed in the universe because, with 400 million stars in earth's galaxy alone, the natural cosmic process included formation of planets—a rule, not an exception—and the basic stuff of life existed throughout the universe. Because the Viking program had failed to turn up signs of life on Mars, SETI would focus its sights on life beyond the solar system, Billingham said. To accomplish this would require either a manned interstellar vehicle or radio telescopes. The former option would require, to reach the nearest star, a four-stage spacecraft weighing 34,000 tons, traveling 3/10 the speed of light and using electrical power equal to 500,000 years of earth usage driven by antimatter—hardly a feasible option, he noted. However, researchers could design and build radio telescopes to listen to life from other cosmic sources, he said. Such a system would make use of the microwave window frequency range, a quiet region of the spectrum that provided the best chance of picking up extraterrestrial signals. To accomplish this, SETI's information system would need to develop the technology using the largest radio telescopes to amplify the signal (1 to 3 GHz) and to build a signal processing system driven by a specially designed SETI computer. Billingham said the biggest challenge facing the SETI program would be identifying the format, frequency resolution, and time of the signals in order to recognize and eliminate as much interference as possible, thus separating noise from sound manifestations. To determine signals of non-natural origin, SETI would apply a sequence of logical tests coupled with a huge computer-based storehouse of information that would filter out most of the interference signals. "A radio telescope placed in low earth orbit will help eliminate some of the interference problems," Billingham said, "and the prospect of a much larger lunar orbiting radio telescope would offer an even more advantageous interference-reducing listening position that would cover a radius of 1,000 light years." SETI was then preparing its first system radio telescope prototype for testing at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, where a 1,000-ft. radio telescope conducted signal searches. Once fully operational and in orbit, the new telescope would receive signals originating 30 to 40 light years away. "Either we are alone or not," Billingham concluded, "and either has large implications. And we wonder, indeed if there is intelligent life elsewhere, will it help us understand our own." (Lewis News, March 22/85, 2) SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
Dr. George Wetherill, director of the department of terrestrial magnetism at the Carnegie Institution of Washington, said in an interview with the New York Times that his report to appear in the May 17 issue of Science discussed his hypothesis that the inner planets of the solar system appeared to have been formed when a number of planets, some of them three times larger than Mars, repeatedly collided with one another until only one survived in each of the present planetary orbits. Wetherill believed the present planets had "lots of brothers and sisters" not much smaller than themselves, which collided to form "trial" planets, the NY Times reported. "The four we see today [Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars]," he said, "are the survivors. One of the final collisions," he added, "probably increased the spin of earth sufficiently to throw off materials that consolidated to form the moon." Wetherill derived his hypothesis from a computer simulation of what probably happened after the solar system began to take shape from a rotating cloud of dust and gas about 4.5 billion years ago. The analysis took into consideration various factors affecting the formation process once some 500 bodies, each one-third the size of the moon, had formed in the region around the sun now occupied by the four planets mentioned above. These factors included the gravitational fields around each object, the frequency of near misses that would throw the objects into eccentric orbits, and the collisions that may have canceled the eccentricity. Collisions would have generated enough heat within the earth to melt most, if not all, of its interior, allowing heavy material to sink and form earth's metallic core. Wetherill's calculations assumed that not enough gas was present to affect motions of the objects as they sped past one another; many scientists concurred that a violent "wind" blowing out from the sun swept the inner solar system clear of gas. Each collision would have driven off most of any planetary atmosphere that had begun to accumulate, and since impact histories of Earth and Venus were different, this could account for the differences in their atmospheric abundances of such inert gasses as argon. Initially, material destined to form the planets was so uniformly spread around the sun that their motions were determined by multiple collisions much like those of molecules in a hot gas. By the time this material had formed into larger bodies, Wetherill said, their mutual gravitational attractions would have become a significant factor. During the ensuing collisions, Wetherill believed, the existing planets had acquired 50% of their present material; after 100 million years the process was 99% completed. Age determinations of moon rocks indicated that the last great crashes, enough to produce the lunar seas, did not end until 3.8 billion years ago, or several hundred million years after the formative process began. By then, however, the impacting bodies were "quite small," Wetherill said, "about 30 miles in diameter." What remained in the form of asteroids and meteorites was far less than that needed to produce even a small planet. Jupiter and the large planets beyond it were not in a region swept clear of gas, making their formation histories very different, Wetherill concluded. (NY Times, May 11/85, 12)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
In its recently published "1986 Long-Range Program Plan," NASA outlined plans for an evolutionary, permanently manned space station in low-earth orbit; operation by the year 2000 of man-tended platforms in equatorial, polar, and geosynchronous orbit; and routine manned missions on the moon and later Mars by the early 21st century, Defense Daily reported. The annually updated plan, summarizing the status of NASA planning as of the end of February 1985, also detailed some 120 ongoing and planned NASA space projects and missions for approximately the next ten years, with some out to the year 2000. The plan did not discuss budget figures, but for the near-term assumed budgets with the 1% growth promised annually by President Reagan (which had since disappeared in the deficit battle in Congress). The report did not project a need for more than four Space Shuttle orbiters but did not rule out such a need, while calling for development by 1990 of an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). Beyond 1990, objectives of the NASA spaceflight program included developing an orbital transfer vehicle complementary to the Space Shuttle for transportation of payloads, to, between, and beyond earth orbits; defining, designing, and providing a second-generation space transportation system including unmanned cargo vehicles and second-generation orbiters; developing and operating on a routine basis, beginning in the mid-1990s, geosynchronous orbit space platforms that were unmanned, permanent, and multifunctional; developing and putting into routine operation by the year 2000 geosynchronous orbit facilities that were permanent, multifunction, and able to be periodically manned; developing technology and techniques to construct, deploy, or assemble such facilities in space and to test and service them in orbit; and encouraging and supporting NASA and industry development of technology to improve concepts for space boosters that significantly reduced launch costs. The NASA report noted that "achievements in the early 21st century in science, exploration, earth applications, and commercial uses would depend on two trends: first, the increasing capabilities of space systems with regard to accessibility, payloads, stay times, and variety and sophistication of operations; and second, the increasing capability of instruments with regard to detection, resolution, pointing accuracy, and data collection and management made possible by improvement of their power supplies and cooling mechanisms." In the 21st century, the NASA report said, "automated or human-tended instruments located on the lunar surface will begin complementary observations" with instruments in low-earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit. For manned transportation from the space station, "a cyrogenic version of the orbital transfer vehicle evolutionary family, currently in early stages of preliminary design, is expected to provide by the year 2000 reusability for manned and sortie flights to at least geosynchronous orbit ... It also should be able to provide the basis for transportation for longer flights to establish a lunar base and for planetary missions such as a Mars sample return . . . Routine access to the lunar surface will make possible the first intensive, systematic study of another major celestial body," the report noted. "Extensive sample collection and scientific traverses conducted by humans and long-term instrument networks installed and managed by humans will help determine the details of the moon's structure, composition, and history. They also will make accessible the record of solar and cosmic ray particle fluxes preserved in the lunar soil . . . Similar scientific activities can be carried out on Mars, either by large automated spacecraft or by a manned mission . . ." (D/D, Oct 22/85, 268)
NASA announced that a panel of scientists at its Ames Research Center (ARC) said today that, although Mars presently was a frigid desert planet, it once had enough water to cover its entire surface with an ocean more than 300 feet deep. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey said at the meeting, which grew out of research discussed the previous winter at ARC's Water on Mars Workshop, that "The pictures taken by the two Viking spacecraft in orbit around Mars tell us that Mars had as much water in geologic history as earth did." Carr said the 20,000 close-up pictures taken since 1976 by the two Viking spacecraft revealed canyons that were deeper, wider, and longer than the Grand Canyon and could be made only by rushing rivers. The photos also showed thousands of gullies formed only by water or snow and ice slicing into the surface or forcing their way up to the surface. "If all the water that existed on Mars to form these channels covered its surface today," commented ARC's Dr. James Pollack, "it would be enough to form a global Martian ocean tens of hundreds of meters deep." Carr pointed out that the Viking photos also suggested that water was below the surface at latitudes near the Martian equator where the planet's interior heat could keep it from freezing just as do underground rivers in most temperate latitudes on earth. "There is a softening of the terrain, a rounding off of the edges . . . that is evidence of underground water flow and the creep of ice near the surface," he said. "This terrain is also located where most of the Martian gullies are today, where snow, ice, and water burst out of the ground to cause the colossal floods that formed the channels we see today," Carr said. And Pollack added that Mars long ago lost most of its carbon dioxide, which helped trap the sun's heat, causing in effect a permanent Martian ice age. (NASA Release 85-140)
The National Academy of Sciences' Astronomy Survey Committee, the NASA Solar System Exploration Committee, and the NASA Committee on Solar and Space Physics made recommendations for future NASA space exploration and science programs, which Rep. Wyche Fowler, Jr. (D-Ga.) was asking the U.S. House to endorse in concurrent resolutions, Defense Daily reported. Advisory committee recommendations were often the basis for programs NASA sought to implement. The Astronomy Survey Committee recommended the following major new programs "in order of priority" for total funding of up to $950 million (in constant 1980 dollars) over the next ten years: (1) the advanced x-ray astrophysics facility (AXAF) to be authorized in FY 87, (2) a very-long baseline (VLB) array of radio telescopes, (3) a new technology telescope (NTT) of the 15-m class operating from the ground at optical and infrared wavelengths, and (4) a large deployable reflector (LDR) in space. The Solar System Exploration Committee recommended a program funded at a sustained annual level of $300 million per year (in FY 84 dollars). Its four initial core program recommendations were the Venus radar mapper (authorized in 1984), the Mars observer (authorized in FY 85), a comet rendezvous/ asteroid flyby to be authorized in FY 87 for a 1990-92 launch, and the Titan probe/Saturn orbiter to be authorized for a 1988-92 launch as a joint NASA/ European Space Agency mission. Other committee recommendations included the Mars aeronomy orbiter, the Venus atmospheric probe, the lunar geoscience orbiter, the Mars surface probe, the comet atomized sample return, the multiple mainbelt asteroid orbiter/flyby, the earth-approaching asteroid rendezvous, the Saturn flyby/ probe, the Uranus flyby/probe, the Neptune flyby/probe, and the Pluto flyby. The Committee on Solar and Space Physics recommended an average annual funding of $400 million (in FY 84 dollars) "which would be sufficient to achieve the highest objectives in solar and space physics between the year 1988 and the year 2000." Major missions recommended were the upper atmosphere research satellite (authorized in FY 85), solar optical telescope for launch in 1990, the international solar terrestrial physics program for launch between 1989 and 1993, a solar probe for launch in 1995, and a solar polar orbiter to be launched in 2000. The committee also endorsed a series of moderate Explorer-class missions of about one launch per year. (D/D, Oct 8/85, 197)
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
NASA announced that its Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded a research grant to Tuskegee University to research possibilities of growing food in outer space. In the project, the researchers would select several sweet potato varieties that looked promising and research nutrient delivery and hydroponic systems that appeared best suited to development of the crop. The sweet potato project was part of NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support Systems (CELSS) program to search for methods to supply a continuous food source and to regenerate waste during long-duration spaceflights or for proposed lunar colonies. Dr. William Knott, manager of KSC's Life Science Support Facility and technical monitor for the project, said that, if the sweet potato could deliver enough energy conversion efficiency and productivity, NASA would incorporate it into a nearly full-scale "breadboard" of a working CELSS that it was developing. Other plants previously chosen for the CELSS breadboard project included sugar beets, lettuce, snap beans, wheat, soy beans, and white potatoes. The sweet potato research would focus on three systems: plant growth, food processing, and waste management. The program would begin by studying the plants in a sealed 24 by 12-foot growth chamber with controlled light, food, water, and temperature. Plants would receive food in the chamber by recycling the atmosphere and water that passed through the nutrient system. NASA expected the chamber, once used to test the Mercury spacecraft for flight, might produce enough food for two to three people. A waste management system would treat leftovers from the recycling process, converting the waste products into a nutrient source for the plants. Knott said a major challenge of the project was to harvest the highest yields possible while using a minimum of space and water to deliver nutrients to the plants. "We will take the edible seeds and fruit out of the chamber for processing and storage. The leaves, stems, and parts of the plant normally not consumed also would be converted into a food material." Calling the CELSS program "a beyond the year 2000 endeavor," Knott said NASA would test some of the concepts of the program on the proposed space station "just to see if they work." However, he pointed out, "resupply on a long-duration spaceflight, a lunar base, or on a Mars mission . . . would make the 'space farm' . . . much more attractive." (NASA Release 85-180)
Although a mission to put a human colony on Mars seemed unlikely anytime soon, members of the National Commission on Space [see U.S. Space Policy/National Commission on Space, Mar. 29] said it appeared to be only a matter of time until such an undertaking took place, the Washington Post reported. The commission was due in May 1986 to present a report outlining what it thought the U.S. space program should look like over the next 20 years. The U.S. last visited Mars in 1976, when unmanned Viking 1 and 2 missions landed and began collecting data. The Mars Observer was scheduled for a 1991 launch to study the planet from orbit. NASA officials said that beyond that there was nothing concrete on the drawing boards, although they were considering sending an unmanned craft to land on Mars, collect samples, and return in a manner similar to early moon explorations. (W Post, June 5/85, A5)
NASA announced that its associate administrator for space science and applications, Dr. Burton Edelson, in a speech today at the 36th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Stockholm warned his audience that the earth's environment as was presently known might be in jeopardy and called on the world's scientific community to accelerate its study of the planet. "Resources, once thought to be limitless, are slowly being depleted," Edelson said. "Earth's atmosphere is changing, and some of its life forms are threatened. It is imperative that we, as scientists and engineers, take action now to maintain the quality of life on our planet and improve its biological productivity." Edelson cited the many accomplishments of planetary science since the beginning of spaceflight 28 years ago. "We have examined most of the planets in the solar system at close range and have performed systematic studies of our closest neighbors, Venus and Mars, through telescopes and more recently, through data and imagery received from planet-orbiting spacecraft," he said. "We still lack synoptic, systematic, and temporal knowledge, predictive skills, and an understanding of the mechanisms underlying earth's global processes," he pointed out. Calling for an international study effort, Edelson said, "Our sophisticated spacecraft; new air, sea, and spaceborne sensors; and enormous computing capability will enable us to measure, monitor, model, and finally begin to understand the earth as a system. This mission to planet earth could unlock the secrets of life itself . . . and could well prove to be the most important ever undertaken by humankind." Edelson called particular attention to the problems of water pollution in rivers, lakes, and streams; potential depletion of the ozone layer; growing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide; and a sharp increase in the levels of carbon monoxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. "Economic development over large portions of the earth have significantly changed the patterns of land and water use," he said. "The results have been mixed—while in some cases the benefits have been significant—we have paid a substantial price. We must study the land and learn to use it properly." To emphasize the importance of his proposal, Edelson said, "The U.S. National Academy of Sciences has reviewed the scientific merit of the global habitability concept and has found it to be both sound and worthy. The Academy is now participating in the broader efforts of the International Council of Scientific Unions in a program called Global Change. NASA and several other government agencies, notably the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation, also will participate." Edelson said he envisioned multifaceted investigations with oceanographers, meteorologists, biologists, and foresters studying the land, sea, atmosphere, and the air-sea and solar-terrestrial environments. "This is truly an international challenge," he concluded, "involving many scientific disciplines. Everyone on earth has a stake in our success." (NASA Release 85-142)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
Roger Bonnet, director of the European Space Agency's (ESA) scientific programs, speaking today at the opening of a meeting with the USSR's "Intercosmos" Council for International Cooperation, Soviet Academy of Sciences, said, "We are keenly interested in extending cooperation with the Soviet Union in space exploration," FBIS, TASS in English reported. "The first results of our joint work and experiments have given us reasons for making the most optimistic forecasts and opened up new opportunities for studying and using space for peaceful purposes." The program for the three-day meeting included discussion of details of the Soviet "Vega" mission to study Venus and Halley's Comet and review of preparations for a similar West European program called "Giotto," which would use data from the Soviet probe. Attendees also heard reports on the Soviet "Phobos" project for the comprehensive study of Mars and its satellites and ESA's plans to develop an orbital radio telescope. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 15/85)
During a "Science and Engineering" radio program, Boris Belitskiy responded to a New Zealander's question about the possibility of there someday being a larger Soviet space station, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. "A Soviet orbital station of the next generation will be a larger and more comfortable complex with better facilities for research work, pilot production, cosmonaut exercises, recreation, and everyday life generally," Belitskiy said. When asked whether the Soviets were developing a reusable spacecraft like the U.S. Space Shuttle, Belitskiy responded, "For the present, freighters of the Progress type meet the needs of resupplying Salyut orbital stations. Nevertheless, Soviet space scientists do see a future for reusable transport systems and have been conducting tests in this area. The technological problems involved have, on the whole, been solved, but this cannot be said of the economic problems . . . This being so, Soviet space scientists are interested in quite a few other approaches to the problem as well," In response to a question about a manned mission to Mars, Belitskiy said, "Some day, undoubtedly, there will be such a mission but that's still a long way down the road. And a vast project of this kind, bound to be very expensive, would be greatly facilitated by more cooperation between the major space powers." (FBIS, Moscow World Service in English, July 22/85)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) planetary scientist Steve Ostro recently completed a five-year study of asteroids located in a belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, the JPL Universe reported, and then turned his attention to observing near-earth asteroids using the world's most powerful radar telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. "Some asteroids are among the most primitive planetesimals—the matter which accreted to form the solar system," Ostro said. "Asteroids are every bit as exciting as comets and potentially the most important objects in our solar system," he pointed out. Asteroids constituted an enormous and diverse population, ranging in size from a few hundred meters to 1,000 km, and varying in composition, spin rate, and shape. Most asteroids were in the belt Ostro had studied and were thought to be the remnants of a planet that failed to form due to Jupiter's gravitational influence. However, many other asteroids tumbled through space close to and sometimes across earth's orbit. Some scientists believed near-earth asteroids could be the nuclei of burned-out comets. "We really don't know what the nucleus of a comet is," Ostro said. "Comets might eventually lose all of their volatile compounds and then travel as asteroids." And scientists believed asteroids were some of the most primitive objects in the solar system. "We really have a spectrum of asteroids—some of the primitive material left from the solar nebula all the way up to those that are highly evolved," Ostro commented. "So asteroids are a laboratory for studying the evolution of planets and other planetary objects." No spacecraft had ever explored an asteroid, nor had scientists obtained an image of an asteroid's surface. That was why many planetary scientists believed JPL's proposed Comet Rendezvous/Asteroid Flyby mission was critical to understanding not only comets and asteroids, but also the history of the solar system. Another JPL planetary scientist, Eleanor Helin, recently discovered a nearearth asteroid with a 36-inch telescope located in Caussols, France. The asteroid, designated 1985-PA and the 22nd asteroid discovered by JPL researchers, had a small elongated orbit highly inclined to the ecliptic plane; scientists had discovered only two other near-earth asteroids with orbital inclinations higher than 1985-PA. Helin said the asteroid's inclination suggested it could have had a close encounter with Mars and been knocked into the steeply inclined orbit. At discovery the asteroid was moderately bright—measuring at 16.5 magnitude—and reddish, indicating the asteroid was probably a stony, silicaceous body. (JPL Universe, Nov 1/85, 1 and 2)
Finland and Sweden would together build measuring equipment for two Mars space probes for launch in three years by the USSR, FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish reported. The work was significant, the service quoted Risto Pellinen of the Finnish Meteorological Institute as saying, because it was the first time Finns would build equipment to be launched into space. Altogether 11 countries and the European Space Agency would participate in the program. The Mars probes would study solar winds, the planet itself, its near surroundings, and its two moons (Phobos and Delmos). Finland with Sweden would build equipment to measure the nature and characteristics of space particles. Participants and funding sources for the Finnish program were the Center for the Development of Technology, the Academy of Finland, the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Scientific-Technical Cooperation Committee of the Foreign Ministry, and the Meteorological Institute. (FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish, May 29/85)
