The Federal Aviation Administration has become increasingly concerned with the problem of inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 17hourperday schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, commercial jetliners are prone to numerous mechanical breakdowns. Although "modern jets are designed to fly despite even serious defects" and although U.S. carriers employ an army of airline mechanics repairing planes in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by the Federal Aviation Administration last summer for a "series of maintenancerelated transgressions." The National Transportation Safety Board was considering whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 31 people were killed, was caused by poor maintenance. Some airsafety experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious about safety; still, maintenance error ranked third behind pilot error and bad weather as a cause of fatal airline crashes. (WSJ, Jan 3/86) 0*January 6: NASA renamed two planetary missions scheduled for flight in 1988 and 1990. The mission to map the planet Venus, previously known as Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan spacecraft, attached to a CentaurG upper stage, would map the entire surface of the planet Venus for the first time, using a syntheticaperture radar instrument. The spacecraft would orbit the planet about once every three hours, coming as close as 250 kilometers from the The mission to map the planet Mars, previously known as the Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing productionline type of Earthorbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of its surface and to investigate the Martian climate, both present and past. The Magellan and Mars Observer projects were managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 861)
Technology developed by NASA for delivering a culture medium into the Martian soil was modified and implanted into a diabetic patient to serve as an insulin pump. Although other insulin pump implants have been used in the past, the spaceage pump not only had a longer life, but also was programmable after being implanted. (C Trib, Nov 20/89)
A Presidential panel report was to be released April 11, but details that aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by 1994, called for establishing a lunar base after the year 2000 for mining and production of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially0*useful asteroids, and a "network of spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian colony by the year 2027." (W Post, Mar 24/86; NY Times, Mar 25/86; CSM May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, selected the RCA Corporation and Orbital Sciences for negotiations leading to the award of contracts to build a spacecraft and upper stage booster for the Mars Observer Mission scheduled for launch in August 1990. The first in a series of proposed planetary observer programs, the Mars Observer would study the climate, atmosphere, and surface, using eight science instruments while in orbit around the planet a full Martian year, 687 Earth days. (NASA Release 8634; WSJ, Mar 26/86)
Negotiators concluded an agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union for cooperation in scientific exploration, primarily focusing on Mars research, said officials from NASA. The agreement, said other sources, made no commitment to a specific joint mission and could be signed at the upcoming summit meeting. (LA Times, Nov 11/86; CSM, Nov 11/86)
