Astronomer Carl Sagan told the Senate Commerce committee that a U.S. Mars mission would be the best cure for USA's "sagging" space program. According to Sagan, some 20,000 U.S. scientists have written to Congress urging a Mars mission. He recommended that NASA consider a possible joint mission with the Soviet Union, which had stepped up efforts to land on Mars. (NY Times, Feb 20/87; USA Today, Feb 20/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that its Denverbased Space Systems group was one of the companies awardedh) 0*0*0*two NASA contracts to study and design spacecraft for a mission to Mars. A contract to study the techniques of robotic rover to traverse Martian surface was awarded by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA awarded a similar contract to the FMC Corporation of Santa Clara, California. The second contract was awarded by NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. It called on Martin Marietta to study braking methods that would allow a spacecraft to orbit Mars, enter its atmosphere, and descend to the surface of the planet. The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of Sunnyvale, California, was the other company awarded this study contract by the JSC. Martin Marietta was the company that designed, built, and tested the twin Viking spacecraft that landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 and 1977. (AVWK, Oct 26/87; B Sun, Oct 1/87, Rocky Mountain News, Oct 1/87)
NASA released a long awaited report of a task force, headed by Dr. Sally K. Ride, set up to assess NASA's future space policy in the wake of the Challenger disaster. The 63page report, delivered to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher the preceding week, urged that the United States build a permanent outpost on the Moon as the first step toward the ultimate goal of "exploring, prospecting, and settling Mars." Ride emphasized, however, that while settling Mars should be "our eventual goal," it should not be "our next goal." She recommended a strategy of "natural progression which leads step by step, in orderly, unhurried way, inexorably toward Mars." (LA Times, Aug 18/87; NY Times, Aug 18/87; W Post, Aug 18/87; W Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA announced that Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, were studying concepts for designing and building a robot space vehicle for Mars exploration and samplereturn mission. If approved, the robotic space vehicle mission would be launched in 1998 and return with martian samples in 2001. The mission would precede human exploration of Mars. (NASA Release 8744)
NASA announced that it was studying four major initiatives to help determine the next major goal in space. The initiatives emerged from proposals by NASA's Strategic Planning Group and by a group headed by astronaut Dr. Sally Ride. The four initiatives were a considerably expanded study of Earth systems, an enhanced program of solar system exploration, establishment of a permanent scientific base on the moon, and human exploration of Mars preceded by untended missions. At the same time, the independent NASA Advisory Council recommended that exploration of Mars be the Nation's primary goal in space. (NASA Release 8736)
NASA officials, who met in Moscow with their Soviet counterparts December 713 to discuss cooperation in space, said the Soviet Union planned to launch a spacecraft to Mars in 1992. In addition, the Soviets asked the United States to modify an American spacecraft to help relay data from another Soviet mission to Mars set for launching in 1994. (CSM, Dec 21/87; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 19/87)
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
