The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
In an interview with the Washington Post, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev announced he would ask President Ronald Reagan to approve a joint SovietU.S. untended flight to Mars during the upcoming summit meeting in Moscow. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said Gorbachev's proposal for a Mars mission was recommended by Roald Z. Sagdeev, a Soviet space expert, as a symbol of superpower cooperation and a fruitful scientific and technological undertaking. "This is a field for cooperation that would be worthy of the Soviet and American people," Gorbachev said. "And I will make that proposal to President Reagan." (W Post, May 22/88; UPI, May 22/88; LA Times, May 22/88; B Sun, May 23; C Trib, May 23/88)
A guidance system malfunction caused the Soviet Mars observer spacecraft Phobos 1 to wobble out of control on its way toward Mars. The spacecraft stopped responding to commands from Soviet ground controllers and was rapidly losing power as it was unable to properly orient its solar panels toward the Sun. Phobos 2 continued to function normally. (UPI Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 9/88; W Times, Sep 9/88;
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
Aviation Week Space Technology reported that the Soviet Union was assessing a major expansion of its untended Mars balloon/rover mission planned for 1994. Soviet officials were evaluating the possibility of significantly increasing the payload capability of its dual Mars orbiter/lander spacecraft by using aerobraking instead of rocket propulsion to enter Martian orbit. Aerobraking would enable the Soviets to dispense with rockets needed to decelerate the spacecraft sufficiently to enter Martian orbit, thereby making available an additional 3,300 pounds of payload An approved aerobraking maneuver would give the Soviets several new features to the balloon/rover mission, including: a 110pound subsatellite that would be released into Martian orbit to provide Mars gravity data; 10 "meteorbeacons" dropped on the surface that would return data on temperature, pressure, and wind velocity; 2 penetrators that would dive as deep as 16 feet into Mars' surface to return data on chemical composition, soil temperature, and water vapor content; a high resolution orbiter imaging system; and 2 Earthreturn vehicles, which would serve as test vehicles for a future automated soil sample return mission. AvWk, Feb 29/88)
The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 1 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. Phobos 1 and Phobos 2, scheduled for0*launch the following week, would carry 100pound landers designed to analyze Phobos, the larger of the two moons of Mars. The 17milelong, potatoshaped Phobos and its smaller moon Deimos were thought to be asteroids captured by the gravitational field of Mars. Tracking support for the Soviet missions would be provided by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN), whose primary mission would be to provide essential tracking data to permit landings on Phobos. The DSN would then shift to enabling a key scientific goal of the mission, to track Phobos very precisely. The 13,000pound Phobos spacecraft would carry more than two dozen robotic instruments on their 200day journey to Mars. (FBISSov88131, Jul 8/88; SSR 1988 058A; NASA Release 8887; UPI, Jul 8/88; NY Times, Jul 8/88; W Post, Jul 8/88;)
The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 2 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. The Phobos 2 launch occurred less than a week after the launch of its companion spacecraft, Phobos 1. (FBISSov88134, Jul 13/88; SSR 1988 059A; W Post, Jul 13/88; W Times, Jul 13/88; LA Times, Jul 13/88; P Inq, Jul 13/88; C Trib, Jul 13/88)
