The Soviet Union's Phobos 2 Mars observer spacecraft entered into Martian orbit after firing its braking engine. In addition to various instruments for remote observation of Mars, Phobos 2 carried a lander module to be deposited on Mar's moon Phobos in early April. Phobos 1 became inoperative in August 1988 after a flight command error disoriented the spacecraft and misdirected its solar power arrays. The schedule for Photos 2 was moved forward by several days because of electrical problems that might endanger the mission. (FBISSOV89018, Jan 30/89; NY Times, Jan 30/89; LA Times, Jan 30/88; P Inq, Jan 30/89) During January: Using data from the orbiting Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), astronomers at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor discovered several dim galaxies in an area of the universe previously believed to be devoid of large celestial objects. The discovery of seven dim galaxies in the "Bootes Void" challenges accepted theories of the structure of the universe, which is believed to consist of filaments or "bubbles" of matter surrounding less dense areas of relatively empty space. The Michigan astronomers said they planned to continue studying IRAS' infrared data in hopes of finding more dim galaxies. (W Post, Jan 16/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
The Soviet Union announced that it would suspend occupation of the Mir Space Station for at least three months following the return to Earth of its current crew in late April. The reason given by the Soviets for the abandonment of the station, which had been continuously occupied since February 1987, was a delay in the manufacture of additional pressurized modules to be attached to the facility. Western experts were interpreting the temporary shutdown of the station as a possible costcutting measure and another setback to the Soviet space program following the loss of its twin Mars probes during the last several months. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine was also reporting that degradation of the station's solar power arrays was causing an electrical shortage. (NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89, 15/89; LA Times, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 14/89; W Times, Apr 14/89; P Inq, Apr 19/89)
The Tass News Agency reported that the Soviet Phobos 2 spacecraft had begun to transmit high quality closeup images of the Mars moon Phobos. Phobos 2 was expected to dispatch two small robot landers to the surface of Phobos. (FBISSov89034; LA Times, Feb 23/89; W Post, Feb 27/89)
Soviet and western planetary scientists announced results from the Phobos 2 mission to Mars and the moon Phobos. Despite the premature loss of spacecraft transmissions because of a computer error, scientists revealed that valuable data had been obtained from the twomonth period preceding the loss of communications. The new findings showed that Mars has no magnetic field of its own and that incoming solar particles impact directly with the planet's ionosphere. Researchers hypothesized that the direct interaction between the solar wind and Mars' upper atmosphere may have been responsible for the depletion of the planet's original atmosphere, as ionospheric particles were gradually electrified by the incoming solar particles. The observations suggested that Mars may have had an atmosphere comparable to Earth's during the first billion years after planet formation, and that conditions for the appearance of life may have prevailed during that time. (NY Times, Oct 19/89)
In a severe setback for the Soviet Union's planetary exploration program, Soviet ground controllers lost stable radio contact with the untended Phobos 2 Mars probe, the Tass news agency reported. Phobos 2 stopped responding to ground control commands shortly after the craft was ordered to perform a delicate maneuver around the Mars moon Phobos. The maneuver was an initial step toward landing a probe on the Martian moon. During its transit toward Mars, Phobos 2 had experienced a failure of its main radio transmitter, forcing ground controllers to rely on a lowpower backup transmitter for all communications with the spacecraft. A companion spacecraft, Phobos 1, was also lost in September as a result of a ground control command error. The loss of communications with Phobos 2 was described by Western experts as having occurred at the "worst possible time" because few of the main mission objectives had yet been fulfilled. (FBISSov89059, Mar 29/89; UPI, Mar 28/89; AP, Mar 29/89; NY Times, Mar 29/89; W Post, Mar 29/89; W Times, Mar 29/89; P Inq, Mar 29/89)
