The Los Alamos National Laboratory urged NASA and the National Space Council to fund a multibillion dollar nuclear propulsion project that the group believed would reduce the Mars journey by half of the expected time. The proposed system would draw on a 1970s technology, Rover and Nerva programs, that circulated liquid hydrogen through a solid reactor core, thereby heating the hydrogen and creating thrust. The reactor engine could operate only in a vacuum, so testing it on Earth would prove difficult. The program, reported Space News, would likely receive substantial money. (Sp News, Feb 1925/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
NASA responded to a request issued August 7 by the Office of Management and Budget asking for various Federal agencies to outline the effects of a $100 billion cut in the 1991 budget. The report submitted by NASA warned of a halt in Space Shuttle flights, suspended development of the Space Station, and delayed launch of the Mars Observer spacecraft. Although not expected, cuts acrosstheboard were a possible result of the GrammRudman deficit control law. (Sp News, Sep 913/90)
NASA's 1991 budget would be cut by $1 billion dollars, warned Congress. The Space Station, planned explorations of the Moon and Mars, and the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle were slated to be trimmed. Money for the Earth Observation System was earmarked for an increase. (Sp News, Mar 26Apr 1/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
A letter from Lennard A. Fisk to Jacques Breton of the French space agency, the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, revealed NASA's defunct plans for a U.S.French experiment that was to fly aboard a 1994 Soviet mission to measure the mineral content of Mars. The constraints recently imposed on the two countries was the reason given for cancellation of the project. W Post, Jun 18/90)
The White House began looking at other ideas for astronaut expeditions to the Moon and Mars besides those presented by NASA. The unprecedented move stemmed from NASA's cost and time estimate, $400 billion over 30 years for the project. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met in the previous week, and the National Research Council planned to review its own efforts to seek innovative ideas later in the week. NASA joined the search for sources of outside ideas as well. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for Aeronautics, called the move "highly appropriate" and added, "A lot of our ideas are good, but we certainly haven't covered the waterfront." NY Times, Jan 15/90)
President George Bush announced his plans for a cooperative effort with the Soviet Union in the humanassisted exploration of space, including voyages to the Moon and Mars. On a related note, Japan agreed to open its doors to foreignmade satellites by lifting its ban on government agencies and businesses that required them to buy only Japanese spacecraft. The Japanese law was created in order to help Japan's fledgling H&space industry. (NY Times, Apr 3/90; Apr 4/90; W Times; Apr 4/90; WSJ, Apr 4/90)
The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA's 1991 budget. The bill drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiative and cut $863.6 million from the planned Space Station. The measure was to go to a conference committee to iron out differences with the House appropriations bill before being sent to President George Bush. (WSJ Oct 4/90)
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory began testing its prototype for the Planetary Rover Navigation Test Bed Vehicle, a selfnavigating vehicle, about the size of a small car, for use in planned outposts on the Moon and Mars. (Daily News, Mar 13/90)
The House passed a $44 billion, 3year spending authorization bill for NASA that included establishment of a Moon base and a crewassisted expedition to Mars. The bill was to next go to a conference committee to work out differences with the Senate. (LA Times, Sep 29/90) During September: Astronaut Bruce McCandless retired from NASA and as Captain from the U.S. Navy. He helped develop the space agency's Manned Maneuvering Unit, a jetpowered backpack he was the first to wear during a Space Shuttle Challenger mission in February 1984. (W Times, Sep 12/90)
A panel of experts convened by the National Academy of Sciences opined against a U.S./U.S.S.R. joint mission to Mars. The reason they cited was the lack of any experience in cooperation between the two and instead suggested a "graceful path of coordinated but independent explorations." (NY Times, Apr
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
