AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company announced it has teamed up with Japanese architectural and engineering firm Shimizu Corporation to develop space exploration technologies for the proposed U.S. lunar/Mars initiative. Each company was to fund its own research, which included applying solar energy on the lunar surface to process materials into useful resources such as oxygen and creating closed system that would recycle most of the products needed for a lunar base or long-term expedition to Mars. (WSJ, Jul 12/91; LA Times, Jul 12/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an ingenious "Mars rover" that Soviet scientists want to send to Mars, was ready to be tested in the Mojave Desert. The desert was selected because it resembles the surface of Mars. (LA Times, Sep 13/91)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
A policy paper by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington think tank, said defense and national security should be top priority for the US space program. Exploration of the moon and Mars should occur as a result of "market incentives" or interest of research organizations. Environmental research should be the province of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the Department of Energy. If NASA's functions could be performed by other agencies, it should be closed. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA scientist Thomas J. Miller said NASA would establish a Nuclear Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center in early 1991 to develop nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. The Defense and Energy departments would join in this project; the NASA FY 1991 budget included about $1 million for nuclear propulsion development. Such propulsion could significantly reduce the time required from Earth to the moon or Mars. (AvWk, Jan 7/91)
Members of NASA's Project Viking, the group that put the first two spaceships on Mars 15 years previously, gathered at the Langley Research Center to commemorate that event on July 20, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, Jul 23/91)
Former astronaut Thomas Stafford, head of the Synthesis Group, told Congress it would not require much start-up money to set the U.S. on a course to Mars in the next century. He said funds could come in savings from the Department of Defense and Department of Energy budgets. (AP, Jul 10/91)
Exploring the Moon and Mars, a report by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment, was quoted. The report advocated the need for the United States to take the development and use of robotic technology more seriously if robots are to be used in a mission to Mars. Furthermore, the report projected that robots would be considerably cheaper than human exploration that NASA appeared to favor. (W Times, Aug 30/91)
The media reported a study contained in the British journal Nature, written by Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California, Christopher P. McKay, who also worked at Ames, and James F. Kasting, associate professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State University. The authors concluded it would be relatively easy to alter Mars' atmosphere to make it suitable for plants. Making the planet fit for people, however, would take about 100,000 years. (P Inq, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; C Trin, Aug 8/91; LA Times, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91)
The New York Times featured a lengthy article on robots that might be used in Martian exploration as well as in industrial activities. The designer of the principal robot under consideration was William L. Whittaker, a Carnegie-Mellon University professor. He demonstrated to government officials the Ambler, a 19-foot tall, six-legged robot that could step over high boulders and avoid holes. Named Attila, the robot has 25 motors and 150 sensors and develops its behavior from the interaction of dozens of independent processors. The robot represents a combination of electrical and mechanical engineering and computer science. In addition, Whittaker  demonstrated a computer and laser vision system that could steer a vehicle in a straight line. (NY Times, Apr 21/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
Former astronaut Michael Collins in his new book, Mission to Mars, said that he believed homosexuals and lesbians should be barred from space exploration because they would be likely to create interpersonal problems. NASA never considered sexual orientation in hiring. (AP, Apr 9/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, Apr 9/91)
Edward Stone, new director of the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which manages planetary missions for NASA, commented on present and future plans. He stated Magellan was sending back pictures of Venus; Galileo, on its way to explore Jupiter and its moons, would view the asteroid Gaspra in October; and Mars Observer was being prepared for a September 1992 launch. He spoke of the preliminary unmanned research necessary before any exploration of Mars could be undertaken. (CSM, Apr 15/91)
A cover story feature article on Mars dealt at length with NASA and the Bush Administration's plans for a "New Age of Exploration" that was intended to result in the "terraformation" of Mars. Life on Mars was described at length and as was planned launching of the Mars Observer. Various stages of terraformation were discussed, beginning with the first (2030-2080), which is to raise the mean temperature of the planet. The final stage (2150-2170) is conceived as having achieved a breathable medium, when Earth's vast investment would begin to pay off. (Life, Apr/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
The report of the committee appointed by the Bush Administration, headed by Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, produced favorable comments from industry, according to the New York Times. Industrialists believe that the report showed greater realism about the space program, with its emphasis on unmanned flights and request for larger funding for NASA. In contrast to this complimentary review, Alcestis Oberg in Space News maintained that the Augustine panel's recommendations were irrelevant and a new agency was needed to pursue moon and Mars initiatives. (NY Times, Feb 7/91; SP News, Feb 4-10/91)
The Washington Post cited the Synthesis Group unpublished report stating that although a Space Station in Earth orbit was preferable, if such could not be built in timely fashion and with the desired capabilities, one could consider using the moon as a preparatory environment for a Mars mission. (W Post, May 25/91)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
An article by S. Fred Singer, guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, where he is completing a book on space policy, discussed the Space Station and the Stafford committee report. He advocated Martian moon exploration as NASA's best solution. (H Post, Jun 20/91; W Times, Jun 25/91)
The Space Propulsion newsletter commented on the report of the Stanford University professors who, together with Soviet aerospace engineers, projected that at a cost of $60 billion (about one-eighth NASA's estimate) a joint venture using the Soviet Energia heavy-lift rocket could land humans on Mars by 2012. In contrast, the Stafford Synthesis Group estimated 2014 as the earliest date to reach Mars, using lunar bases established in the interim. Some civilian space experts found flaws in the Stanford study. In line with comments on the Stanford report, the New York Times featured a lengthy article on the designer of the Energia rockets, currently visiting New York and seeking a U.S. buyer for the rocket. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91; NY Times, Jul 9/91)
NASA announced that scientists and engineers at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, successfully tested the mini-rover Rocky III in the Avawatz Mountains south of Death Valley. The mini-rover, weighing 52 pounds, was designed to be used on Mars. (NASA Release 91-153; Bus Wk, Sep 9/91)
NASA announced that it had signed an agreement with the National Science Foundation (NSF) by which the two organizations would use Antarctica as a testing site to prepare for future missions to the Moon and Mars. The agreement would enable NASA to benefit from NSF's 33 years of experience in scientific research in the harsh Antarctic environment. Scientists believe that Antarctica's climate, terrain, temperature, and isolation provide an environment on Earth that most closely parallels the conditions of isolation and stress to be faced on long-duration human missions in space. (NASA Release 91-13)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced a nationwide search for a senior official to direct NASA's activities to send people to the Moon and to explore Mars. This announcement represented an implementation of a recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program to create a new Office of Exploration under an Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 91-24)
The New York Times cited the recent issue of Nature with articles by NASA scientists and others on the possibility of using advanced technologies to make Mars's environment more terrestrial and thus hospitable to humans. A May issue of Life magazine was also cited as evidence of growing scientific interest in the potential habitability of Mars. Nevertheless, serious obstacles remained, in addition to the tremendous costs that would be involved. (NYT, Oct 1/91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled the most detailed images of Mars ever taken. Scientists said the telescope made possible a long-term program to monitor seasonal climate and surface changes on Mars that previously had been impossible. According to the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore, the images revealed Martian features as small as 31 miles across. (W Post, Mar 18/91; UPI, Mar 18/91; CSM, Mar 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
The media reported that a private study by American scientists concluded that an international manned mission to Mars could be done within 21 years for less than $60 billion. These figures represented faster and cheaper estimates than those of a proposed United States-only project. (USA Today, Jun 27/91; UPI, Jun 27/91; AP, Jun 27/91; H Post, Jun 30/91)
