NASA scientists announced that they would use "telepresence" technology in the Antarctic this fall to see if life that existed millions of years ago on Earth could provide clues about organisms that once may have lived on Mars. A team was scheduled to travel to Antarctica in October to study sediment on the bottom of ice-covered Lake Hoare on Ross Island. (NASA Release 92-147)
NASA Administration Daniel Goldin said President Bush's goal of a manned flight to Mars by 2019 was unrealistic because it would take longer to develop the spaceship and fly the robotic missions that must precede humans. (USA Today, Apr 3/92)
Air Force officials employed a revised and more accurate computer model of wind direction and speed in the launch of the Mars Observer. The officials insisted on ideal weather conditions before allowing the launch because of concerns that a plume of harmful nitrogen tetroxide could drift over nearby populated areas should the Titan 3 rocket explode within the first 20 to 30 seconds of flight. The new computer model allows the Martin Marietta-built Titan family of rockets to continue as launch vehicles, although the modelling may make it more difficult to launch on time. (Fla Today, Oct 4/92)
NASA delivered a report to the U.S. Senate outlining a shift in emphasis towards smaller, lower cost and more frequent planetary missions. The Small Planetary Mission Plan, which was requested by the Senate Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD and Independent Agencies chaired by Senator Barbara Mikulski, described two proposed missions that NASA had selected for preliminary studies leading to launches in 1996 and 1998. The two missions were the Mars Environmental Survey Pathfinder and the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous. (NASA Release 92-63)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
Scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation detailed experimental projects scheduled to be undertaken in the winter in Antarctica. The Antarctic Space Analog Program was to use the harsh, frigid conditions of the Antarctic continent to test technology and techniques for future missions to the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-200)
David A. Paige of the University of California at Los Angeles reexamined the thermodynamics of ice under Martian conditions and concluded that there could be some ground-ice deposits just a few feet below the surface and that "these deposits could be valuable resource for human exploration." (W Post, Mar 9/92)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
The flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, carrying seven astronauts from three countries, was the second Shuttle mission in a row to carry an array of life science experiments focusing on the effects of space travel on humans and other organisms, with an eye toward preparing to send astronauts on interplanetary flights, specifically, NASA's proposed manned mission to Mars. The astronauts were split 12-hour work shifts so experiments including a battery of medical tests could be conducted non-stop. Researchers hoped to learn more about space motion sickness and back pain, common ailments among astronauts in orbit. Experiments were also to be conducted in the cargo bay to measure effects of zero gravity, fertilization of eggs, and cartilage formation in various organisms. The Shuttle would also study the effect of bombardment by high-energy cosmic rays on living tissue. (B Sun, Jan 22/92; NY Times, Jan 23/92)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
Dr. Everett Gibson of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, Dr. Haraldur Karlsson, and scientists at the University of Chicago analyzed drops of water extracted from several meteorites believed to have come from Mars and concluded that the oxygen isotopes in the water were extraterrestrial. Photographs returned to Earth from the Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft show features that suggest Mars once may have had a water-rich atmosphere and flowing water on its surface. Through the years, several meteorites have been collected on Earth that scientists have identified as Martian by comparing them to information gleaned by the Viking spacecraft. Six of these meteorites were used in the water extraction procedure. Findings from the work completed by the team may answer some questions about the processes operating in the solar system. (NASA Release 92-35)
The Senate, defying veto threats by the White House, adopted an $6.3 billion savings package that demanded deep cuts in President Bush's military and space priorities, including the Strategic Defense Initiative. Approved 61-38, the measure would take $1.3 billion from prior appropriations for SDI and $1 billion from production funds for the B-2 bomber. The cuts from the space program, though much smaller, dealt a further blow to exploration of Mars, and they would kill an on-going project to design a high-speed aircraft capable of orbiting into space after launch from a conventional runway. (WSJ, May 7/92)
In an interview in Huntsville, Alabama, Vice-Presidential candidate Al Gore said that a Clinton administration would support a return to the moon and Mars but would not commit major resources to such efforts. Given other current NASA priorities, Gore said the longer-range mission to Mars "must be pursued according to a sensible timetable." (Htsvl Tms, Sept 11/92)
Scientists prepared to decide whether Dante, a walking robot, would make a descent next month into an active Antarctic volcano. The project had two goals: testing the prototype robot for possible Mars missions, and getting a rare look at the minerals and gases ejected by the 12,000-foot icebound volcano. Scientists also wanted to learn about the permanent lava lake that bubbles and boils on the crater's floor. NASA, along with the National Science Foundation, was funding the $2 million project. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 29/92; P Inq, Nov 18/92)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
Robotics engineers and scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, planned to demonstrate a new planetary lander and robotic rover at a specially designed test site near the laboratory. "Rocky IV," a prototype of a mini-rover, might be launched to Mars in 1996 as part of the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Pathfinder mission. The 16.5-pound testbed would let NASA researchers study how to integrate planetary lander functions and science instruments under conditions approximately those of a Mars mission. (NASA Release 92-93)
NASA sent its remote-controlled robot named "Dante" to Antarctica, where it was scheduled to explore the active volcano Erebus. The $2 million mission was intended to use Antarctica to test possible Mars-bound technology because the harsh climate is as close to that of Mars as occurs naturally on Earth. Upcoming U.S. missions to Mars were expected to land small robots programmed to look around, take samples, and perhaps begin mapping the planet, all tasks "Dante" would test in Antarctica.  (WSJ, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
According to Michael Griffin, NASA's associate administrator for exploration, NASA needs $3 billion annually to conduct a program of human exploration of the moon and Mars. Those funds would have to come from sacrificing other space projects if NASA's overall budget could not be increased, Griffin said. (Space News, Apr 13/92)
NASA announced the selection of 33 participating scientists to take part in a wide range of investigations on the Mars Observer mission, planned for launch September 16, 1992. These scientists would  be added to the current science teams in October 1992 to increase the range of studies planned for the 2-year global mapping mission. Besides representing U.S. universities and research centers, the newly selected group of participating scientists included four individuals from the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Six scientists from Austria, the United Kingdom, France and Germany were already involved in the mission, and a group of 10 participating scientists from Russia were to be added later this year. (NASA Release 92-45)
The Association of Space Explorers 8th Planetary Congress opened at Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. It was attended by the largest group of astronauts and cosmonauts ever assembled, with over 100 international space flyers, representing 19 nations, in attendance. The congress opened with remarks by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and was concerned mainly with discussions about an international mission to Mars. Goldin also mentioned the practical applications of NASA's technology innovations since the 1960s. He identified CAT scans, laser surgery, and intensive care units as having had their genesis in the space program. "New products, new industries, and new jobs come through NASA research," Goldin said. (NASA Note to Editors: N92-75; W Times, Aug 31/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
Large landslides have been identified on Venus by Magellan Project scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. They are similar to landslides that have been known for some time to occur on Earth and Mars, a project spokesman said. (NASA Release 92-75)
The eight-legged rappeling robot Dante was placed in position on the rim of the Antarctic volcano Mt. Erebus in preparation for its exploration of the interior of the crater and its lava lake. NASA and the National Science Foundation hoped that the Dante project would help develop technology and telecommunications capabilities that NASA could use in future explorations of the Moon or Mars or in ongoing research activities in the Antarctic. (NASA Dante Advisor #3; UPI, Dec 28/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 31/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
If Japan follows through on plans to launch a probe toward Mars in 1996, it will become the third nation to explore the red planet, following the U.S. and Russia. Budgeted at $96.8 million, the 550-pound Japanese probe has been dubbed Planet B. It would begin to orbit Mars by October 1997, according to Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Science, which is planning the project. (Parade Magazine, Mar 3/92)
It was reported that Martin Marietta Corporation had abandoned the six-year venture into the commercial satellite launching business that it started in the summer of 1986, seven months after the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. The original plan was to build 20 Titan rockets for commercial launches. That number was reduced to 12, and the company charged $90 million to fourth-quarter earnings in 1988 for a reserve to help finance the launch venture. Martin eventually built only four commercial Titans, the last of which was scheduled for launch in September 1992, carrying a payload to map the surface of Mars and look for possible landing sites on that planet. (B Sun, May 8/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Dr. Lynn Wiley, an obstetrician who had worked with NASA since the early 1980s, reported that because of plans for long-term missions in space, the question of sex and reproduction had become very important issues. Men and women could be teamed in lunar colonization efforts planned after the turn of the century and in trips to Mars, which could take two to three years for a round trip. Dr. Stewart Whitman of the Space Settlement Studies Program at Niagara University agreed that research was "essential if males and females are going to be on long-term missions together." But Barbara Shwartz, a spokeswoman for the Johnson Space Shuttle Center, said Shuttle sex is not feasible because there is no "privacy" and stressed that NASA plans no sexual experiments involving humans. (W Times, Feb 28/92; Huntsville Times, Feb 20/92; Birmingham News, Feb 20/92; NY Times, Feb 11/92)
NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the U. S. Geological Survey in a published paper said that Mars was once very active tectonically and may still be shaken by quakes daily. The scientists said that although the planet is less seismically active than the earth, their studies, based on Viking photos, predict that about two marsquakes of magnitude five or greater occur per year, and about a hundred quakes of magnitude three or greater occur per year. (NASA Release 92-198; LA Times, Nov 6/92; W Times, Nov 7/92; P Inq, Nov 26/92)
Arthur C. Clark, the legendary science-fiction writer, whose accomplishments include numerous literary awards, academic honors, and more than 70 written works, including "2001: A Space Odyssey," declared that his latest personal odyssey was contemplating the feastability of "colonizing" and "farming" on Mars. "Mars is the next frontier, what the Wild West was, what America was 500 years ago...Mars is where the action is going to be in the next thousand years," declared Clark. (LA Times, Jan 24/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft was seriously contaminated with metal filings, paint chips, and other trash and could not be launched until it had been cleaned. The contamination may have been introduced when technicians tried to protect the spacecraft from possible damage from Hurricane Andrew. Originally scheduled for launch on September 16, NASA officials estimated a postponement of at least 10 days or possibly two weeks in the launch date. (NY Times, Aug 28/92; AP, Aug 28/92; W Post, Aug 29/92; The Sun, Aug 29/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
The launch date of Mars Observer was rescheduled from September 16 to 25 in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew. Although the hurricane passed well south of Cape Canaveral, the craft was nonetheless removed from the launch pad for protection. It required cleaning before it could be repositioned for launch, necessitating launch postponement. (NASA Release Launch Advisory, Sept 2/92; W Post, Sept 4/92; AP Sept 3/92)
