NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that they had signed a contract to fly two U.S. Mars Oxident Experiment (MOX) instruments on the Russian Mars '94 Mission. The contract had a potential value of $1.5 million. The Mars '94 Mission, scheduled to be launched in November 1994, would deploy small landing stations and penetrators and carry instruments to study the surface and atmosphere of Mars. (NASA Release 93-62)
NASA's Mars Observer spacecraft returned its first image of Mars taken last week when the spacecraft was 3.6 million miles from the red planet.  Mars Observer was to orbit Mars on August 24, and global mapping operations were scheduled to begin December 16. (NASA Note to Editors N93-43)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
According to  Luke Dones, a visiting Assistant Research Astronomer at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, the Earth's rotation rate may be caused by early collisions with rocks as large as Mars. Without the large impacts, the Earth would rotate only every 200 hours instead of the 24 hours it rotates today, said Dones. (NASA Release 93-012; AP, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Jan 19/93)
NASA said that the Mars Observer spacecraft fired four of its 24 thrusters as a means of adjusting its course so it could begin orbiting Mars on August 24. This was the third correction maneuver since the spacecraft was launched September 25 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (APn, Mar 18/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and a team based at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages most planetary flights, have examined a variety of options for a new mission to Mars to achieve the scientific goals of the lost Mars Observer at less cost.  The flight would be launched no earlier than 1996. (W Post, Nov 13/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
According to an article in the Washington Times, scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation were using the Antarctica as a model for Mars in the Antarctic Space Analog Program. The program used the harsh Antarctica terrain to test technology and techniques that might work on Mars. Sophisticated robots, already being used in Antarctica, would pave the way for human exploration of Mars. A spaceflight may carry a small robot to Mars as early as 1997. (W Times, Apr 4/93)
NASA officials said that the Mars Observer mission could be a total loss if ground controllers failed to re-establish contact with the probe in time for the scheduled start of the orbit on August 24. Engineers suspected that a faulty flight clock aboard the craft might have caused communications to cease. New computer commands were sent telling Mars Observer to switch to a backup clock.  However the commands failed to restore contact with the spacecraft, suggesting that the clock theory was wrong. If contact could not be restarted, controllers would have no way of receiving scientific data or even confirming if the Mars Observer probe had made it into orbit. The Mars Observer project was the first U.S. Mission to Mars in 17 years; it was designed to pave the way for a new generation of international planetary exploration centered on Mars.
Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)
The Itar-Tass news agency reported that the United States and Russia planned a joint mission to Mars in October of 1994. According to the report, the Russian Space Agency and NASA signed an agreement on the Mars-94 project late last year. Scientific equipment on board a Russian space craft would include two small landers with probes for analyzing the Martian surface and atmosphere. The oxidization capability of the Martian soil would also be measured, Tass said. (RTw, Apr 4/93)
At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)
French scientists, led by Dr. Jacques Laskar of the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris, writing in the journal Nature, and Dr. Jack Wisdom, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writing in the journal Science, described the implications of chaos in the solar system. New computer simulations have revealed that over great spans of time, small gravitational disturbances from neighboring planets, combined with their own wobbly rotations, can cause significant fluctuations in the orbits and orientations of the planets, leading to, for example, great temperature fluctuations. Mars, for example, is still undergoing great variations. According to scientists, Earth may be spared such variations because of the stabilizing influence of the moon, the only large satellite in the inner solar system. (NY Times, Mar 2/93; Time, Mar 8/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the establishment of a study team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to explore possibilities for a return mission to Mars to recover some of the scientific objectives of the Mars Observer mission, if communications with that spacecraft could not be reestablished. (NASA Release 93-157; UPI, Sep 1/93; AP, Sep 1/93)
NASA announced that NASA scientists were to spend October and November in Antarctica testing "telepresence technology" that might be used in the future to explore Mars. The research expedition was sponsored by a joint NASA-National Science Foundation Antarctic Space Analog Program and funded for NASA by the Offices of Space Science and Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-178; LA Times, Oct 3/93; UPI, Oct 4/93)
The Mars Observer failed to call Earth on August 25, when a five-day timer should have had it send an emergency signal, lessening hopes that the mission could be salvaged. Observer was the latest reminder of the growing problems of the U.S. space program.  The Observer failure added to a string of expensive space failures: the loss earlier in August of a $500-million spy satellite, then of a $67-million weather satellite, and a series of mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other planetary probes.
Some scientists, led by former CBS News science adviser Richard C. Hoagland, accused NASA of not doing enough to investigate surface features that may be signs of intelligent life. The critics say that computer-enhanced photographs taken by the 1976 Viking Mars mission show objects on the Cydonia Plain that they believe were left by an extraterrestrial civilization.  Mr. Hoagland said a "rogue group in NASA" might have sabotaged the Mars Observer mission to suppress information about the Cydonia Plain structures. NASA officials denied the charge.  (APn, Aug 24/93; LA Times, August 25/93; Weekly World, Sept 14/93)
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
NASA said that its mission to send a robot into an Antarctic volcano had opened the way for exploration of the moon and Mars. Despite the fact that the mission had to be aborted, David Lavery, director of the Dante project, noted that the objectives of controlling the robot from afar and testing sophisticated hardware in a harsh environment had been met.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
Benson Edward Gammon, 76, a retired research scientist with NASA, died on February 24. Mr. Gammon worked with NASA and its predecessor agencies for 32 years. He served as chief of research and technology in the office of plans and program evaluation, where he worked on the proposal for a manned flight to Mars. (W Post, Feb 26/93)
Scientists failed in a new attempt to get the Mars Observer spacecraft to re-establish contact with Earth, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said. The spacecraft did not respond to commands to turn on its primary telecommunications equipment. A proposal to try to restart the Observer's central computer was rejected because it was thought to pose an unnecessary risk to telecommunications with other spacecraft. (RTw, Aug 30/93; W Post, Aug 31/93; AP, Aug 31/93l CSM, Sept 1/93)
House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)
NASA announced that the Galileo spacecraft had successfully explored the asteroid Ida located between Mars and Jupiter. Although hampered by a jammed main antenna, Galileo zoomed around 1,491 miles from Ida and took all but three of 21 planned photographs.  The three missing photos were the longest-distance photos and unimportant compared with the close-ups. The first photos were not scheduled to arrive at Earth for another two months; the others were to be transmitted in the spring of 1994.  (AP, Aug 28/93; RTw, Aug 28/93; USA Today, Aug 30/93; NY Times, Aug 29/93
Writing in the Baltimore Sun, Gwynne Dyer, syndicated columnist, described the plan for "terraforming" Mars held by a group of scientists loosely called "The Mars underground."  One of the leaders of the group was Christopher McKay of NASA's Ames Research Center in California.
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPLA), Pasadena, California, announced the selection of two major aerospace companies as the associate contractors for the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network Phase B1 study and MESUIR Pathfinder support effort.  The companies were Hughes Aircraft Company; Hughes Spacecraft & Communications , El Segundo, California; and Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division, Downey, California.  (NASA Release C93-r)
Several articles in the media discussed the planet Mars. An article in the Christian Science Monitor discussed Mars exploration, noting that the arrival of the Mars Observer spacecraft on Mars was just the beginning of a new saga of planetary exploration.
Mars Observer was scheduled to zoom into orbit around Mars next week, as the United States returned to Martian skies for the first time in 17 years. Mars Observer, which was launched from Florida on September 25, was scheduled to reach Mars on August 24. After maneuvering a near-polar orbit, it was scheduled to turn on its instruments and make one complete photographic map of the planet during a month-long test. It was scheduled to formally start its exploration on December 16. (P Inq, Aug 19/93)
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft had returned to normal operations after its main antenna failed to point at Earth for the third time in about four months. Engineers were fairly certain that the glitch had been caused by a computer-programming problem. (AP, May 3/93; W Times, May 4/93)
UPI reported that a solar-powered drill used to bore into icecaps on Earth could be used on a mission to Mars to collect ice samples from Mar's north pole. The drill would sample a core about three feet deep. The drill was scheduled to be used this summer to sample two ice caps in the Peruvian Andes. (UPI, June 6/93)
NASA announced the formation of an International Mars Exploration Working Group. In addition to NASA, members included the European Space Agency, the Russian Space Research Institute, the Italian Space Agency, the German Space Agency, and the French Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. The group would focus on producing an international strategy for the exploration of Mars after the year 2000. (NASA Release 93-87)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
A NASA spokesman announced that the Mars observer spacecraft had spent eight days pointing the wrong direction but engineers thought that they now had the problem under control. It was the Observer's fourth such malfunction. Mars Observer was scheduled to go into elliptical orbit around Mars on August 24. (AP, May 18/93)
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) were cooperating on an experiment that involved three spaceships "listening" for passing gravitational waves. The spacecraft, now travelling to separate destinations in the solar system, were  NASA's Mars Observer, Galileo, and the ERS's Ulysses spacecraft.
