George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)
Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)
Glenn Cunningham, manager of the new program at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said NASA planned a new program of Mars exploration. The program was to begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996. Launchings were to occur every 25 months over the next 10 years, using relatively low-cost spacecraft. Funds in the current NASA budget were to go for designing the first of the orbiting craft, the Mars Surveyor. Another Mars program, the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR), was to establish a seismic network on Mars. The program was to begin with the already authorized $175 million Pathfinder mission. (NY Times, Feb 15/94; CSM, Feb 16/94)
Rene Pellat, head of the French space organization CNES, said that both the Mars 94 and Mars 96 proposed Russian missions with large international participation were to be postponed by at least two years because of Russia's economic difficulties. (W Times, May 15/94)
NASA ground controllers were to send final commands to the Magellan space probe on October 7 to send it crashing to its death in the atmosphere of Venus on October 11. The robot had been in a highly successful Venus orbit since 1990 but its solar panels were failing and its gyroscopes worn out. On October 12 NASA announced that Magellan was expected to burn up within two days. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, declared Magellan dead on October 12. However, Magellan lasted long enough to radio back telemetry showing how much rocket power would be required to offset the increasing atmospheric turbulence, which was useful data for future designers seeking to use the atmosphere of Mars for orbit purposes. (LA Times, Oct 6/94; AP, Oct 6/94; USA Today, Oct 7/94; C Trib, Oct 9/94; W Post, Oct 10/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 11/94; Reuters, Oct 11/94; W Times, Oct 12/94; LA Times, Oct 12/94; CSM, Oct 12/94; NASA Release 94-170; Fla Today, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 12/94; W Post, Oct 13/94; NY Times, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA researchers were to go underground on April 11 in Lechuguilla Cave in Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico to try to replicate conditions on Mars. NASA engineer Larry Lemke was mainly interested in the technology aspect of developing robots to collect the microorganisms in Lechuguilla if it proved a useful source. NASA planetary scientist Chris McKay and contract microbiologist Penny Boston wanted to see if microorganisms living inside Lechuguilla could reveal life that might exist on Mars. Bacteria in the cave get their energy from sulfur and iron, believed to be two main ingredients of Mars's soil. Samples taken during the five-day underground stay that ended on April 16 were to be analyzed at the U.S. Geological Survey laboratory in Denver, a NASA-contracted laboratory in Boulder, Colorado, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. (AP, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 13/94; AP, Apr 18/94)
Mars Pathfinder, the first of NASA's Discovery missions, was beginning construction in preparation for launch in two years' time. Anthony J. Spear, project manager for the Mars Pathfinder project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said fabrication of the cruise portion's structure had begun; final assembly of the spacecraft was to begin in June 1995. Testing of various kinds would follow with the spacecraft being shipped to Cape Canaveral for launch by early September 1996. The primary goal was an engineering demonstration of a low-cost Martian landing system. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced receipt of a report investigating the loss of the Mars Observer mission.
NASA announced a new Mars exploration program in fiscal year 1995 involving the development of a small Mars Surveyor orbiter. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, was to manage the program, which was designed to study the surface of Mars. (NASA Release 94-20)
Eric Glomboske, an 11th grader at Highland High School, was one of 10 regional winners in the NASA-sponsored Space Science Student Involvement Program. To compete, Eric designed, planned, and mapped out a human journey to Mars. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 25/94)
A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)
A flight plan change seven months before the Mars Observer launch may have caused the craft's failure. Its propellant tanks were pressurized not five days after launch but eleven months into the flight as it reached Mars, thereby apparently causing a catastrophic rupture in a fuel line that spun the craft out of control. Pressuration, needed to fire the braking rockets to put the craft into orbit around Mars, involves opening previously closed valves and releasing high-pressure helium to squeeze the hydrazine fuel and nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer from separate tanks to mix and ignite. Minute amounts of condensed oxidizer possibly reached the hydrazine fuel, ignited, and ruptured the pipes, which released propellant into space and caused the uncontrolled spin. Peter G. Wilhelm, Director of the Naval Center for Space Technology, a panel member who focused on the propulsion system, said that the team debated the change extensively, and JPL project manager Glenn E. Cunningham stated that the team considered and rejected an option to change valves as too costly and slow, and a procedure that might have meant missing the 1992 launch window, thus requiring a two-year launch delay. (W Post, Jan 10/94)
Russian and U.S. Mars mission planners were meeting the week of June 6 at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to define how the two countries could best cooperate in a proposed multinational space exploration program to be called "Mars Together." France, Germany, and Italy were also considering joining the new 1998 mission to Mars. The new mission resulted from Russia's delay in its originally proposed "Mars 94" and "Mars 96" flights. The idea would be to combine major technological elements on which individual nations were already working. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)
The Mars Observer spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. NASA officials reported the probable cause of communication loss as a rupture in the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine--MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have put the craft in a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. Goldin asked Dr. Wes Huntress, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science, to conduct a thorough review of the findings and recommendations and to report back in the near future on corrective actions to be taken by NASA. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
A feature article described ways in which Pittsburgh was becoming "Robot City, USA." One of the reasons was NASA's $2.5 million grant in May 1994 to Carnegie Mellon University's Robotics Institute to establish an engineering consortium that would transfer robotics technology to U.S. industry. Other robotic firms also came to Pittsburgh recently. Other than industrial uses for robots, NASA wants to use robots to explore Mars and get instruments on the planet's surface. David Pahnos, director of the new NASA-CMU consortium, saw an opportunity for Pittsburgh to become a technical center that pushed technology forward. (CSM, Jun 8/94)
NASA announced that Jack Farmer, a paleontologist and geologist at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a strategy to search for microfossils on the planet Mars. Farmer presented his strategy, which was based on principles of Precambrian paleontology, at the Geological Society Meeting of America in San Bernardino, California. (NASA Release 94-49)
The group of scientists from Phillips Rocket Laboratory investigating the disappearance of the Mars Observer more than one year ago concluded the probable cause of the accident. Phillips aeronautical engineer and project manager said the likely cause was failure of a small pyro valve that allowed propellants to mix. This in turn could cause the rupture of a tube and result in the Observer tumbling out of control. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94)
Russian cosmonaut Krikalev aboard Discovery exchanged greetings with Russian cosmonauts aboard Space Station Mir. The Soviet cosmonaut also got through by ham radio to students in Mars, Pennsylvania. (AP, Feb 8/94; UP, Feb 8/94; Reuters, Feb 8/94; W Times, Feb 9/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would not claim a $21.3 million on-orbit performance fee and would return $17 million already received because of the failure of the Mars Observer craft. The total cost of the craft and its instrument cargo was $1 billion. Referring to the presumed explosion caused by a change in the flight plan with an eleven-month delay in pressurizing a system, discussed in the four-volume report but omitted in news media interviews, Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory and leader of the panel investigating the failure, said that "had J.P.L. been more closely involved with Martin Marietta in the development of the spacecraft, it is conceivable this issue would have been identified earlier." (NY Times, Jan 11/94; W Post, Jan 11/94)
NASA announced the selection of an ancient flood plain on Mars as the landing site for the 1997 mission of Mars Pathfinder, one of the first in a new generation of small, low-cost aircraft. The Pathfinder was scheduled to arrive at Mars on July 4, 1997. (NASA Release 94-149)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the University of Arizona's Open Sciences Forum at which professors presented overviews of their space-related work. He assured the faculty and students that NASA would continue to fund University of Arizona research projects such as the $3.6 billion Cassini Saturn probe. He urged scientists to simplify the way in which they discuss their experiments so that lay people would understand them and thus increase scientific awareness. Stressing the concept that "small is better," he mentioned the development of robots that may one day extract fuel from the moon or Mars, thus reducing the amount of propellant that would need to be stored on moon- or Mars-bound spacecraft. (Tucson Citizen, Apr 9/94)
In an address to business executives, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also spoke of NASA's goal of putting a man on Mars. With the proper technical groundwork and economic and political conditions, Goldin felt 10 years was a reasonable time frame for accomplishing this. The plan was for innovative technology to cut the cost, such as drawing methane from Mars to use as fuel for the return trip, thus cutting the space vehicle's size in half. Another part of NASA's vision was to learn how to work together with other countries in space programs. (Reuters, Feb 15/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report on the Mars mission to NASA. The spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. Despite lack of any communication with the craft, the board found that the probable cause of the loss of communication was a rupture of the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine - MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have caused the craft to enter a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. The board discussed a number of other concerns of a procedural nature. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
