NASA commemorated the 20th anniversary of Viking 1’s landing on Mars, the first time that a spacecraft had successfully descended to the surface of the planet. NASA marked the occasion with an address from Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the celebration of Mars Day at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Viking 1 had searched for life on Mars, but at the end of its quest, scientists had found no evidence of life on Mars. As it celebrated its accomplishments, NASA continued its efforts to learn more about Mars throughout its 20th anniversary year, with the development of Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Pathfinder.(NASA, “Activities Planned To Commemorate 20th Anniversary of First Mars Landing,” news release 96-141, 15 July 1996.)
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
NASA returned the record-setting, solar-powered, research aircraft Pathfinder to flight-testing at Dryden Flight Research Center. Pathfinder had set an altitude record of more than 50,000 feet (15,000 meters) during a flight on 11 September 1995. Wear and tear during previous operations, as well as a ground accident inside a hangar, had damaged the craft. NASA had hired AeroVironment to repair the remotely piloted plane. AeroVironment made several improvements and rebuilt the damaged portions of the aircraft. The company installed stronger rib structure and higher-efficiency solar cells. NASA had adopted Pathfinder in the 1980s after the aircraft’s release from a classified military program.(NASA, “Solar-Powered Pathfinder Returns to Skies,” news release, 25 November 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planet’s surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, “U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars,” New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
NASA released images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, revealing a dust storm on Mars nearly the size of the state of Texas. The storm appeared in the pictures of the planet as a 600- mile-long (965-kilometer-long), salmon-colored patch. Scientists believed this was the first time that one of the huge storms had neared the planet’s northern polar ice cap.(Reuters, “Hubble Shows Texas-Size Dust Storm on Mars,” 4 November 1996.)
NASA reported that a team of scientists from Johnson Space Center and Stanford University had found evidence that “strongly suggested” that primitive life existed on the planet Mars. During a two-year study, the researchers discovered what they believed to be organic molecules of Martian origin on a potato-sized meteorite, which members of the National Science Foundation’s Antarctica Meteorite Program had found in 1984. Scientists estimated that the meteorite was about 4.5 billion years old. According to the team’s report, published in Science magazine, the remnants on the meteorite shared several mineral characteristics indicating biological activity, possibly even containing microscopic fossils of primitive, bacteria-like organisms. The minute scale of the evidence required the careful research of the team of specialists in the fields of microbiology, mineralogy, and chemistry. The largest of the possible fossils measured about 1/100th the diameter of a human hair. Only with recently developed technological instruments, including a dual-laser mass spectrometer, were the scientists able to make any substantial observations.112 The announcement generated immediate excitement in the scientific community and in the mass media, although some scientists responded with a multitude of critical questions. The researchers carefully qualified their report, stating, “It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let alone on Mars.”113 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make samples of the meteorite available to scientists throughout the world, to encourage a full scientific investigation.(McKay et al., “Search for Past Life on Mars,” 924–930; NASA, “Meteorite Yields Evidence”; Sawyer, “NASA Releases Images.”)
NASA launched into space its unpiloted Mars Global Surveyor, the first in a series of missions to explore the Red Planet further. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission and vehicle embodied a shift in the United States’ approach to space exploration. With the expressed intent to make exploration as affordable and reliable as possible, NASA had developed the smaller Mars Global Surveyor, measuring 5 by 5 by 10 feet (1.5 by 1.5 by 3 meters) and designed to carry less fuel than Mars Observer. Mars Global Surveyor cost NASA US$150 million to develop, whereas Observer had cost nearly US$1 billion and had failed to reach Mars after its 1992 launch. Surveyor’s ability to function with less fuel than previous models heightened the chances that it would succeed in its mission. NASA predicted that after ascending to the desired 235-mile-high (378-kilometer-high) orbit, the robotic Global Surveyor would have to travel nearly halfway around the Sun before catching up with Mars in September 1997. The spacecraft would then begin mapping the Martian atmosphere and surface, a survey planned to last 687 days. Mission objectives included searching for evidence of life on Mars, gathering data about the Martian climate, learning more about the planet’s geology, and determining what resources were necessary to support future human missions to Mars. According to NASA, the search for water was the unifying theme of all missions to Mars. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission continued the exploration of Mars that NASA had begun with the Mariner and Viking missions of the 1960s and 1970s.(Associated Press, “Mars Probe Heads for Mapping,” 8 November 1996; Paul Hoversten, “Surveyor Sets Off for Mars,” USA Today, 8 November 1996; NASA, “1996 Mars Mission—Press Kit,” news release 96-207, November 1996.)
