NASA researchers released images and temperature readings collected by Mars Global Surveyor. The images revealed that the Martian moon Phobos is covered in a layer of dust at least 3 feet (0.9 meters) deep, the result of the impact of meteoroids, occurring over millions of years. Surveyor’s thermal emission spectrometer revealed that, on Phobos, the temperature changes from -170oF to -25oF (-112oC to -32oC) between night and day. Scientists explained that dust accounts for some of the moon’s drastic temperature change, because Phobos does not have an atmosphere enabling it to trap heat. Therefore, the surface’s small particles have only 7 hours to absorb heat from the Sun, losing heat rapidly after sunset. Images of landslides on steep crater slopes indicated that Phobos’s gravity, even at just 1/1,000th of that of Earth, is sufficient to pull objects downward.(NASA, “Martian Moon Phobos Hip-Deep in Powder,” news release 98-164, 11 September 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Martian Moon,” 12 September 1998.)
James B. Willet, a nuclear astrophysicist who had worked for NASA, died of cancer at his Maryland home. Willet had worked for 20 years on the scientific staff of NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, and for three years as JPL’s liaison to NASA Headquarters before joining the Space Research Association in 1993. At JPL, Willet had acted as a science coordinator and team chief for the Galileo Mission. Galileo was orbiting Jupiter at the time of his death. Willet was also a field operations team leader for the Mars balloon-testing program and had conducted research in gamma-ray astronomy. Willet’s duties as liaison officer involved him in the Voyager, Ulysses, and Pioneer programs.(Buffalo News (NY), “James B. Willet Nuclear Astrophysicist,” 20 June 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of nine researchers to form the Science Team for the Mars Microprobes, “a technology validation mission that will hitchhike to the [R]ed [P]lanet aboard NASA’s 1998 Mars Polar Lander mission.” NASA intended the probes to collect data measuring thermal and physical properties of the soil while searching for the presence of water ice. The nine selected scientists were David C. Catling, Julio A. Magalhaes, Jeffrey E. Moersch, James R. Murphy, and Aaron Zent of NASA’s Ames Research Center; Ralph D. Lorenz of the University of Arizona; Paul Morgan of Northern Arizona University; Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology; and Marsha Presley of Arizona State University.(NASA, “Science Team Chosen for Technology Validation Mission To Explore the Subsurface of Mars,” news release 98-59, 8 April 1998.)
A Progress cargo spacecraft delivering supplies to Mir veered off course while in automatic mode, forcing the space station’s crew to perform a manual docking. Mission Control ordered Commander Talgat A. Musabayev to perform the docking when the two craft were only 65 feet (20 meters) apart. Musabayev steered the cargo craft smoothly and avoided repeating last June’s collision.(Reuters, “Focus: Technical Failure Mars Russian Space Docking,” 17 March 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 17 March 1998.)
Wesley T. Huntress Jr. announced that he would resign from NASA in the near future. As NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, Huntress had been responsible for programs in astrophysics, planetary exploration, and space physics. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin credited him with the revitalization of NASA’s Space Science Enterprise, in particular, with overseeing critical components of the program such as the HST and Mars Pathfinder. Huntress had joined NASA’s JPL in the 1960s, a research scientist specializing in ion chemistry and planetary atmospheres, and NASA had appointed Huntress to head the Office of Space Science in March 1993. In his retirement announcement, Huntress stated, “I have served in this position for more than five years now and it is simply time to move on.”(NASA, “Huntress Announces His Departure from NASA,” news release 98-31, 18 February 1998.)
Mark H. Thiemens, professor of chemistry at the University of California at San Diego, and a team of researchers published a study in the journal Science disputing NASA’s theory that a rock from Mars contained evidence of life. NASA scientists had studied the rock, found in the Allen Hills ice field in Antarctica, concluding that some carbonate mineral structures in the rock were evidence that microbes had lived in the rock before it “blasted away from Mars,” during the collision of Mars with an asteroid millions of years ago. By contrast, Thiemens’s researchers concluded that the chemical characteristics of oxygen inside the rock originated from the carbon dioxide and ozone of the Martian atmosphere. The team explained that, if a microbe had deposited the oxygen, “the chemical signature of the minerals would have matched that of oxygen in water, not oxygen in the atmosphere.” According to the team, this finding did not provide final proof that the rock had never contained life. However, it provided a significant argument against NASA’s theory, controversial since its first proposal in August 1996.(James Farquhar, Mark H. Thiemens, and Teresa Jackson, “Atmosphere-Surface Interactions on Mars: Δ17Ο Measurements of Carbonate from ALH84001,” Science 280, no. 5369 (June 5, 1998): 1580; Los Angeles Times, “New Meteorite Study Casts Doubt on Theory of Martian Life,” 5 June 1998.)
After a one-day delay to correct a software problem, Mars Climate Orbiter launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Delta II rocket. NASA had scheduled the 1,400-pound (635-kilogram) robotic craft, paired with Mars Polar Lander, to launch on 3 January 1999. Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, the second pair headed to study Mars following Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor, were part of NASA’s “long-term strategy for Mars exploration,” calling for small robotic craft “to leave Earth two at a time,” about every two years. According to NASA’s plan, Climate Orbiter’s first task would be to provide a two-way communications relay between ground controllers and Polar Lander after Lander’s arrival and during its planned 60–90 day mission. Thereafter, Orbiter would generate weather maps and profile the Martian atmosphere for a full Martian year, or 687 days.(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Probe To Examine Climate; NASA Launch Is First of Two Designed To Shed Light on Potential for Life,” Washington Post, 12 December 1998.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planet’s polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyor’s data; the Arizona researchers believed that a “concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes.” The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water “was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.”(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, “Mars Discovery,” 28 May 1998; Washington Times, “Minerals Suggest Life in Mars’ Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers,” 28 May 1998.)
New data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor Mission provided insights into the planet’s deeply layered terrain, its strong, localized magnetic fields, and the genesis and evolution of a Martian dust storm. Scientists analyzed data collected in October and November 1997, publishing the first set of formal results in the 13 March 1998 issue of Science. Mars Global Surveyor had used a variety of instruments to collect data. The thermal emission spectrometer had mapped the temperature and opacity of the Martian atmosphere during the sandstorm, and a camera had returned visual images of the storm’s effects. The spectrometer had also obtained some infrared emission spectra of Mars’s surface, indicating “the presence of pyroxene and plagioclase, minerals which are common in volcanic rocks, with a variable amount of dust component.” Surveyor’s magnetometer and electron reflectometer had measured strong localized magnetic fields on Mars. A laser altimeter had collected data from Mars’s northern hemisphere, revealing a flat surface, becoming increasingly rough toward the equator. Scientists had interpreted a variety of landforms in the Mars images, including the northern polar cap and gigantic canyons, ridges, craters, and shield volcanoes.
Due to arrive at Mars in October 1999 after a period of orbiting Earth, Japan’s Planet B spacecraft launched from Kagoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu. The Japanese Education Ministry’s Institute of Space and Aerospace Science developed the probe, nicknamed Nozomi, or Hope. The probe carried 14 scientific instruments developed by Canada, Germany, Japan, Sweden, and the United States. NASA provided two instruments for the probe: the Neutral Mass Spectrometer, designed to measure the gas composition of Mars’s upper atmosphere for the first time; and the Ultra Stable Oscillator, deployed to support a radio science experiment, also involving analysis of the Martian atmosphere, and to guide the spacecraft in its orbit around Mars.(NASA, “NASA Instruments on Japanese Planet-B Spacecraft Will Aid Studies of Martian Upper Atmosphere,” news release 98-119, 1 July 1998; United Press International, “Japan Launches First Mars Mission,” 4 July 1998.)
NASA released images recorded by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft, showing the Cydonia region of Mars in 10 times more detail than that provided in the images recorded more than 20 years ago by one of the U.S. Viking space probes. In the new images, the Sun was shining from the opposite direction than in the images recorded by the Viking probe. Viking’s images had revealed a surface formation in the hilly desert area, Cydonia, which some members of the public believed to be a monumental sculpture of a humanoid face, in spite of NASA scientists’ insistence that the “face” was only a common geological formation called a mesa. Some of those people who believed the structure to be a sculpture had accused NASA of manipulating data in a conspiracy to keep the origins of the face a secret. Surveyor’s new images confirmed NASA’s previous analysis of the formation. However, in an effort to counteract the conspiracy rumors, NASA posted on the Internet the raw data sent by Mars Global Surveyor and took no official position regarding what the images did or did not reveal. Several planetary scientists remarked that “the new image contained no surprises and no evidence of artificial origin.”(Robert Lee Hotz, “California and the West Alien ‘Face’ Recedes into Martian Myth Space: NASA Photo Appears To Show a Naturally Weathered Mesa,” Los Angeles Times, 7 April 1998; Kathy Sawyer, “With Mars Images, NASA Says: Face It, It’s a Mesa,” Washington Post, 7 April 1998.)
Steve Fossett’s Solo Spirit balloon, carrying NASA’s prototype Aerobot Science Payload, landed prematurely when it experienced equipment problems. NASA had been testing the Aerobot Science Payload prototype for use on balloons in outer space, to collect information from other planets’ atmospheres. On this trip, Aerobot returned accurate data on position, balloon velocity, vertical wind velocity, temperature, and humidity, but experienced problems with a pressure sensor and a satellite communications link.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Balloon Trip Helps Martian Studies,” 11 January 1998.)
Aerojet announced it had won a US$485,000 contract to build a rocket injector for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) that would help JPL scientists develop propulsion technologies for NASA’s Mars Sample Return Vehicle.(Sacramento Bee (CA), “Aerojet Lands Contract,” 11 June 1998.)
At an American Geophysical Union meeting, a team of research scientists led by David E. Smith of GSFC discussed new research findings based on data collected in the spring and summer by the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA). The data indicated that the ice cap on Mars’s north pole, although definitely water ice, is much smaller than previously thought. The scientists concluded that the amount of water in the ice cap is not voluminous enough to have created the “deep gullies that scar the surface of the planet,” nor could it have filled an ancient ocean. MOLA images showed the ice cap resting in a deep basin, possibly created by an asteroid impact. Scientists described this formation as unique in the solar system. The team of researchers remarked that their findings raised more questions about Mars’s formation and conditions than they answered.(NASA, “Laser Provides First 3-D View of Mars’ North Pole,” news release 98-219, 7 December 1998; Joseph B. Verrenga for Associated Press, “Icecap Seen on Mars’ North Pole,” 6 December 1998; Maria T. Zuber et al., “Observations of the North Polar Region of Mars from the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter,” Science 282, no. 5396 (11 December 1998): 2053.)
NASA officially declared Mars Pathfinder “dead” six months after its mission ended, after getting no response to one last set of commands. Pathfinder’s mission had ended on 27 September 1997, when NASA lost communication with the craft. Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner had landed on Mars on 4 July 1997, and NASA had expected the two craft to “live” on Mars for only 30 days. However, Pathfinder had exceeded its mission by eight weeks, and Sojourner had roamed the Martian terrain 10 weeks longer than the originally planned one-week operation.(Dan Whitcomb for Reuters, “Scientists Declare Pathfinder Officially ‘Dead’,” 10 March 1998.)
