Engineers discovered that exposure to 11 months of cold temperatures in outer space could cause the descent engine on Mars Polar Lander to malfunction. NASA had scheduled Mars Polar Lander to land on Mars on 3 December. Lander’s companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter had burned up as it entered its Martian orbit on 23 September. The investigative panel studying the cause of Orbiter’s loss had uncovered the potential problem with Lander’s engines. Because of the discovery, scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) altered their plans, deciding to turn on the craft’s descent engine heaters earlier than originally scheduled, to warm the engines to 46.4°F (8°C) before Lander’s descent.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Finds Flaw in Mars Lander Engine Turning On Descent Heaters Earlier Should Prevent Failure of Mission,” Florida Today, 9 November 1999; Mark Carreau, “Mars Probe To Get Brake Check: NASA Engineers To Warm Descent Rockets of Polar Lander,” Houston Chronicle, 9 November 1999.)
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services’ maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martin–built Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russia’s new Dnepr rocket, Europe’s Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporation’s Pegasus.(United Press International, “Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year,” 23 November 1999.)
Scientists Peter Smith of the University of Arizona and Justin Maki of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory published a report in the Journal of Geophysical Research summarizing the results of the Mars Pathfinder Mission. After an exhaustive review of more than 17,000 images from the Pathfinder’s 1997 mission, the report had concluded that Mars’s air and dirt are yellowish-brown in color, not red. Viking probes of the 1970s had likewise indicated that Mars is not red, but rather yellowish-brown. However, Mars appears red to the naked eye from Earth, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) data had indicated that Mars is red. The scientists reported that the detailed analysis using Pathfinder data had revealed that the HST, not Pathfinder, needed to be recalibrated.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), “The Red Planet? Mars Is Really Yellowing Brown: Pathfinder Discovers What Hubble Missed,” 24 April 1999.)
NASA announced that the magnetometer on board Mars Global Surveyor had revealed “banded patterns of magnetic fields on the Martian surface,” bearing a “striking similarity to patterns seen in the crust of the Earth’s sea floors.” Scientists interpreted the patterns as evidence that the Martian crust had shifted in the past. The discovery of banded patterns on the floor of Earth’s oceans had provided a record of Earth’s magnetic history, validating the theory of plate tectonics. Jack Connerney of NASA’s GSFC, a member of Global Surveyor’s magnetometer team, explained, “if the bands on Mars are an imprint of crustal spreading, they are a relic of an early era of plate tectonics on Mars.” He added that such tectonic activity on Mars is likely extinct, unlike on Earth. The spacecraft’s magnetometer had been able to capture the magnetic field observations because of the extended aerobraking phase, devised to protect against further damage to one of the spacecraft’s solar panels. The period of aerobraking had permitted the magnetometer to “obtain better-than-planned regional measurements of Mars.” Each time it reached the lowest point of its elliptically shaped orbit, below the planet’s ionosphere, the probe encountered minimal magnetic interference and enabling it to obtain additional data.(NASA, “Magnetic Stripes Preserve Record of Ancient Mars,” news release 99-56, 29 April 1999.)
NASA officials and Mars Polar Lander Mission scientists were unable to communicate with Lander following its scheduled landing. The team had expected the first signal to arrive from the spacecraft at a tracking station in the Mojave Desert in California, approximately 30 minutes after the scheduled touchdown at 3:01 p.m. (EST). A second attempt to communicate with the craft had produced nothing. Before the craft’s landing, tracking data indicated that Lander had veered slightly off course. Flight controllers had fired its thrusters briefly to alter its approach angle slightly. Flight Operations Manager Sam Thurman had expressed his satisfaction with the new tracking data, which showed the craft heading for a point within a mile of its target.(John Noble Wilford, “Probe to Mars Becomes Silent, Its Fate Unclear,” New York Times, 4 December 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
NASA launched Mars Polar Lander from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Boeing Delta II rocket, three weeks after the launch of its companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter. The craft’s main purpose was to search Mars for signs of water. Lander carried machinery and two microprobes, as well as a microphone to record the sounds of Martian wind. Mars Polar Lander and Mars Climate Orbiter formed a pair, the second launched in a 12-year series of dual missions to explore Mars, with the ultimate goal of collecting a sample of Martian soil to bring to Earth by 2008.(Reuters, “U.S. Mars Probe Launched from Florida,” 3 January 1999; Beth Dickey, “Craft Joins Mars Quest for Water,” New York Times, 4 January 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the mission’s failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASA’s interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California” had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, “Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named,” news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)
Mission controllers indicated that chances of ever contacting the US$165 million Mars Polar Lander were “remote at best,” after they failed to detect a signal during their “last best chance” of communicating with the probe. NASA officials announced that the loss of Lander meant that NASA would need to drop the timetable for future Mars missions and rethink the entire Mars exploration program, including the scheduled launch of the next lander in 2001. NASA had already spent US$193 million on the planned 2001 launch. Edward J. Weiler, head of NASA’s Office of Space Science, indicated that NASA would convene a panel of experts to diagnose the Mars Polar Lander failure and to suggest a “new architecture” for its Mars program. Although they had set no dates, members of Congress said that they planned to hold hearings about NASA’s procedures and budget.(Down Jones Newswire, “NASA Fails To Detect Signal from Mars Polar Lander,” 7 December 1999; Peter Kendall and Vincent J. Schodolski for the Chicago Tribune News Service, “Mars Exploration Put on Hold: NASA Scraps Its Timetable, and the Launch of a $193 Million Lander Set for 2001 Is Uncertain,” Oregonian (Portland), 8 December 1999.)
Scientists studying images obtained by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published two reports in the journal Nature about Martian volcanic activity. One study reported that the images contained evidence that “ten times more lava” than previously thought had erupted onto Mars’s surface. The other study suggested that at least one of Mars’s volcanoes was still active.(William Hartmann et al., “Evidence for Recent Volcanism on Mars from Crater Counts,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 586; Alfred S. McEwen et al., “Voluminous Volcanism on Early Mars Revealed in Valles Marineris,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 584; Rick Callahan, “Mars Was Truly Red Planet⎯as in Red- Hot Molten Lava⎯Scientists Say One Volcano Would Have Coated U.S. 4 Miles Deep,” Seattle Times (WA), 17 February 1999.)
NASA announced the winner of an essay contest to name the Deep Space 2 microprobes, which the Mars Polar Lander spacecraft was carrying to Mars. NASA had scheduled the two probes to crash into Mars’s south pole on 3 December. Paul Withers, a graduate student at the University of Arizona in Tucson, studying the thin upper atmosphere of Mars, had suggested naming the pair Amundsen and Scott, in honor of Roald Amundsen and Robert F. Scott, the first explorers to reach Earth’s South Pole. In his winning essay, Withers recalled that one century ago, Antarctica was Earth’s only unexplored continent. Withers wrote, “Scott perished in Antarctica. His memorial’s inscription reads: ‘To strive, to seek, to find, not to yield.’ These are the aims of the Deep Space 2.” NASA had designed the two probes with a dual purpose: to test advanced technology for future planetary-surface microlanders and to search for water ice 3 feet (0.9 meters) below the Martian surface. Deep Space 2 Project Manager Sarah A. Gavit remarked that the names of the Antarctic explorers were appropriate for the probes, because “like Amundsen and Scott, Deep Space 2 will have to survive great odds, including not only braving the elements but also crashing into the terrain with unbelievable force.”(NASA, “Mars Penetrator Probes Named for Pioneering Polar Explorers,” news release 99-135, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-135.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
The Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board released its first report, identifying eight contributing factors that had led to the 23 September loss of Orbiter as it entered its Martian orbit. Arthur Stephenson, chairperson of the board investigating the failure, agreed with NASA on the causes of the mission’s failure. The board reported that “the failed translation of English units into metric units in a segment of ground-based, navigation-related mission software” was the primary cause of the loss, but that other significant factors had set the stage for the mission’s failure. Moreover, the team had failed to identify and correct multiple mistakes, leading to “a major error in our understanding of the spacecraft’s path as it approached Mars.” The failure board faulted the Mars Climate Orbiter team with “inadequate consideration of the entire mission and its postlaunch operation as a total system, inconsistent communications and training within the project, and lack of complete end-to-end verification of navigation software.” Although engineers working with Lockheed Martin Astronautics’ mission operations team had failed to convert English units into metric for entering data into ground-based navigation software, the investigating board focused most of its attention on the navigation team at NASA’s JPL, which had overall management authority for the mission. The board remarked that, because it had navigated interplanetary spacecraft successfully for 30 years, JPL had developed a “widespread perception that ‘Orbiting Mars is routine’,” leading it to pay inadequate attention to the risk of faulty navigation.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Failure Board Releases Report, Numerous NASA Actions Underway in Response,” news release 99-134, 10 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-134.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Earl Lane, “Report Details NASA Failings: Assigns Blame for Orbiter’s Loss,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 11 November 1999.)
NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASA’s navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was “not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole,” because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost,” news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter,” 23 September 1999.)
NASA released preliminary findings of an internal peer review conducted at Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) after the apparent loss of the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its orbit on 23 September. The results of the review indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California led to the loss of the spacecraft.” The peer review discovered that “one team had used English units while the other used metric units for a key spacecraft operation.” NASA’s systems engineers had failed to detect the error. In addition to the JPL committee, NASA had formed a separate review committee of experts from within and outside of JPL and planned to establish an independent failure-review board shortly.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Team Finds Likely Cause of Loss,” news release 99-113, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-113.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA released its first three-dimensional global map of Mars. The Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA), an instrument aboard NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor, had generated the data for the high-resolution map, created from measurements gathered in 1998 and 1999. David E. Smith of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Principal Investigator for MOLA and the lead author of a study published in the journal Science, said that, according to the new topographic map, Mars is slightly lopsided⎯the northern hemisphere is low and smooth, but the southern hemisphere had many craters and an elevation of about 5 kilometers (3.1 miles) higher than that in the north. Additionally, Smith noted that the depression in Mars’s northern hemisphere is “distinctly not circular,” indicating that it formed from internal geologic processes rather than an external impact. Carl B. Pilcher, NASA’s Science Director for Solar System Exploration, commented that the data MOLA had collected enabled scientists to know “the topography of Mars better than many continental regions on Earth.” Pilcher said that the data would “serve as a basic reference book for Mars scientists for many years,” inspiring “new insights about the planet’s geologic history.”(NASA, “First Global 3-D View of Mars Reveals Deep Basin and Pathways for Water Flow,” news release 99-66, 27 May 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-066.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); David E. Smith et al., “The Global Topography of Mars and Implications for Surface Evolution,” Science 284, no. 5419 (28 May 1999): 1495–1503.)
A six-member team of Brown University scientists used data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor to examine six categories of evidence supporting the hypothesis that oceans once existed on Mars. The team, led by planetary geologist James W. Head III, published their findings in the journal Science. Primarily using altimetry data and images captured by Surveyor, the researchers had found that the border between two geologically dissimilar areas was nearly level in elevation, suggesting an ancient coastline. Furthermore, they found that the topography below the possible coastline was consistent with the effects of sedimentation and the volume of the hypothetical sea was within range of previous estimates of Martian water. A series of terraces running parallel to the supposed shoreline gave credence to the idea of receding water; low areas contained the appearance of possible mud cracks; and scars from impact craters suggested groundwater or ice near the surface.(James W. Head III et al., “Possible Ancient Oceans on Mars: Evidence from Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter Data,” Science 286, no. 5447 (10 December 1999): 2134–2137; William J. Broad, “Tantalizing Signs of Ancient Martian Ocean,” New York Times, 10 December 1999.)
NASA announced its decision to end a US$240 million project to land a small spacecraft on a comet, so that scientists could learn how to destroy a comet if it were on course to collide with Earth. NASA had planned to launch the probe in 2003 and to land it on the surface of Comet Tempel 1 in 2005. After landing, the probe was to drill into the nucleus of the comet, helping scientists understand the comet’s composition. Manager of the Space Technology 4 project Brian Muirhead remarked, “we know very, very little about how comets are formed and what their constituency is,” adding that anyone serious about planetary protection must learn more about comets. NASA’s JPL was in the early stages of developing the Space Technology 4/Champollion project and had only spent US$10 million. NASA had also considered canceling Mars Surveyor 2001, but had already spent US$100 million on that project. Other projects were experiencing cost overruns also, such as the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, which needed an extra US$60 million to cover last-minute development problems. NASA intended to redirect some funds from Space Technology 4 to other missions experiencing funding difficulties, such as Chandra.(Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Comet Lander,” 29 June 1999.)
NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor successfully completed the aerobraking phase of its mission, raising its orbit completely out of the Martian atmosphere and preparing the craft to begin its primary mapping mission. Glenn E. Cunningham, Deputy Director of the Mars Exploration Program at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), described the Mars spacecraft’s “pioneering operation” of aerobraking as a long and arduous task, which had become a valuable learning experience for all involved—engineers and scientists alike. The technique required the spacecraft to use frictional drag “as it skim[med] through the planet’s thin atmosphere,” altering the shape of the craft’s orbit and providing an innovative method to change the orbit using less on-board fuel. NASA had first tested aerobraking in 1994, during the final days of the Magellan mission to Venus. A structural problem with Mars Global Surveyor’s solar panel had delayed the final burn of aerobraking by approximately one year, so that the flight team could ensure that the process would not overstress the weakened panel. The extended aerobraking phase had enabled Global Surveyor to acquire bonus science data, yielding “some spectacular new findings about Mars,” such as a “profile of the planet’s northern polar cap and information about the unique nature of its remnant magnetic fields.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-06, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
Joseph G. Beerer of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory stated that all of the instruments aboard Mars Global Surveyor were operating, and that the craft had begun mapping Mars, approximately one year later than originally planned. NASA had launched the craft in November 1996, and Surveyor had entered orbit around Mars in September 1997. NASA had delayed the mapping portion of the mission when scientists detected a structural problem with one of the craft’s solar panels. To avoid placing excessive stress on the panel, the flight team had opted to proceed cautiously in aerobraking. Aerobraking, a pioneering operation, was necessary to position the spacecraft for its Mars mapping mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-006, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 27 December 2007).)
The ESA signed a 60 million Euro contract with Matra Marconi Space, to design and build the Mars Express spacecraft, with a planned launch date of June 2003. The agency chose that target date because the planets would be in optimal alignment, allowing for minimum travel time to Mars with maximum payload capacity. Major space missions can require upwards of 11 years from concept to launch, and only six years remained before the 2003 date, so the ESA selected a contractor with the means to develop missions quickly and inexpensively. Matra Marconi demonstrated that it would be able to streamline the development of Mars Express, building and launching the mission for about half the budget required for similar efforts.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named A. Thomas Young to chair the Mars Program Independent Assessment Team, charged with reviewing NASA’s approach to robotic exploration of Mars following the recent loss of the Mars Polar Lander Mission. Among the review team’s tasks were the evaluation of several recent NASA missions to deep space, including Mars Pathfinder, Mars Global Surveyor, Mars Climate Orbiter, Mars Polar Lander, Deep Space 1, and Deep Space 2. The team would analyze the projects’ budgets, content, schedule, management structure, and scientific organization, assessing how roles and responsibilities of those missions related to the missions’ safety, reliability, and success.(NASA, “Young To Lead Mars Program Assessment Team,” news release 99-147, 17 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-147.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
NASA announced that scientists studying high-resolution images from Mars Global Surveyor had detected no evidence that ocean shorelines once existed on Mars. Previously, researchers had interpreted features in images from NASA’s Viking missions of the 1970s as remnants of ancient coastlines. However, Surveyor images taken in 1998, with a resolution 5 to 10 times sharper than images that Viking had produced had not provided evidence that water in a coastal environment had formed those features. Michael C. Malin of Malin Space Science Systems, Principal Investigator for the Mars Orbiter Camera aboard Surveyor, remarked that although scientists could not rule out the presence of oceans on Mars at one time, the evidence in the new images appeared to undermine the “foundation for the ‘ocean hypothesis’ developed in the 1980s on the basis of suspected shorelines.” Nevertheless, Malin acknowledged “significant other evidence of water on Mars in the past,” suggesting that as the Mars Orbiter Camera continued to acquire new high-resolution images, scientists might have new clues to the role of water in the evolution of Mars.(NASA, “New Mars Images: No Evidence of Ancient Ocean Shorelines,” news release 99-114, 1 October 1999.)
JPL appointed Glenn E. Cunningham, Manager of NASA’s Mars Surveyor Operations Project, as the new Deputy Director of JPL’s Mars Exploration Directorate. In the newly created position, JPL tasked Cunningham with overseeing the implementation and operations of all Mars missions through 2013. As Cunningham’s successor, JPL appointed Richard A. Cook, former Flight Operations Manager for the 1997 Mars Pathfinder Lander and Rover Mission, to manage the Mars Surveyor Operations Project.
