In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that “in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years,” U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASA’s next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, “Red Planet Is Next Frontier,” 2 May 2000.)
In the wake of the failure of the Mars Polar Lander Mission, an independent assessment team appointed by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin assembled for the first time to begin a review of NASA’s approach to the exploration of Mars. The 16-member team included aeronautics experts from NASA, aerospace industries, the U.S. Air Force, and academia. Although NASA officials held out hope that Lander would eventually respond to signals from Earth, Goldin tasked the team with evaluating NASA’s successful and unsuccessful missions to Mars. The independent investigation continued NASA’s pattern of scrutinizing all failures to improve its proficiency in the exploration of space.
NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASA’s scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers’ Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, “NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003,” news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
NASA declared an end to its attempts to contact Mars Polar Lander, which had descended to the Red Planet’s surface on 3 December 1999. The planned 90-day mission had derailed when mission controllers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) were unable to communicate with the probe after it landed. Investigators had methodically tried different commands to reach Lander. Meanwhile, scientists and amateur space enthusiasts alike had offered a wide range of hypotheses concerning the cause of Lander’s silence, speculating that Lander had exploded before actually reaching Mars’s surface or that it had simply sunk in the Martian dust. After exhausting all means of contacting the probe, NASA had declared the US$165 million mission concluded, indicating that future missions would attempt to make up for the loss of Polar Lander. Project Manager Richard A. Cook expressed his sense of closure about the decision to stop investigating the matter: “we feel somewhat complete in the sense that we did go through the things we thought were reasonable . . . we gave it a good shot.”(Usha Lee McFarling, “NASA Gives Up Hope of Finding Mars Probe,” Los Angeles Times, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “JPL To End Search Today for Mars Polar Lander,” 17 January 2000; USA Today, “NASA Quits Trying To Contact Missing Mars Polar Lander,” USA Today, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “Report: Mars Lander May Have Touched Down in Steep Canyon,” 6 January 2000.)
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiter’s solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileo’s magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelson’s team had measured the moon’s magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings “best explained by a thick layer of water⎯about as salty as Earth’s oceans⎯hidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath” the moon’s surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared “to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface.” Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiter’s intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Solar System’s Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean,” news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, “Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiter’s Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life,” Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
NASA reported to the public that Mars Global Surveyor had captured images depicting erosion and soil deposits consistent with the presence of flowing water on the planet in the past. Researchers had long postulated that, billions of years ago, Mars’s surface held abundant water, which had dried up as the planet’s atmosphere thinned. Because scientists had suggested that the one-time presence of water on Mars might indicate the one-time presence of life on the planet, the new evidence created significant excitement in the scientific community. In announcing the find, NASA reported that it “could turn out to be a landmark discovery,” but cautioned against drawing conclusions from the images without further analysis. Furthermore, the images suggested that water might have been present on the planet more recently than previously thought. Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler explained, “For two decades scientists have debated whether liquid water might have existed on the surface of Mars just a few billion years ago. With today’s discovery, we’re no longer talking about a distant time. The debate has moved to present-day Mars.”(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Craft Finds Evidence of Water,” Washington Post, 22 June 2000; William F. Nicholson, “Reports: NASA Finds Evidence of Water on Mars,” USA Today, 21 June 2000; NASA, “New Images Suggest Present-Day Sources of Liquid Water on Mars,” news release 00-99, 22 June 2000.)
NASA’s JPL named Thomas C. Duxbury Project Manager for JPL’s Stardust Mission, launched in February 1999 to collect a sample from Comet Wild-2 and return it to Earth. Duxbury, who had served as the Mission’s Acting Project Manager for the past year, replaced Kenneth Atkins, who had been heading a program to develop leadership for JPL’s projects. Duxbury had joined the Stardust project in 1996 as Mission Manager, responsible for navigation, mission design, the ground-data system, science-data management, and mission operations. Before working on the Stardust project, Duxbury had served on planetary mission teams, including several Mariner missions, the Mars Viking mission, Pioneer 10 and 11 to Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 and 2 to the outer planets, the Soviet Phobos Mission to Mars, the Mars Observer Mission, and the Clementine Mission to study the Moon. Concurrent with his position as Stardust Project Manager, Duxbury planned to continue to serve as a member of the science teams for Mars Global Surveyor’s laser altimeter and for the ESA’s Mars Express orbiter and lander, as well as continuing as lead scientist for geodesy and cartography in the Mars Exploration Office.
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler appeared before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics to address the future of NASA’s space science programs. Weiler discussed NASA’s problems in the previous year, such as the loss of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, explaining that, although NASA was developing a response to those losses, it would need more funding if it were to prevent similar failures in the future. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) indicated that President William J. Clinton had proposed increasing the space science budget by US$200 million over each of the following four years. NASA’s budget reauthorization bill for FY 2001 added an additional US$19 million in funding for space science programs.(Space Business News, “Money, Management Are Key To Avoiding NASA Failures, House Panel Hears,” 27 September 2000.)
NASA announced that it planned to implement a new Mars Exploration Program over the following two decades. NASA planned six major missions during the next 10 years, launching the Mars Odyssey orbiter mission in 2001, twin Mars Exploration Rovers in 2003, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter⎯a powerful scientific orbiter⎯in 2005. Additional plans included the development and launch, possibly as early as 2007, of a “long-range, long-duration mobile science laboratory,” which would “pave the way for a future sample return mission.” NASA also proposed to create a new line of small missions called Scout missions, involving airborne vehicles or small landers. NASA would select designs for the Scout spacecraft from proposals submitted by the scientific community. Besides sending additional scientific orbiters, rovers, and landers to Mars during the second decade of the program, NASA announced its plans to launch its first sample-return mission in 2014, with a second mission in 2016. The new program incorporated “lessons learned from previous mission successes and failures” and built on recent scientific discoveries. Although NASA led the revamped program, the Mars missions also included international participants, particularly France and Italy, whose space agencies had agreed to conduct collaborative scientific orbital and surface investigations, as well as to contribute sample collection-and-return systems, telecommunications assets, and launch services.(NASA, “NASA Outlines Mars Exploration Program for Next Two Decades,” news release 00-171, 26 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-171.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
An independent study, commissioned by NASA in the wake of the highly public failures of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, found that cost-cutting measures had created significant risks for NASA’s Shuttle program. Although the report maintained that the overall safety of NASA’s operations remained within an acceptable range, the investigators warned that the use of contractors and the lack of oversight compromised the quality of NASA’s missions. NASA’s chief of the Office of Space Flight accepted the report’s recommendations to improve NASA’s operations, also noting, however, that NASA had already investigated and dealt with many of the weaknesses highlighted in the report. With budgetary matters always a pressing concern, NASA had made various necessary reductions in personnel, relying on companies such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin more than ever. NASA had initiated the investigation to understand more fully the impact of the changes on NASA’s highest priority⎯the safety of its astronauts.(Associated Press, “NASA Says Shuttle Cuts Have Led to Higher Risk,” 10 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Study Raises Concerns About Shuttle Safety,” 13 March 2000.)
Nearly one year after the highly publicized failure of a probe to reach the surface of Mars, NASA announced plans for at least one, possibly two, robotic rovers to explore Mars by 2003. The new design plan, the outcome of an overhaul of NASA’s Mars Program in the aftermath of the unsuccessful mission, called for a rover larger than Mars Sojourner, which had successfully navigated the Martian surface in 1997. NASA planned for the new probe to continue the search for water on the surface of the Red Planet.(Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Moves To Send Robot Rovers To Explore Mars Surface,” Washington Post, 28 July 2000; Peter N. Spotts, “New Rover To Look for Signs of Water on Mars,” Christian Science Monitor, 31 July 2000; Tribune News Services, “NASA Unveils Plans for 2003 Mission to Mars,” 28 July 2000.)
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARC’s chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASA’s astrobiology program and to establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffen’s two loves, and that “the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.”(NASA, “NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies,” news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, “Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official,” 27 November 2000.)
In an article in the journal Science, a team of researchers led by Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reported that they had found compelling evidence that Mars once had a wet climate. According to Zuber, “Evidence is building of more water on the surface of Mars at one time.” The researchers had used the laser measurements taken by Mars Global Surveyor to reach their conclusions. Although Zuber indicated that scientists did not yet have enough evidence to determine whether Mars once had a surface ocean, the study did find large, buried channels beneath the planet’s crust, suggesting that an enormous flow of water once deluged the landscape. The researchers had also found further evidence of two distinct “crustal provinces” on Mars, similar to those on Earth. The team estimated that Mars’s crust was 50 miles (80 kilometers) thick beneath the planet’s southern highlands, but only 22 miles (35 kilometers) thick beneath the northernmost areas of the planet. By using Surveyor’s data to analyze thoroughly the topography of the planet, the research team had also drawn the conclusion that Mars had once been home to more water than ice. The variety of landmasses suggested that, for a period, the planet’s core had released heat, turning ice trapped beneath Mars’s surface into water. As one newspaper described the formative events estimated to have taken place approximately 4 billion years ago, “It steamed and streamed.”(Marie T. Zuber et al., “Internal Structure and Early Thermal Evolution of Mars from Mars Global Surveyor Topography and Gravity,” Science 287, no. 5459 (10 March 2000): 1788−1893; NASA, “View Inside Mars Reveals Rapid Cooling and Buried Channels,” news release 00-36, 9 March 2000; Dan Vergano, “Northern Mars Once Was Drenched,” USA Today, 13 March 2000.)
Arizona State University and JPL, a division of California Institute of Technology, announced the creation of the Arizona State University Planetary Imaging Facility and Advanced Training Institute (PIF-ATI) for the study of Mars. Arizona State University and JPL would jointly fund the new facility, which the two institutions intended for scientists and students to use. PIF-ATI expanded on a facility originally planned in support of the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS), scheduled to fly on the 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft. PIF-ATI would offer scientists and students outside the project greater access to instruments and data, providing access for university students, for students of the fifth through twelfth grades, and for their teachers.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “New Mars Research Facility To Involve Scientists, Kids,” news release 2000-115, 20 November 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marsasu.html (accessed 17 April 2008).)
Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edgett of Malin Space Science Systems published research in the journal Science based on images from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft. The two researchers had found that the images showed massive sedimentary deposits on Mars, suggesting that the planet “was once a water-rich land of lakes.” Malin described the images as revealing “hundreds and hundreds of identically thick layers,” features that were “almost impossible to have without water.” J. William Schopf, head of the Center for the Study of Evolution and the Origin of Life at the University of California at Los Angeles, commented that the images provided the “strongest evidence yet for what appear to be sedimentary units on Mars,” supporting the theory that, billions of years ago, Mars had been wetter, warmer, and possibly hospitable to life.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Evidence of Martian Land of Lakes Discovered,” news release 2000-123, 4 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marslakes.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Associated Press, “Satellite Photos Indicate Mars Was Water Plentiful,” Washington Times, 5 December 2000; Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edget, “Sedimentary Rocks of Early Mars,” Science 290, no. 5498 (8 December 2000): 1927–1937.)
