The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASA’s JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Mars’s surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planet’s seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASA’s chief Mars program scientist celebrated: “We’ve got a program! This is the next step . . . It’s kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. We’re bound for a new frontier.”(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, “Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars,” news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, “Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASA’s Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission,” Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists,” 8 April 2001.)
NASA released the first images taken by the recently launched Mars Odyssey spacecraft. Headed for the Red Planet, Odyssey pointed its camera Earthward to take calibrating shots as it traveled around the South Pole. Among the first images the vessel captured were the first thermal-infrared views ever taken of Earth and its Moon. The photographs demonstrated the technological sophistication of the instruments for the mission to Mars, which allowed close observation, producing images even with very little available light. The clarity of the images of Earth, particularly those of Antarctica, boded well for the success of the Mars mission. Mars Odyssey measured surface temperatures in Antarctica as low as minus 58°F (14°C), similar in range to temperatures the craft would experience during its survey of Mars.(NASA, “Earth Day Portrait Is First One Snapped by NASA’s 2001 Mars Odyssey,” news release 01-81, 23 April 2001.)
NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft completed its primary mission, having collected more information about Mars than all of the previous missions combined had acquired. “By any conceivable measure the scientific impact of Mars Global Surveyor has been extraordinary,” said Global Surveyor Project Scientist Arden L. Albee. Since reaching the Red Planet in 1998, Global Surveyor had gathered data on Mars’s climate, topography, and geology, as well as mapping the entire planet. The orbiter, which launched in November 1996, had provided a steady stream of invaluable data. Among the most significant findings of the primary mission had been the detection of significant evidence of liquid water, the detection of a magnetized crust on the planet’s southern hemisphere, and the discovery of new information about seasonal changes on the planet. The spacecraft had gathered the data in the course of more than 8,500 orbits of the planet, during which it had collected 58,000 images. With Mars Global Surveyor still functioning effectively, NASA planned to extend its mission and continue its research.(NASA, “New Era Begins as Mars Global Surveyor Completes Prime Mission,” news release 01-14, 31 January 2001.)
Herbert V. Frey of NASA’s GSFC revealed a fundamental new finding about the complexion of Mars’s surface. According to Frey and his team of researchers, data gathered by Mars Global Surveyor had corrected a commonly held belief about the topography of the Red Planet and the age of its crust. Most scientists had believed that the crust covering the relatively smooth northern lowlands of the planet was much younger than that of the rest of the planet. However, Frey’s research using Surveyor’s pathbreaking instruments had shown that the lowlands are not actually smooth at all. Using the measurements obtained by the spacecraft’s laser altimeter, Frey and his team had documented more than 600 ancient craters lying just beneath a layer of dust on the lowlands, many of the craters larger than 30 miles (48 kilometers) in diameter. From this finding, the team had concluded that the crust of the northern lowlands is older than scientists had expected. According to James W. Head of Brown University, who was not a member of Frey’s research contingent, the findings would “push the reset button” on ideas about how Mars had evolved as a planet.(Robert C. Cowen, “Red Planet Still a Mystery, but Mars Global Surveyor Makes It Less So,” Christian Science Monitor, 14 June 2001.)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Lander’s safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, “Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration,” at the National Geographic Society’s Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Mars’s Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Mars’s surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Mars’s hostile but fascinating landscape.
NASA’s Mars Odyssey provided its first image from its orbit around the Red Planet. Odyssey took the image as part of a calibration process for the spacecraft’s thermal-emission imaging system, which NASA had designed to observe the surface of Mars in both light and darkness. The initial image, a thermal infrared image of the planet’s southern polar carbon-dioxide ice cap, covered an area greater than 6,500 kilometers (3,900 miles) at a resolution of approximately 5.5 kilometers (3.4 miles) per pixel.(NASA, “Mars Odyssey’s First Look at Mars Is All Treat, No Trick,” news release 01-214, 31 October 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of Lockheed Martin to construct Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), scheduled to launch in August 2005. Under the US$145 million contract, Lockheed Martin would be responsible for building the orbiter and for integrating and testing six scientific instruments and two engineering payloads. In addition, Lockheed Martin would provide operations support for spacecraft during its five and one-half year mission. Odyssey, designed for low-altitude remote sensing of Mars, would include an atmospheric sounder; a context imager; a high-resolution camera; a shallow, subsurface, sounding radar; a visible, near-infrared imaging spectrometer; and a wide-angle color imager. NASA engineers planned to use Odyssey’s images to help determine landing sites for future Mars missions. NASA also planned for the spacecraft to provide telecommunications and navigation relay capability for future missions to the planet.(NASA, “NASA Selects Spacecraft Contractor for 2005 Mars Mission,” news release c01-w, 3 October 2001; Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Chosen by NASA and JPL to Build the 2005 Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter,” 3 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinChosenByNASAJPL Build2.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
NASA’s Mars Odyssey spacecraft maneuvered into Mars’s orbit after a six-month, 286 million- mile (460 million-kilometer) voyage from Earth. Newspapers described the event as a major success for NASA, which had lost three previous spacecraft destined for Mars during the years from 1993 to 1999. NASA planned for Odyssey to orbit Mars for two and one-half years, mapping the mineral composition of Mars and searching for evidence of water ice beneath the planet’s surface. Toward the end of Odyssey’s orbital reconnaissance mission, the spacecraft would also function as a communications satellite for two robotic landers that NASA planned to launch to Mars in 2003.(Mark Carreau, “Odyssey Slips into Orbit, Breaks String of Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2001; New York Times, “At Last a Success on a Mars Mission,” 24 October 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his resignation, effective 17 November 2001. Goldin, who had become the head of NASA on 1 April 1992, was NASA’s longest-serving Administrator. During his tenure, Goldin had overseen numerous successes for NASA, including the launch of Mars Pathfinder, the repair of the HST, and the redesign of the ISS. Goldin stated that he was leaving for personal reasons and that he had accepted an interim position at the Council on Competitiveness, an organization promoting U.S. economic competitiveness, both at home and abroad. However, newspapers noted that Goldin had made the announcement during a time of budgetary difficulties for NASA. Moreover, media reported that White House officials had already sought candidates to replace Goldin, although, according to NASA, President George W. Bush had not yet selected his replacement.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Announces Resignation,” news release 01-191, 17 October 2001; William Harwood, “NASA Chief to Step Down,” Washington Post, 18 October 2001.)
In the midst of increased concerns over the long-term effects of the depletion of Earth’s ozone layer and concerns over global warming, scientists learned that Mars’s average global temperature had increased 50°F (10°C) in one month. A research team at Arizona State University analyzed and made public data that Mars Global Surveyor had collected, indicating the planet’s drastic change in climate. Scientists concluded that a massive dust storm, originating in Mars’s lower latitudes, had caused the increase in temperature. The researchers believed that the dust had trapped sunlight, eventually causing a heat wave to envelope the Red Planet; they predicted, however, that the planet’s temperature would cool when the dust particles began reflecting sunlight.(Los Angeles Times, “Science File in Brief; Global Warming Strikes Another Planet: Mars,” 23 July 2001.)
NASA revealed time-lapse images of the biggest dust storm on Mars to occur in nearly 30 years. The HST and Mars Global Surveyor had captured the images, which showed that the storms had begun as a local event in the Hellas region of Mars and had rapidly propagated throughout the planet. The storms had obscured the surface of Mars and dramatically affected temperatures in the planet’s atmosphere, including heating the upper portions of its atmosphere to as much as 80°F (26.7°C). NASA scientists hoped that data about the storms would help them learn more about sediments on Mars, as well as helping them plan future missions to the Red Planet.(William Harwood, “Mars Wearing Veil of Dust; Biggest Storm in Three Decades Obscures Surface, Alters Temperatures,” Washington Post, 12 October 2001; NASA, “Scientists Track ‘Perfect Storm’ on Mars,” news release 01-193, 11 October 2001.)
The government of France named NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin as Officer of the Legion of Honor, the country’s highest award. Napoleon had created the Legion of Honor in 1802 to honor civil and military service to France. The award honored Goldin for his contribution to the cooperation of France and the United States in space endeavors. NASA and the French space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales, had collaborated on Earth observation and Mars exploration, and French astronauts had flown on the Space Shuttle. Ambassador François Bujon de l’Éstang presented the award to Goldin at the residence of the French Ambassador.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Receives French Legion of Honor Award,” news release 01-202, 31 October 2001.)
