167Inside Wallops, “Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement,” news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, “Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy,” news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad O’Connor, “Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader,” New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
Using data gathered by NASA’s Mars Odyssey spacecraft, scientists discovered direct evidence of water ice on Mars. NASA scientists were using the Odyssey to measure and map soils in Mars’s polar regions when the spacecraft’s gamma-ray spectrometer detected hydrogen, indicating the presence of substantial, subsurface water ice in the upper meter of soil in a region surrounding Mars’s south pole. Scientists had already suspected that Mars possessed large quantities of water near its surface, but the Odyssey’s new information was the first direct evidence supporting this hypothesis. Scientists also found that large areas in Mars’s low and middle latitudes contained “slightly enhanced amounts of hydrogen.” However, their report did not indicate whether the hydrogen was in the form of water ice or chemically bound to minerals in the soil.(NASA, “Odyssey Finds Water Ice in Abundance Under Mars’s Surface,” news release 02-99, 28 May 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of two proposals for space missions for its Earth System Science Pathfinder small-satellite program, developed to research Earth’s carbon cycle and the relationship of climate change and oceans. Specifically, the selected proposals would support the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO), which would provide global measurements of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and the Aquarius mission, which would map salt concentrations on oceans’ surfaces to learn how they affect ocean circulation and global heat redistribution. NASA planned to provide up to US$175 million for each of the two proposals selected for the program. NASA appointed David Crisp of JPL as Principal Investigator for the OCO mission and Chester J. “Chet” Koblinsky of GSFC as Principal Investigator for the Aquarius mission. NASA had numerous university, corporate, and international collaborators for both missions, including the Argentine Space Program, a significant partner in the Aquarius mission.
James S. Martin, former NASA Manager of the Viking missions to Mars, died at the age of 81. Martin had led the nationwide team of 750 engineers, scientists, and technicians that had developed the Viking 1 and Viking 2 spacecraft. The two craft had launched in 1975 and landed on Mars a year later, making Viking the first mission to successfully soft-land on the surface of another planet. Martin had joined NASA in 1964 as an Assistant Project Manager for the Lunar Orbiter, and in 1967 he had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his contribution to that project. He had departed from NASA in 1976 to work for Martin Marietta Aerospace, and in 2000 NASA had asked him to leave retirement to lead its effort to restructure its Mars Exploration Program.(NASA, “Mars Viking Leader, James S. Martin Jr. Dies,” news release 02-72, 18 April 2002.)
G. Scott Hubbard replaced Henry McDonald as Director of NASA’s ARC. Hubbard, ARC’s Deputy Director of Research at the time of the appointment, had served in a number of management roles at the Center since the beginning of his career with NASA in 1987. In addition, he had helped establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute at ARC and had originated the Mars Pathfinder program. McDonald, who had served as Director of ARC from 1996 to 2002, had left the Center to become a professor of computational engineering at the University of Tennessee in Chattanooga.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 3 October 2008); NASA ARC, “G. Scott Hubbard Named NASA Ames Research Center Director,” news release 02-103AR, 19 September 2002.)
Researchers at NASA’s JPL successfully demonstrated the first use of robotic rovers capable of cooperating to perform tasks together while navigating uneven natural terrain. The researchers hoped that the rovers would be able to perform sustained research on Mars and to assemble and maintain orbiting spacecraft. In outdoor tests, JPL researchers had used two rovers to simulate the deployment of a solar power station. In these simulations, the two robots had grasped and carried a container measuring 2.5 meters (8 feet) long, for more than 50 meters (160 feet). The project had used new software called the Control Architecture for Multi-Robot Planetary Outposts, which equipped the rovers with a distributed and autonomous intelligence producing instinctively reactive behaviors, shared sense and control, and collective decision making. This new technology, along with other innovations, had developed rovers―referred to as the Robotic Work Crew―capable of sharing both work and thinking. Project scientists hoped these capabilities would enable the rovers to collaborate in performing designated tasks, while coping with the unknown and unpredictable surface of Mars and encountering other scenarios unforeseen by scientists on Earth.(NASA, “Robotic Construction Crew Rolls Up Its Sleeves,” news release 02-04, 9 January 2002; NASA JPL, “TechnologyFeature: Researchers Toy with New Rover Designs,” 21 December 2001, http://jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=489 (accessed 28 July 2008).)
