NASA selected the University of Arizona’s Phoenix lander concept for a US$325 million mission to Mars in 2007, beating out finalists from Arizona State University, NASA’s JPL, and NASA’s LaRC. The Phoenix concept, aptly named for the mythical bird that rose from ashes, drew on the technology of past expeditions, such as the canceled 2001 Mars Surveyor Program. Phoenix’s purpose was to search for evidence of water and carbon dioxide gasa robotic arm would scoop soil samples, small on-board ovens would heat the samples, and on-board instruments would analyze them, checking the soil for organic compounds. NASA called the Phoenix mission the first of a type of mission it had designated as Scout missions. If funding remained available, NASA planned to hold competitions every four years to select relatively small missions like Phoenix as Scout missions.(Chris Kridler, “Mission Will Look for Mars Ice,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 5 August 2003)
Having received a very weak signal from the Pioneer 10 spacecraft on 22 January 2003, NASA announced that it would make no further attempts to contact the craft. On 2 March 1972, NASA had launched Pioneer 10, built by TRW Inc., on a three-stage Atlas-Centaur rocket. In just 12 weeks, Pioneer 10 had traveled beyond Mars, had become the first spacecraft to pass through the asteroid belt, and had continued to travel beyond Jupiter into deep space, “venturing into places where nothing built by humanity had ever gone before.” Pioneer 10 had last returned telemetry data on 27 April 2002. In the previous three attempts of JPL’s Deep Space Network to contact it, Pioneer 10 had emitted very weak response signals, and in the last attempt at contact on 7 February, the Deep Space Network had detected no signal from the spacecraft. Engineers reported that Pioneer 10’s radioisotope power source had decayed. Originally, NASA had designed Pioneer 10 for a 21-month mission, but the spacecraft had lasted more than 30 years.(NASA, “Pioneer 10 Spacecraft Sends Last Signal,” news release 03-082, 25 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03082.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
NASA announced that it had selected several radioisotope-based, power-conversion technologies for research and development. The awards represented the first competitive technology procurement funded entirely by NASA’s Project Prometheus. The projects covered distinct areas in power-conversion technology: thermoelectrics, thermophotovoltaics, Stirling engines, and Brayton engines. NASA intended the awards to lay the foundation for technology development enabling new classes of missions, such as networked science stations on Mars and small spacecraft capable of complex maneuvers in deep space. Each award would cover three one-year performance periods with continued support from one period to the next, contingent on the program’s needs, availability of funds, and each team’s ability to meet milestones. The total funding was US$43 million divided into various increments covering fiscal years 2003 to 2006.(NASA, “Advanced Radioisotope-Power Technologies R&D Teams Selected,” contract release c03-n, 7 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03n.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
Edward J. Weiler, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space about Project Prometheus, a proposed nuclear technology program. The proposal called for NASA to spend US$3 billion between 2003 and 2008, developing more powerful radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) to convert energy from the decay of radioactive material into electricity and to explore the use of fission to power spacecraft and their instruments. A strong supporter of the program, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, a former Secretary of the Navy, hoped to apply lessons learned from the nuclear submarine program to spacecraft. Weiler stated that nuclear fission was necessary for sending spacecraft to scrutinize the outer planets of the solar system, such as Jupiter, and could open the door to human spaceflight to Mars. NASA hoped to use the powerful RTGs developed in Project Prometheus for a robotic mission to Mars in 2009. NASA proposed to make a mission to Jupiter’s moons as its first use of fission technology in space exploration.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Advice to NASA Supports Nuclear-Fueled Spaceflight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 4 June 2003.)
JAXA spokesperson, Junichi Moriuma, announced that JAXA had failed in its final effort to return the Nozomi craft to the correct trajectory for orbiting Mars. Insufficient fuel supplies had prevented the craft’s engines from firing. Nozomi―Hope―had been traveling toward Mars for five years and was schedule to arrive in one week. JAXA had planned for Nozomi to examine the Martian atmosphere’s interaction with the solar wind, to determine whether the planet has a magnetic field. During its journey from Earth to Mars, Nozomi had experienced several malfunctions that had altered its trajectory, placing it on a course that was too low and causing concern that the spacecraft would crash into Mars, possibly contaminating the surface. JAXA officials stated that, although they had failed to place the craft on the correct trajectory, they had greatly reduced the probability of the craft’s colliding with Mars. Instead, the craft would escape Mars’s gravitational field and enter a long-term orbit of the solar system. Moriuma remarked that Japanese scientists would continue to modify Nozomi, allowing it to carry out alternative missions, such as monitoring solar activity.(Kenji Hall for the Associated Press, “Japan Quits Mars Mission as Probe Strays,” 10 December 2003; Jason Testar for Canadian Press, “Japanese Fail To Salvage Mars Mission Carrying Canadian Research Instrument,” 10 December 2003.)
Scientists studying data produced by the thermal emission spectrometer (TES) on board NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published findings in the journal Science disputing the theory that Mars once had a warm climate. Using the TES, which measured infrared light from rocks, scientists had searched for patterns of color to identify different minerals, particularly carbonates. Carbonates form only in the presence of liquid water. TES data confirmed small concentrations of carbonates in Martian dust, but no large deposits, such as those that would have formed at the bottom of a lake or ocean. Lead author of the article, Philip R. Christensen of Arizona State University, remarked that, according to the data, it was “extremely unlikely” that large bodies of water exposed to the atmosphere for an extended period had ever existed on Mars. Matthew P. Golombek of NASA’s JPL commented that the new findings directly contradicted the idea that, at one time, Mars may have been warmer and wetter with a denser carbon-dioxide atmosphere. Previously, scientists had proposed this theory to explain Mars’s apparent geological formations resembling the intricate patterns of riverbeds, carved canyons, and delta fans.(Joshua L. Bandfield, Timothy D. Glotch, and Philip R. Christensen, “Spectroscopic Identification of Carbonate Minerals in the Martian Dust,” Science 301, no. 5636 (22 August 2003): 1084; New York Times, “Study: No Past Standing Water on Mars,” 22 August 2003; Kenneth Chang, “New Data Dispute Theory That Mars Had Warm Climate,” New York Times, 22 August 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of Steven J. Dick as NASA’s Chief Historian, to succeed Roger D. Launius, who had departed in July 2002 to become Historian of the National Air and Space Museum. An astronomer and historian of science, Dick had served as the first Historian of the U.S. Naval Observatory and, just before his NASA appointment, had been Acting Chief of the Naval Observatory’s Nautical Almanac Office. As an expert in the field of astrobiology and its cultural implications, Dick had served on a panel examining the potential societal implications of the discovery of life in the Mars rock. He had received the NASA Group Achievement Award in recognition of his contributions to the establishment of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), including the definition of the field of astrobiology. Dick had authored more than 100 works, including a history of the Naval Observatory, Sky and Ocean Joined: The U.S. Naval Observatory, 1830–2000, which had won the John Lyman Award of the North American Society for Oceanic History for best book in 2002 in Science and Technology and the U.S. Naval Observatory’s Captain James Melville Gilliss Award for extraordinary dedication and exemplary service. At the time of his appointment, Dick served on the editorial boards of several journals and was an associate editor of the International Journal of Astrobiology. From 1993 to 1994, Dick had served as Chairperson of the Historical Astronomy Division of the American Astronomical Society, and between 1997 and 2000, he had been President of the History of Astronomy Commission of the International Astronomical Union.(NASA, “NASA Names New Historian,” news release 03-327, 10 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03327_new_historian.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA launched the first of two Mars Exploration Rovers from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The destination of the 384-pound (174-kilogram) rover Spirit was the Gustev Crater, a site that scientists believed had been a crater lake. NASA intended the second of the identical rovers, called Opportunity, to launch later in June and to land on the opposite side of Mars from the Gustev Crater at a site called Meridiani Planum, which had a large deposit of a type of mineral (gray hematite) that usually forms in wet environments. NASA had designed the rolling rovers to capture sharper images, explore wider regions, and examine rocks better than any previous craft that had landed on Mars, searching for evidence of wet environments on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Prepares Two Robot Rovers for Mars Exploration,” news release 03-189, 4 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03189_ROVERS.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “First of NASA Rovers En Route to Mars,” 11 June 2003.)
ESA launched its Mars Express mission from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat rocket. Mars Express consisted of ESA’s Mars Orbiter and a 65-kilogram (143.3-pound) lander, Beagle 2, named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life. The orbiter, scheduled to reach Mars in December, carried multiple cameras, spectrometers, and radar equipment. Following the launch, ESA Director of Science David J. Southwood remarked that its success signified Europe’s official entry into the interplanetary travel club.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596, 1 July 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx596.html, (accessed 12 December 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Europe Launches First Ever Mars Space Mission,” 3 June 2003.)
ESA’s Science Programme Committee (SPC) dropped the Eddington mission and scaled back the BepiColombo mission because of budgetary concerns―the SPC had determined that ESA would only have sufficient resources to fund one new mission in the next decade. For that mission, the Committee had selected the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) Pathfinder mission, which would launch in 2006 or 2007 and would test technologies and strategies for the planned 2012 LISA mission to detect gravitational waves. ESA had planned for the Eddington mission, scheduled for launch in 2008, to monitor the brightness of stars, study their interiors, and search for planetsof the size of Earth or smallerpassing in front of the stars. Japan and Europe had scheduled BepiColombo, their joint mission to Mercury, for launch in 2011 and had originally planned to send a lander to Mercury as part of that mission. Although the SPC had cancelled the lander portion of the mission, it still planned for ESA to launch two satellites to orbit the planet.(Vanessa Thomas, “ESA Axes Planet-Finding Mission and Mercury Lander,” Astronomy.com, 12 November 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “European Planet-Finding Mission Cancelled,” Space News, 10 November 2003.)
After numerous delays, NASA launched Mars Explorer Rover-B (MER-B) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in time to meet the 15 July deadline. If NASA had not met that deadline, it would have had to wait an additional four years to launch the craft. MER-B, nicknamed Opportunity, was an exact duplicate of MER-A, known as Spirit, which had launched on 10 June. Bad weather, a failed battery cell, and a problem with the cork insulation, which had failed to adhere to the aluminum rocket, had caused the launch’s delay.
ESA formally opened its first deep space ground station in New Norcia, Australia. Construction on the US$47 million (EUR 28 million) facility had begun in April 2000. The key component of the station was a massive antenna, 40 meters (125 feet) high and weighing 600 tonnes (661.4 tons or 600,000 kilograms), with a 35-meter (110-foot) dish. ESA had selected the New Norcia site because its distance from urban areas protected it from interference from other transmission devices, its latitude was perfect for deep space operations, and its weather was excellent. ESA had built and opened the station in time for it to play a key role in ESA’s Mars Express mission, scheduled for launch in June. The Mars Express craft would carry a lander dubbed Beagle 2―named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life―which would map the surface, subsurface, atmosphere, and ionosphere of Mars.(ESA, “ESA’s First Deep Space Ground Station Opens in Western Australia,” ESA news release 14-2003, 5 March 2003, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_14_2003_p_EN.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Australian Town Host to European Space Quest,” 6 March 2003.)
ESA announced that the Beagle 2, ESA’s Mars Lander, had separated from the Mars Express orbiting spacecraft. ESA had scheduled the Beagle 2 to land on Mars early on 24 December (EST), while, at approximately the same time, Mars Express would enter Martian orbit.
