NASA officially refuted news reports that had circulated on 16 February claiming that NASA scientists affiliated with ARC had found strong evidence that life might exist on Mars. According to the news reports, during a private meeting in Washington, DC, two astrobiologists from Ames had told a group of space officials that they had found strong evidence, in the form of methane signatures, that life currently exists on Mars, hidden in caves and sustained by pockets of water. NASA stated that it did not have any observational data from any current Mars missions to support the claim. NASA further stated that the work the scientists had conducted did not directly support any conclusion regarding the existence of life on Mars but, rather, that the scientists’ research could help formulate a strategy for searching for such life. The scientists had not submitted any research papers asserting the existence of Martian life to any scientific journal.(NASA, “NASA Statement on False Claim of Evidence of Life on Mars,” news release 05-052, 18 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05052_mars_claim.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Bloomberg News, “NASA Says Claims of Evidence of Current Life on Mars Are False,” 19 February 2005; Brian Berger, “Exclusive: NASA Researchers Claim Evidence of Present Life on Mars,” Space.com, 16 February 2005, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/mars_life_050216.html (accessed 28 August 2009).)
NASA’s JPL released a series of images that Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) had captured on 20 and 21 April, which showed, for the first time, NASA’s Mars Odyssey and ESA’s Mars Express spacecraft orbiting Mars. MGS had orbited the planet since 1997, Mars Odyssey had arrived in 2001, and Mars Express had arrived in late 2003. MGS and Mars Odyssey followed similar near- polar orbits, sometimes passing within 9 miles (15 kilometers) of each other, but Odyssey orbited higher than MGS to prevent collision. MGS had captured two images of Odyssey 7.5 seconds apartthe first from a distance of 56 miles (90 kilometers) and the second from 84 miles (135 kilometers). The following day, MGS had captured an image of Mars Express from a distance of 155 miles (249 kilometers).(Tariq Malik, “New Photos Are First of Spacecraft Orbiting Mars,” Space.com, 20 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050519_mgs_orbiters.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
The U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA’s proposal to reduce spending on aviation research by 20 percent over five years, which would necessitate the closure of some wind tunnels and other centers. Overall, the Bush administration had proposed a 2.4 percent increase in NASA’s budget, with most of that increase directed toward funding travel to the Moon and Mars, initiatives requiring NASA to eliminate or reduce its other programs, such as aviation research. NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Research J. Victor Lebacqz defended the program, remarking that the United States remained a global power in aviation and had developed technologies to improve safety, reduce environmental impact, and increase efficiency of aviation operations. However, Lebacqz stated that NASA needed a clearer vision for the goals of the program. John M. Klineberg, a retired NASA official and industry executive, who had headed a National Research Council (NRC) study group in 2004, testified before the committee. The NRC study group had published a review of NASA’s aeronautics programs. Klineberg warned against using the group’s recommendations out of context to justify major cuts in programs. He testified that NASA’s proposed aviation-research budget was a disaster, putting the program at risk of becoming irrelevant to the future of aeronautics in the United States and throughout the world. In an interview following the hearing, Klineberg emphasized that the study group had suggested consolidating and focusing programs but did not support budgetary cuts eliminating entire areas of research.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Proposal To Reduce Spending for Aviation Research by 20% Dismays Experts,” New York Times, 17 March 2005; Malia Rulon for Associated Press, “Lawmakers Question Proposed NASA Cuts,” 17 March 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The Future of Aeronautics at NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 16 March 2005.)
After a delay of more than one year, ESA’s Mars Express deployed the first of three booms that form the craft’s Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere Sounding (MARSIS). The MARSIS booms would search for evidence of water under the surface of Mars. The deployment marked the beginning of a 10-day sequence, originally scheduled for April 2004. NASA’s JPL had conducted an investigation that had warned of the possibility that one or more of the antenna components could swing back and hit the spacecraft, a risk that had caused ESA to delay the deployment. Although an ESA review board had concluded that, even if such an event were to occur, the risk of damaging Mars Express remained low, scientists had voiced concerns that a strike from any of the booms could damage delicate instruments on board the orbiter. According to Mars Express Mission Manager Fred Jansen, engineers had analyzed the problem over the past year to assure themselves that any existing risks would not affect the spacecraft. As deployment commenced, telemetry data indicated that the first boom, which formed half of MARSIS’s primary antenna, had deployed successfully. ESA had scheduled the second half of the antenna to deploy four days later.
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
ESA announced that its Mars Express spacecraft had discovered ancient geological structures and ice reservoirs―but not liquid water―below Mars’s surface. Mars Express, equipped with radar capable of conducting subsurface analyses of the planet, had detected a crater approximately 250 kilometers wide (155 miles wide) below the planet’s surface, as well as 1.8 kilometers (1.1 miles) of subsurface water ice near its north pole. However, the spacecraft had not detected the liquid water necessary to support life. Even deep below the surface of Mars, the planet’s polar temperatures decline to -129oC (-200oF), preventing its ice from melting. Scientists regarded the discovery of subsurface ice as evidence that Mars’s environment was unable to harbor life.(John Johnson, “European Mars Express Show[s] That the Red Planet Was Not as Warm or Wet as Previously Thought,” Los Angeles Times, 1 December 2005; “Radar Provides Deeper View of Ice on Mars,” Nature 438, no. 7068 (1 December 2005): 545.)
NASA announced that it had awarded Rice University’s Carbon Nanotechnology Laboratory (CNL) an US$11 million contract to produce a prototype power cable constructed of carbon nanotubes. The engineers expected the so-called quantum wires to conduct electricity up to 10 times better than copper, at 1/6th the weight. NASA anticipated that the technology would help return humans to the Moon and enable travel to Mars and beyond. Richard E. Smalley, the project’s Lead Investigator, explained that the Space Shuttle’s primary power-distribution system accounted for almost 7 percent of its weight. However, NASA’s next generation of human and robotic spacecraft would need far more power to support additional instrumentation and broadband communications, requiring a copper power-distribution system that would account for up to 25 percent of the craft’s weight. Under the contract, CNL would provide NASA with a 1- meter (3.2-foot) prototype of quantum wire by 2010, a task requiring major breakthroughs in the production of nanotubes. To date, scientists had succeeded in producing wires no longer than several centimeters. At the time NASA awarded the contract, only armchair nanotubesa type comprising 2 percent of all nanotubes were suitable for use as quantum wires. Researchers at CNL planned to grow these nanotubes like crystals, placing “seeds” in a laboratory reactor and pumping in a source of carbon, such as carbon monoxide, with the hope of creating perfect, long armchair nanotubes each time. The researchers would then twist the tubes together to produce a quantum wire according to NASA’s specifications.(NASA, “NASA Awards $11 Million “Quantum Wire” Contract to Rice,” news release J05-018, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/J05-018.html (accessed 9 September 2009); Amit Asaravala, “NASA Funds ‘Miracle Polymer’,” Wired News, 28 April 2005.)
NASA announced that it had approved the extension of operations for the twin Mars Rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, for up to 18 months. The robotic craft had already surprised engineers and scientists, having completed 11 months of extended activity beyond their successful three- month primary missions. Opportunity had driven more than three miles since arriving at Mars, eight times the distance originally planned, and, in March 2005, had set a new record of 722 feet (220 meters) in a single day’s drive. Spirit had driven a shorter distance but was working in a much rougher terrain than Opportunity. Both rovers were exhibiting signs of wear and exposure, and scientists recognized that either mission could end suddenly because of a random part failure. James K. Erickson, Project Manager for the rovers at NASA’s JPL, remarked that, despite the wear and the effects of exposure, both rovers remained in exceptional shape. Erickson said that NASA would work to get as much benefit as possible for as long as the craft were capable of producing worthwhile scientific results. Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program J. Douglas McCuistion added that the rovers’ successes had strengthened NASA’s commitment to achieving the ambitious goals of returning samples from Mars and eventually sending a human expedition to the planet.(NASA, “Durable Mars Rovers Sent into Third Overtime Period,” news release 05-091, 6 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05091_mer_extension.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
NASA launched its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) at 7:43 a.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida on an Atlas 5 launch vehicle. The occasion marked the first time that NASA had used an Atlas 5 to launch an interplanetary mission. NASA had designed the MRO to conduct highly detailed analyses of Mars’s atmosphere, surface, and subsurface. From low orbit, the MRO would evaluate landing sites for future Mars missions and search for sites where water might have previously existed. NASA planned to examine the MRO data to seek evidence of previous life on the planet and to study planetary climate change. After two years of gathering data, the MRO would relay the information to Earth, using two robotic probes scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2008 and 2010.(NASA, “NASA’s Multipurpose Mars Mission Successfully Launched,” news release 05-218, 12 August 2005; Thomas H. Maugh II, “New Mars Orbiter Embarks on Ambitious Fact-Finding Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 13 August 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASA’s Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probes―Viking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, “Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral,” Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
ESA and the government of the United Kingdom (UK) officially published the report of the investigation into the circumstances and possible reasons for the failure of the Beagle 2 mission. Beagle 2, the Mars lander that had “piggybacked” aboard ESA’s Mars Express Orbiter, had failed to communicate after its landing date of 25 December 2005. The UK government and ESA had commissioned the report in February 2004, and the commission had completed the report in April 2004. Initially, ESA and the UK government had refused to publish the report, citing details of confidential intergovernmental agreements, as well as commercially sensitive information. Instead, they had issued a set of recommendations for future missions. However, the New Scientist had requested the report’s publication under the UK’s new Freedom of Information Act, in force since the beginning of 2005. Colin Pillinger, the planetary scientist who had first proposed the Beagle 2 project, and Mark Sims, the mission’s project managerboth at the Open University in the UKagreed that the report contained little, if any, commercially sensitive information. However, the report concluded that ESA and the UK government should never have approved the project. ESA committee investigating the loss of the probe had found several fundamental errors, such as classifying the lander as an instrument aboard Mars Express, instead of as a separate spacecraft, and making inaccurate estimates about the characteristics of the Martian atmosphere. The committee also determined that ESA and the UK had underfunded the mission from the start. Moreover, the committee found that the mission’s logistics were too complex for Pillinger’s team.(British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2”; Justin Mullins, “Beagle 2 ‘Should Never Have Been Built’,” New Scientist, 4 February 2005; BBC News, “Report Scorns Beagle 2 Decision,” 4 February 2005.)
NASA’s Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASA’s first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, “NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, “STS-114: Return to Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, “Return to Flight: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, “NASA Grounds Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
