NASA awarded Scripps Institution of Oceanography a grant valued at US$750,000, to develop an instrument to detect signs of biological compounds on Mars. European Space Agency (ESA) selected the Urey Mars Organic and Oxidant Detector (Urey), named for the late Nobel Laureate, Harold C. Urey, to fly aboard its ExoMars rover mission in 2013. Jeffrey L. Bada, Lead Investigator on the Urey team and Director of the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Exobiology at Scripps, explained that Urey would be the first instrument with the capacity to detect amino acids, as well as other possible biomolecules. To search for trace levels of amino acids and for some components of DNA and RNA, Urey would heat and analyze spoon-sized amounts of Martian soil, collected from 2 meters (6.6 feet) beneath Mars’s surface. Urey would then trap and condense any molecules released from the heated soil and probe them with a laser. If the laser detected amino acids in the soil, another instrument, developed at the University of California at Berkeley, would examine the amino-acid composition to determine whether the molecules came from biological or nonbiological sources.(Scripps Institution of Oceanography, “NASA Funds Scripps Instrument for Probing for Life on Mars: Detector To Hunt for Organic Molecules During Proposed 2013 Mission,” Scripps News, 9 January 2007, http://scrippsnews. ucsd.edu/Releases/?releaseID=768 (accessed 9 November 2009).)
NASA announced that the chemical analyzer at the end of the arm of the Mars rover Spirit had measured a concentration of pure silica in a soil sample at Gusev Crater, providing the strongest evidence to date that Mars was much wetter in the ancient past than at present. At 90 percent, the concentrated deposit of silica could only have formed in the presence of water. Spirit’s discovery had been the result of a mechanical failure. One of the rover’s six wheels, which had become incapable of rotating, had gouged a deep impression as it moved through the soil. The scraping had exposed patches of bright soil, leading to the discovery of the silica. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, Principal Investigator for the Mars rovers’ scientific instruments, underscored the significance of the discovery, stating, “the fact that we found something this new and different after nearly 1,200 days on Mars makes it even more remarkable.” J. Douglas McCuistion, Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program, added that the unexpected discovery was a reminder that Spirit and Opportunity were still conducting cutting-edge exploration more than three years into their extended mission.
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawn’s mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and Jupiter—Vesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawn’s instrument suite to measure the asteroids’ elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, “NASA’s Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt,” news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, “Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, “NASA’s Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids ‘Frozen in Time’,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, “NASA’s Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids,” Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
The journal Science published a special issue about water on Mars. The issue included five reports that had used the scientific results derived from the detailed images that NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) had captured during the first 100 days of its mission. MRO’s primary mission was to study Mars’s hydrologic history, using six scientific instruments, including the High-Resolution Imaging Science Experiment camera (HiRISE), which provided 10 times the resolution of any previous Mars imager. The papers published in this special issue of Science indicated that evidence for liquid water on Mars was rare and difficult to discern. NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor (MGS), which had visited Mars in 1999, had raised researchers’ hopes that the probe had detected modern flows of liquid water on Mars. However, MRO’s observations suggested otherwise—that landslides of loose, dry materials had created the deposits that scientists had interpreted as evidence of liquid water. In addition, MRO had captured images suggesting that flowing lava, rather than water, had shaped some Martian landforms, such as branched channels and fan-like deposits. Moreover, MRO images indicated that, although certain gullies and rims of craters did indeed contain liquid water, the presence of water at these locations did not reveal the presence of a water table. Rather, the images suggested that objects impacting Mars had triggered trickles of water at these sites. Radar and gravity data indicated that the cap on Mars’s south pole held the largest reservoir of water ice on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Orbiter Provides Insights About Mars Water and Climate,” news release 07-206, 20 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07206_Mars_Water.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Joanne Baker, “Introduction to Special Issue: Water, Water, Not Everywhere?” Science 317, no. 5845 (21 September 2007): 1705, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/summary/sci;317/5845/1705?maxtoshow=&hits=10&RESULT FORMAT=&fulltext=Mars+Reconnaissance+Orbiter&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&resourcetype=HWCIT (DOI: 10.1126/science.317.5845.1705; accessed 10 August 2010); Jeanna Bryner, “Hope for Water on Mars Dims with Sharp New Images,” Space.com, 20 September 2007, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/070920_mars_tale. html (accessed 10 August 2010).)
During a ceremony rededicating its Glenn Research Center (GRC) Plum Brook site in Ohio, NASA announced its intention to use the Plum Brook Station’s Space Power Facility (SPF) to test the CEV Orion. NASA had designed Orion, which was in development, to enable research on the Moon, Mars, and other destinations in Earth’s solar system. NASA intended for the SPF—the only facility in the world large enough to undertake full-scale testing—to conduct environmental tests of the Orion spacecraft, using simulations of conditions during launch, in- orbit operations, and reentry. The facility would also conduct thermal, acoustic, mechanical- vibration, and electromagnetic-interference tests.
NASA announced that its solar-powered Mars rover duo, Spirit and Opportunity, had survived severe dust storms and were ready to continue their mission. Spirit had awakened and, on 5 September, had climbed onto a plateau of layered bedrock, its long-term destination. On the plateau, known as Home Plate, Spirit would examine clues about an explosive mixture of lava and water. Meanwhile, Opportunity had begun preparing for its descent into Victoria Crater, where it would examine an exposed layer of bright rocks. The rocks might provide preserved evidence of an ancient interaction between the Martian atmosphere and surface. Dust storms in July had delayed Opportunity’s scheduled descent into the crater, blocking significant amounts of sunlight and causing researchers to become concerned that the rovers’ daily energy supplies might plunge too low for recovery.(NASA, “Mars Rovers Survive Severe Dust Storms, Ready for Next Objectives,” news release 07-187, 7 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07187_Mars_Rovers.html (accessed 4 August 2010).)
NASA’s JPL announced that, after entering the Victoria Crater on 13 September, Opportunity had reached its first destination inside the crater, driving 7.45 meters (24 feet) on 18 September and 2.47 meters (8 feet) further on 22 September. On 25 September, the rover had descended 2.25 meters (7.38 feet) down the inner slope of the 800-meter-wide (2,625-foot-wide) crater to a band of relatively bright bedrock, positioning itself to examine a selected slab of rock composed of three distinct layers. After the science team had conducted safety checks, Opportunity would examine the rock, using the tools at the end of its robotic arm. Safety checks were necessary because Opportunity was sitting on the slope at a 25° tilt. Victoria was the largest crater that Opportunity had visited during its nearly four Earth years of Mars exploration. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, the Rover Science Principal Investigator, explained that, through the several planned stops along the band of rock, scientists hoped to 141 figure out the processes that had led to Victoria’s formation and to its distinctive appearance.
NASA announced that, for the fifth time, it would extend the missions of the Mars Exploration Rovers Spirit and Opportunity. The twin rovers had landed on Mars in January 2004, embarking on missions originally planned to last 90 days. John L. Callas, Mars Rover Project Manager at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, remarked that, although Spirit and Opportunity were showing some signs of aging, they remained “in good health” and capable of continuing to collect scientific data. At the time of the announcement of the missions’ extension, Spirit had driven 4.5 miles (7.3 kilometers) and had returned more than 102,000 images. Opportunity had driven 7.2 miles (11.6 kilometers) and had returned more than 94,000 images.(NASA, “NASA Extends Operations for Its Long-Lived Mars Rovers,” news release 07-208, 15 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_072088_Mars_Rovers_Funding_Ext.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Roskosmos head Anatoly N. Perminov signed agreements in Moscow allowing two Russian scientific instruments to fly aboard NASA spacecraft. According to the agreement, the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) would fly aboard NASA’s LRO, which was scheduled to begin a yearlong mission in October 2008. In addition, the Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) instrument would travel to Mars aboard NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), a robotic rover scheduled to launch in 2009. Designed to search for evidence of water ice, LEND would map concentrations of hydrogen at the lunar surface, or just below it. The DAN instrument would conduct similar investigations on Mars— measuring hydrogen to analyze the interaction of neutrons with the Martian surface.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft To Carry Russian Science Instruments,” news release 07-219, 3 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07219_combined_Russian_MOU.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA’s JPL announced that the Phoenix Mars Lander flight-operations team had successfully tested the craft’s descent-monitoring radar and UHF radio on 24 August. During its flight to Mars, Phoenix had communicated with Earth via an X-band radio unit, but the craft would switch to UHF radio after landing on Mars. Because the X-band radio unit was mounted on a part of the craft that would jettison shortly before Phoenix reached the Martian atmosphere, the UHF radio would become critical to communications once the craft reached Mars.(NASA JPL, “Phoenix Mars Lander Status Report: Radar and Other Gear Pass Checkouts,” news release 2007- 094a, 4 September 2007, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-094a (accessed 9 August 2010); Dave Mosher, “Phoenix Spacecraft Passes In-Flight Tests,” Space.com, 5 September 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/070905_phoenix_update.html (added 9 August 2010).)
NASA’s Phoenix Mars Lander launched aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:36 (UT). The 350-kilogram (772-pound) Lander carried scientific instruments and a robotic arm that would vertically penetrate the icy soil of the Vastitas Borealis, an arctic plain bearing similarities to central Greenland or northern Alaska. Phoenix’s instruments included eight on- board ovens designed to analyze vapors from soil samples to identify the presence of organic compounds, which would indicate whether biological processes had occurred. To avoid contamination, Phoenix would use each oven just once. Phoenix also carried multi-spectral instruments that would collect data revealing the composition of Mars’s surface minerals and of its atmosphere, to an altitude of 20 kilometers (12.4 miles).(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 646, 1 September 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx646.html (accessed 14 June 2010); John Johnson Jr., “Phoenix Spacecraft Launches to Mars,” Los Angeles Times, 6 August 2007.)
for designing the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon and, eventually, to transport human explorers to Mars. Gilbrech had joined NASA in 1991 and had played a key role in helping NASA solve the problem of the Shuttle’s dangerous foam debris, which had caused the Columbia tragedy in 2003. Griffin also named Robert D. Cabana, Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC in Houston since 2004, to replace Gilbrech as Director of NASA’s SSC, where he would oversee all operations of NASA’s primary center for rocket-propulsion testing and of the Applied Research and Technology Project Office. NASA had selected Cabana as an astronaut in 1985. He had flown twice as a Space Shuttle pilot and twice as a Shuttle commander, accumulating more than 1,000 hours in space.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Announces Senior Leadership Appointments,” news release 07-175, 10 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07175_Gilbrech_Cabana.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA Names New Leader for Moon Exploration,” Houston Chronicle, 12 August 2007.)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the People’s Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russia’s Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, “China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars,” 28 March 2007.)
