Construction begun on the world's largest radar at Arecibo, P.R., capable of bouncing signals off Venus, Mars, and Jupiter, with Cornell University as the prime contractor under direction of ARPA and USAF.
In news conference, Dr. Albert R. Hibbs, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Chief of Space Sciences, stated that it would be a “major accomplishment” if the United States were to overtake the Russians in the race to the Moon, a “less than 50-50 chance.” He pointed to the rumors that the Soviet Union had already attempted to launch a probe to Mars.
President Kennedy stated in his state of the Union address to Congress: “This administration intends to explore promptly all possible areas of cooperation with the Soviet Union and other nations ‘to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors.’ Specifically, I now invite all nations—including the Soviet Union—to join with us in developing a weather prediction program, in a new communication satellite program, and in preparation for probing the distant planets of Mars and Venus, probes which may some day unlock the deepest secrets of the universe.”
dod announced that Perkin-Elmer Corp. was completing a new 36-inch airborne telescope with 3-5 times as much resolution as any telescope on the ground. New instrument should finally answer the speculation about the so-called canals on Mars, the mysterious red spot on Jupiter, and perhaps the hidden surface of Venus. “This historic enterprise is only one more step forward, leading to large telescopes orbiting the earth in satellites and eventually constructed on the moon.”
Soviet academician M. Sissakian, Presidium member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. hoped to bring mars i back to earth.
afsc announced invention of Bio-telescanner—compact and portable instrument to determine biological properties of other planetary soil—by Dr. William G. Glenn, sam research immunobiologist, and Wesley E. Prather, electronics expert. Designed to answer basic questions about extraterrestrial life, the instrument would analyze samples gathered by travelers to Mars or other planets and would telemeter its findings back to earth. It could be adapted to operate automatically, to gather and analyze soil samples before man set foot on the planet. Use of the Biotelescanner would preclude necessity to bring samples of other planetary crust back to earth—an operation which could be dangerous if alien micro-organisms were present in the sample.
National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board report on the atmospheres of Mars and Venus released. Prepared by William W. Kellogg of rand and Carl Sagen of the University of California, it reported that available evidence suggests the existence of life on Mars and that space flights during the next decade would probably resolve this question.
Difficulties in Centaur launch vehicle development were forcing nasa to program 1964 Mars probe for Atlas-Agena vehicle, New York Times reported. Use of Atlas-Agena would mean smaller payload, with about 60 lbs. of instruments instead of 200 lbs.	_
Soviet press agency Tass reported the planet Mars has “experienced the effects of meteorites to a much greater degree than the earth.” Emblen Sobotovich, senior scientist at Leningrad Radium Institute, said meteorites were preserved on Mars for long periods of time because Martian atmosphere contained almost no moisture, Tass reported.
Reported that the U.S. would send a Mariner B spacecraft to Mars in late 1964, to land on the red planet in early 1965. The launching of this heavily instrumented probe would mark the beginning of the scientific search for extraterrestrial life.
Representative John E. Moss (D-Calif.), Chairman of special House Subcommittee on Government Information, criticized “Government news management which is unique in peacetime.” He objected strongly to handling of news about military space launches: “All launches by military agencies, whether they are for a military purpose or to gather information of a scientific nature, are covered by a blanket of secrecy. . . . All information about the billions of dollars spent by the military in space research is channeled through the Pentagon’s single public information voice.” Moss recalled last September when nasa said that six Russian attempts to send space probes to Venus and Mars had failed. Since then, Moss said, “there has been a complete blackout of information about Russian satellite efforts. This is the kind of news management that causes grave concern. ... If we cover up Russian successes ... we can certainly cover up our failures. This . . . leads to a dangerous delusion of the American people.”
In Voice of America broadcast, Alan H. Shapley of the National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Laboratory, reviewed the “new dimension to research in ionospheric science” added by space vehicles. He pointed out that “scientific expeditions landing on the surface of Mars or Venus, whether manned or unmanned, will have to communicate by radio with terrestrial headquarters. We must know which frequencies wlli get through the planetary ionosphere, and which can be used with the radiomirror effect to talk from one part of the planet to another. So far we have had only [the earth’s] ionosphere to study, but this is like the doctor with only a single case. To understand a disease he needs many cases.”
Man’s conquest of space accelerated on a broad front. The U.S. achieved manned orbital flight three times, provided man with his first close-up of another planet with mariner ii’s fly-by of Venus, brought global communications a step closer with the orbiting of the first active repeater communications satellite telstar i, and saw the X-15 exceed its design speed and altitude (4,104 mph and 58.7 mi.). U.S.S.R. achieved first dual manned space flight in an effort that racked up an impressive total of 112 orbits, and launched a space probe toward Mars. During the year the U.S. successfully launched a total of 61 satellites, deep-space probes, and probes, the U.S.S.R. 17, accord-according to the U.N. Public Registry. Of the U.S. total, 20 were launched by nasa, 41 by dod.
In speech before the Woman’s National Press Club, Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, said that the U.S., U.S.S.R., and other qualified nations should pool their space efforts under the auspices of the United Nations. “Perhaps their children,” he said, “will sail to Mars together.”
Rocket-powered instruments wlli be traveling as far as Jupiter by 1975, Robert J. Parks, director of jpl Planetary Programs, said in interview. Parks said by 1975 the planets Mars and Venus probably would have been studied “quite closely” by instruments.
aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg told panel discussion of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna that a U.S. nuclear-powered spacecraft now in the initial-test phase could take two men on a round trip to Mars in the 1970’s. He said that the round trip, including one-month visit on Mars, would take about a year.
Soviet news agency Tass announced mars i interplanetary probe was now more than 7 million mi. from earth; all onboard equipment was working normally and the spacecraft was sending back radio reports to earth, mars i was expected to pass within 120,000	mi. of Mars in June 1963.
U.S.S.R. announced it had launched mars i, a 1,970-lb. space probe on seven-month flight to Mars. Launched with an “improved booster” into parking orbit around the earth, mars i was hurled into escape trajectory when vehicle engines re-ignited. Tass reported mars i was flying as planned on its course toward Mars. “All systems are functioning normally and orders sent to the station [i.e., probe] are well received and obeyed.” Main tasks of the probe were interplanetary exploration, establishment of interplanetary space radio communications, photographing the Martian surface and relaying the photographs back to earth by radio. “Telemetric, measuring, and scientific instrumentation will be automatically activated in conformity with the flight program by radio commands from the earth,” Tass said. The flight had been preceded by an unsuccessful launch attempt the previous week, unidentified dod sources said, (nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated in September that two Soviet attempts to launch Mars probes had failed in October 1960.)
U.S. News and World Report carried article on “Red Space Failures,” pointing to official U.S. policy with regard to Soviet launchings: “No Soviet feat [in space] has ever been publicly challenged in Washington and no failure publicly announced.” It reported that while Premier Khrushchev was at the United Nations in September 1960, “a Soviet cosmonaut was sent more than a hundred miles into space and killed”; that in a five-month period in 1960-61, four Soviet space probes were fired toward Mars and Venus, but failed; and that during the same period “a dozen other Soviet space shots went awry . . .”
Two tandem 600-ft.-tall research balloons launched from Palestine, Texas, with dummy payload of 6,300 lb., a development test for February 1963 launch of 36-in. telescope with germanium eye to obtain undistorted look at the Martian atmosphere. Scientists from Princeton University, Univ. of California, Vitro Corp., and Schjeldahl Corp. conducted test flight.
Search for two huge meteorites believed to have fallen in western Virginia near Covington and West Virginia near Clarksburg was conducted by Dr. Frank Drake, Director of National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va. Reports by witnesses indicated that the meteorites weighed^about one ton each and that they fell in sparsely populated, national forest areas. During September: Dr. Joshua Lederberg, of Stanford University, and Dr. Carl Sagan, former University of California professor, wrote in September Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that large amounts of moisture may be frozen into the subsoil of the planet Mars. From openings in the planet’s crust, steam and gas may escape and create hot spots that would be “favorable microenvironments for life.” They said that recurrent clouds detected by telescope “may be symptomatic of this local outgassing of water vapor.”
usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories announced that it wollid conduct a series of high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments during 1962 and early 1963. Primary objective wollid be to get more complete and accurate information about the moon, Venus, and Mars. Scientific director of the project wollid be Dr. John Strong of Johns Hopkins University.
Soviet news agency Tass distributed announcement by U.S.S.R. Academy of Science giving new details on mars i interplanetary probe. Announcement said scientists had held 37 radio communications with mars i during first month of the probe’s journey and that more than 600 orders had been transmitted to it. Command, measuring, and computing centers onboard the spacecraft were reported working properly. Announcement said mars i would pass planet Mars at distance of about 119,000 mi. (193,000 km) and added that its trajectory would have to be corrected sometime during the flight. Data from probe indicated space radiation had increased about 50 to 70% since 1959 Soviet lunar probes made measurements; other data indicated extremely low density of meteor matter at great distances from earth. Announcement said mars i onboard equipment included television to photograph Martian surface; spectrograph to study ozone absorptions in Martian atmosphere; equipment to measure magnetic fields and radiation in space and around Mars; and radiotelescope to register streams of low-energy protons and electrons.
Soviet space probe mars i was 1,677,704 mi. from earth and “continuing satisfactorily” on its flight to Mars, Prof. Vsevoldod Fedynsky of Moscow Univ. said in Tass interview.
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories announced series of three high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments—Star Gazer, Sky Top, and Balast—to be conducted later this year. The primary objective would be to obtain more and complete information about the space environment with emphasis on the moon, Mars, and Venus.
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was 2,725,337.592 mi. away from earth at 4 AM est, Tass reported.
President Kennedy, back in Washington after inspection of defense and nuclear-rocket facilities, said: “We are going to let these test go on of the [Project Rover] reactor. These tests should be completed by July. If they are successful, then we will put more money into the program, which would involve the Nerva and Rift, both the engine and the regular machine. We will wait until July, however, to see if these tests are successful. “It should be understood that the nuclear rocket will not come into play until 1970 or ’71. It would be useful for further trips to the moon or trips to Mars. But we have a good many areas competing for our available space dollars, and we have to try to channel it into those programs which will bring us a result, first, on our moon landing, and then to consider Mars.”
Dr. Andrie B. Severny, Director of U.S.S.R.’s Crimean Astrophysical Observatory, explained techniques used to photograph mars i on Nov. 3, when the interplanetary probe was 120,000	mi. from earth. Using 102-in. telescope, largest outside the U.S., astronomers fixed its aim at spot mars i was calculated to be; automatic controls shifted telescope’s aim slightly to sweep along the probe’s assumed trajectory. At same time, photographs were made, with each plate exposed twice at 30-sec. intervals. Resulting photographs showed mars i as well as its booster rocket traveling through space. This was believed to be greatest distance from which man-made objects had been photographed.
Soviet news agency Tass reported mars i probe was 606,000	mi. from earth (at 4:00 PM est) and was increasing that distance by 215,000 mi. a day. Soviet observatories photographed the Mars probe and its carrier rocket on Nov. 3; director of Crimean Astrophysical Observatory said this was the first time moving artificial interplanetary bodies had been photographed from earth.
Speaking on Radio Moscow, Prof. N. P. Arabashov said: “All the magnificent achievements of Soviet science convince us that flights by men to the moon and the planets are not only possible, but are also near. It is now clear that automatic interplanetary space ships, at first unmanned, will be sent to the moon and then to Venus and Mars.”
Tass reported interplanetary probe mars i began broadcasting scientific data on command from earth. The Mars probe, about two mlliion mi. away from earth, was reported functioning normally.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
Dr. Freeman H. Quimby, Chief of Exobiology Programs in nasa Office of Space Sciences, announed U.S. plans to land life-detecting devices on Mars in 1966. “Perhaps Mars is sterile. But we’re working on the postulate there may be some forms of life,” Dr. Quimby told the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Philadelphia.
jpl awarded Avco Corp. Research and Advanced Development Div. an $83,000 contract for study of entry and landing of ballistic capsules on Mars and Venus. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
Soviet astronomer G. A. Tikhov concluded that Martian vegetation, if it exists, is blue rather than green, because of light and temperature conditions on Mars. In translation/abstract of Tikhov’s report, issued by Dept, of Commerce, he reported that “plants in the Far North on earth should have entirely different optical properties than in temperate latitudes and on mountains. Martian plants should be closest to the Arctic and mountain species, whose spectra have quite inconspicuous chlorophyll bands.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
R. W. Gillespie, systems engineer of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., said in Los Angeles press conference: “America’s giant program for a [manned] lunar landing should be reoriented to allow for a manned landing on Mars and a manned capture [orbital flyby] of Venus by 1973. Most of the talent now working on the lunar landing would have to be diverted for the Mars and Venus flights.” He said he was “one of those who thinks there is some form of life on Mars” and that a landing there would be of more value than one on the moon; scientists already have a pretty good idea of what man would find on the moon. Gillespie was in Los Angeles for 9th annual meeting of American Astronautical Society. (L.A. Times to Wash. Post, 1/16/63, A7)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in interview that plans for 360-ton, four-man spacecraft to fly from earth to Mars were in “quite an advanced stage.” Emphasizing that execution of such plans was not yet approved and funded by nasa, he described nuclear-electric powered spacecraft and said it was “projected for beyond the 1970V’
U.S. Dept, of Commerce translation of article, “How to Fly to Mars, by Soviet scientist Prof. G. Chebotarev, was reported. “The ‘Mars-1’ interplanetary station was launched from a heavy satellite in a circular earth satellite orbit; the velocity of the satellite was 4.9 miles a second. The rocket was launched from this satellite at a velocity of 3.1 miles a second, but the rocket left the orbit at 8 miles a second. 741-683 0—64“It headed toward Mars in a hyperbolic trajectory and left the earth’s sphere of attraction at 4 miles a second. For it to assume an orbital path around Mars the station would have to be braked to a velocity of 3.2 miles a second . . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/12/63, A5)	_
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, Dr. Allan Brown, biology prof. at Univ. of Pennsylvania, urged that U.S. initiate a program to land a scientific probe on Mars in 1969, because the Martian “surface could be sampled during spring and summer when there would be the best chance of detecting plantlife organisms.” He recommended adapting Saturn IB booster to carry a several-hundred -pound instrumented payload. Dr. Brown estimated significant scientific probe of Mars could be achieved in 1969 at cost of $2.9 billion over six years. He suggested international cooperation on the project “should be more easily achieved than in any other area of space research or exploration in which both U.S. and Soviet programs are involved.” {M&R, 1/6/64, 14)
In hearings on U.S. space program, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony of Dr. Philip Abelson, Carnegie Institution of Washington’s Geophysical Laboratory; Dr. C. S. Pittendrigh, Princeton Univ. biology dept.; Dr. Simon Ramo, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc.; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of Calif, prof, of chemistry; and Dr. Polycarp Kusch, Columbia Univ. physicist. Dr. Abelson charged Project Apollo was harming future expansion of scientific knowledge and ‘‘taking away from our national security”; he declared that “manned space exploration has limited scientific value and has been accorded an importance which is quite unrealistic . . . .” Dr. Pittendrigh testified he approved of lunar exploration program chiefly because of its value toward eventual exploration of Mars. He cautioned that manned Mars landing should be made only after it is assured there would be no contamination by terrestrial organisms. Dr. Ramo expressed his approval of Project Apollo, but advised a “calm watch” to assure such a project would not begin to “dominate” U.S. technology and economy. Dr. Urey, taking issue with Dr. Abelson’s suggestion that Apollo costs were hindering U.S. science and education, said that “if we should decide not to do the space program we will probably do less for education than we would otherwise . . . .” Dr. Kusch testified he opposed high priority for Project Apollo because “we have great national needs that far outweigh the exploration of space.” He cited such necessities as conservation of natural resources, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/63) Jwne 10: usaf decision to recover manned spacecraft at Edwards, Holloman, and Wendover Air Force Bases was reported in Missiles and. Rochets. All mission command and control would be exercised by Satellite Test Center, Sunnyvale, Calif. Unnamed usaf spokesmen said first program operating under this arrangement would be X-20 (Dyna Soar) in its air-launched phases. (M&R, 6/10/63,34)
Reporting under a nasa contract to study requirements for a manned mission to Mars in “the unfavorable (1975-1985) time period,” Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. proposed a nuclear-chemical four-stage vehicle carrying a seven-man crew on a 400-day trip. Mission would begin out of 300-mile earth orbit: first stage would boost vehicle into Mars trajectory; 140 days later, second stage would put vehicle into 300-mile orbit of Mars, where for 20 days the crew would study the planet; third stage would provide escape from Mars and 240-day trip back to earth; fourth stage would provide retrothrust for re-entry. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63,27) The most controversial point raised during the conference was statement on the large amount of faulty or careless manufacture and assembly of Mercury spacecraft. On the MA-9 backup spacecraft, for example, some 720 discrepancies were recorded, of which 526 were attributable to unsatisfactory workmanship and 444 of these required specially scheduled time to correct. (msc Releases 63-153-158; Project Mercury Summary)
Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, touring India with his bride, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolavev, said in New Dellii that U.S.S.R. was planning a spacecraft capable of sustaining the life of a crew for three years. This was the estimated time for a manned flight to Mars or Venus and return, with some 14 months of this actual roundtrip flight time and the other two years waiting on the planet for the proper orbital relationship for the return flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/12/63)
U.S.S.R. mars i passed planet Mars, but with its communications systems dead as they had been since March 21. All subsequent attempts to restore communication had failed. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/63)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. press conference in Rome, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, chief U.S. negotiator, and Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced signing of an accord for a joint weather satellite program and called for broader American-Russian cooperation in space activities. Agreements were reached under space cooperation accord signed by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. last June, and after ten days of closed-door negotiations by teams of specialists. Agreement would become effective after a 60-day waiting period pending possible changes by either Government. Under the joint weather satellite program, each nation would launch a satellite on a different orbit to collect meteorological data, while a 24-hr. cable and radio communications network would be established for exchange of information and cloud-cover pictures, such data to be made public throughout the world. Launching of Echo II later in 1963 would provide basis for communications experiments which could lead to a global communications network, including the exchange of radio and TV programs. Both nasa Deputy Administrator Dryden and Blagonravov expressed hope that the accord just negotiated would lead to broader agreements. Blagonravov was quoted as saying that “the first step is always the hardest.” Dryden was quoted regarding the Warsaw meetings later this year on probes of Mars and Venus as saying: “I hope there will be future coordination to avoid duplication.” (Text; AP, Wash. Post, 3/21/63,1)
Memorandum titled “Space Race with U.S.S.R.” from Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, was made public. Dr. Welsh said U.S. space program was in the building stage this year and few space spectaculars could be expected in 1963; U.S.S.R. may attempt the following in 1963: manned orbital mission of eight days, manned orbital rendezvous mission, close-up photographs of planet Mars (with mars i probe), and several unmanned lunar soft-landing probes. Memorandum had been written before launching of Soviet probe lunik, iv, believed by many scientists to have been an unsuccessful attempt to soft-land on the moon. (Text; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by International Academy of Astronautics to succeed the late Dr. Theodore von Karman as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Director since 1961. (iaa Release No. 14) During May: Paul D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, permanent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,” replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and because, being much closer, we can send back information and samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space station, the moon has the advantage of providing a large, stable platform with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a stratigraphic record of its history and of meteoritic material which has accumulated on it. These advantages are in a sense a one-way street. We can make many of the observations proposed for the space station from the moon as well, because the moon has essentially a space environment. But we cannot examine the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release) During May: nasa awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of F-l engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which had initiated F-l development. {M&R, 5/6/63,13)
Tass reported Soviet scientists had lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe on March 21, when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth. Probe was continuing on its flight toward vicinity of Mars but telemetry data indicated difficulty in orientation system had misaligned its radio antennas. Tass said mars i had recorded considerable change in boundaries of radiation belts around earth; “sphere of maximum intensity” in innermost belt was farther out than previously noted. Intensity of cosmic rays had almost doubled m last four years, Tass said. Important findings were made concerning stability and energy of interplanetary and solar plasma, and mars i made possible first scientific observation of junction of earth’s ionized gas envelope with outermost belt of charged particles. Other data on intensity of magnetic fields in space and distribution of meteoric particles were /B.U	K/’I'7/CQ. A „. lFl S /Ol /K9 OA \ A UW1 UUU. \ A/Ull. AJ to/U / i.1 / y XA (/. rr Iv.y KJ J LJ % / \J*Jy y
Cathode of experimental ion engine set endurance record of 1660 hours operation. Electric propulsion engineers at lrc estimate they reached 16 per cent of the cathode life required for a round-trip Mars mission. (Lewis Chronology, 7)
Soviet interplanetary probe mars i was nearing halfway mark on its flight to vicinity of Mars, news agency Tass announced. Tass quoted Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, as saying mars i was about 30 million mi. from earth. ( upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/5/63)
Routine radio contact with mars i interplanetary probe was made over distance of 98,863,000 km. (61,430,502 mi.), about 12,000,000 km. (7,364,400 mi.) farther than last U.S. radio contact with mariner ii Venus probe, according to Tass. (mariner ii’s last contact was at 54.3 million mi.) (Pravda, 3/17/63, 1, afss-t Trans.)
nasa devices for detecting life on Mars, to be ejected from Mariner interplanetary probes and soft-landed onto planet’s surface, were discussed in article in The National Observer. Gulliver, first in series, would be 1.5-lb. dome-shaped device equipped with two 23ft. sticky strings; upon landing, strings would shoot out of dome and then reel back inside, gamering up samples of whatever is on surface to be deposited m solution of distilled water, sterile beef broth, malt extract, vitamins, other nutrients, and radioactive carbon. If adhesive gathers microbes similar to those on earth, microbes would multiply in the solution and produce radioactive carbon dioxide which would be detected by Geiger counter in dome and radioed back to earth. Another device, known as Multivator, designed by Dr. Joshua Lederberg of Stanford Univ. and still under development, was designed to make 24 different biological and chemical tests of micro-organisms. Third life-detecting device is Wolf Trap, named after its designer, Dr. Wolf Vishniac of Univ. of Rochester; it would suck in samples of planetary soil or air and introduce them to broth somewhat like that of Gulliver. (National Observer, 2/11/63)
nasa issued procedures on decontamination of lunar-landing spacecraft and planetary-landing spacecraft, based on recommendations ' by nas-nrc Space Science Board made public this date. Because sterilization procedures employed on previous Ranger lunar spacecraft—particularly heat cycle—were suspected of directly contributing to Ranger mission failures, nasa lowered decontamination requirements for current Ranger spacecraft. It was now only required that microbes on Rangers be “reduced to a minimum.” Regarding lunar probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The lunar surface with its high temperatures, intense ultra-violet radiation, paucity of moisture, and high vacuum is a most unfavorable environment for proliferation of terrestrial organisms . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . minimize contamination to the extent technically feasible . . . [and develop] a sterile drilling system to accompany an early Apollo mission to return an uncontaminated sample of the lunar subsoil . . . .” n\sa procedures ^or M*rs I2.nd.1r* " missions required. th»t sjpEics-craft be sterilized and that this decontamination be effectively achieved without jeopardizing spacecraft reliability. Regarding Mars probes, Space Science Board said: “. . . The contamination of Mars through the impacting of nonsterile probes from the Earth could destroy an opportunity to carry out a meaningful search for life forms on Mars with remote detectors. This opportunity is unique and its loss would be a catastrophe . . . .” It recommended U.S. “. . . accord the highest priority to the prevention of the biological contamination of Mars until sufficient information has been obtained about possible life forms there so that further scientific studies will not be jeopardized . . . .” (nasa Release 63-200; nas-nrc Release; nas-nrc Space Probe Sterilization)
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
mars i interplanetary probe was 78,843,000 km. (48,980,675 mi.) from earth, Soviet newspaper Izvestia reported. From Feb. 20 to March 1, scheduled radio contacts were made; “a series of control commands were transmitted to the station.” Tass said that on March 1 “a number of corrective guidance commands were transmitted to the spacecraft. The strength of radio signals, which are being received from the interplanetary station, decreased somewhat . . . .” (Izvestia,, 3/3/63, 5, afss-t Trans.; Pravda, 2/2/63, eos Trans.)
Stratoscope II tandem balloon system was launched from National Scientific Balloon Flight Station near Palestine, Tex., carrying 36-in. telescope to 15-mi. altitude to focus on planet Mars. Stratoscope II Project Manager, Dr. Martin Schwarzchild. called it “a beautiful launch.” First attempt to detect life-related substances on Mars from above earth’s atmosphere, project was conducted jointly by Princeton Univ. and Univ. of Calif, with Vitro Laboratories in charge of flight operations; it was sponsored by nasa, nsf, and onr. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/2/63)
Symposium on exploration of Mars would be held in Denver June 6-7, cosponsored by nasa, American Astronomical Society, American Institute of Biological Sciences, and American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, nasa announced, (nasa Release 63-68)
According to Soviet press agency Tass, mars i spacecraft was 59,460,000 km. from Earth at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time, traveling at 12.7 km/sec as it moved away from Earth. Routine interrogations had been conducted during the past week and scientific information from mars i had been obtained, (eos Translation, 3/6/63, of Tass, Pravda, 2/13/63)
Bidders’ conference for Voyager design-study contracts held at nasa Headquarters. Unmanned Venus and Mars probe, Voyager “is predicated on the fact that this country is serious in exploring planets in detail for a manned flight to the planets,” nasa Deputy Director of Space Sciences Edgar Cortright was reported to have said. (Space Bus. Daily, 3/13/63,309)
Flight of balloon carrying 36-in. telescope to 80,000-ft. altitude for study of planet Mars was postponed at Palestine, Tex., after balloon developed a leak while being inflated. This was 13th time the launching had been postponed. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/23/63)
Soviet press agency Tass reported in Krasnaya Zvezda that routine radio communications with mars i interplanetary probe were conducted Feb. 13-19 and that telemetry information was received from the probe. Tass said that at 9:00 a.m. Moscow time mars i was 67,432,000 km. from earth. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/20/63,1, afss-t trans.)
nasa was examining the nuclear-pulse propulsion concept (Orion) which had been studied under usaf contracts for some live years. Nuclear-pulse—a series of controlled nuclear explosions—was considered a possible means of propulsion for fast manned trips to Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in the 1975-1995 time period. The fast trip would be desirable because component lifetimes would run around 10,000 hrs., somewhat over one year. It would therefore be highly desirable that the round-trip be possible in one year’s time. If Orion were chosen as the propulsion system, some amendment to the nuclear test-ban treaty might be necessary to legalize its use. nasa was studying the Orion potential through a contract issued in June 1963 to the General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics.	11/4/63, 34)
Utmost care would be taken in the assembly and checkout of the Mariner B spacecraft intended for a landing on Mars in 1966 so that the Mars lander would be completely free of earth microbes that might contaminate the Martian environment. Workers with even minor colds would be barred from the assembly area. The final assembly would be subjected to a dry heat at 275°F for 24 hours, then sealed into its special can and placed aboard the booster for launching. The special can would not open until the spacecraft was some 350 mi. from earth, considered to be the limit of earth microbes. {Wash. Post, 11/7/63)
National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced National Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1962 would be awarded to Dr. Merlyn McLaughlin, president of College of Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery of Des Moines, Iowa, (naa Release) Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Air Force, speaking at Symposium on the Exploration of Mars of the American Astronautical Society, discussed the two-fold task of the Air Force: “. . . . first, to protect the Nation’s exploration and research in space as effectively as the Air Force contributes to protection of our national activities on the Earth’s surface, and second, to act as the Department of Defense agency which helps insure the National Space Program’s success through provision of Air Force facilities and services to the overall effort. “The question of whether there is a need of an operational capability for United States military forces beyond the atmosphere may already have been answered for us in a number of public statements by Soviet military and political leaders .... Their major new book on Military Strategy . . . says, “Soviet military strategy acknowledges the need to study the use of space and space vehicles to reinforce the defense of the socialist countries. ... It would be a mistake to allow the imperialist camp to gain any superiority in this area.’ ” (Text) Speaking at a symposium on the Exploration of Mars in Denver, Colo., Wolfgang E. Moeckel, chief of lrc’s Electromagnetic Propulsion Division, said: “The potential of electric propulsion for Mars exploration is as great or greater than that of other systems now under development and it becomes even more attractive for the exploration of the farther reaches of the solar system.” (lrc Release 63-35, Lewis Chronology, 4-5) Highlights of parellel studies on three classes of Nova launch vehicles, conducted by General Dynamics/Astronautics and Martin-Marietta Corp. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, were presented by Andrew Kalitinsky, gd/a Program Director. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,34) Dr. H. O. Ruppe of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Future Projects Office estimated manned Mars mission would require about $9 billion for interplanetary spacecraft, $5 billion for operating costs (including procurement of Nova launch vehicles), and $2 billion for remaining production and procurement costs. Dr. Ruppe presented paper on “Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit to Mars Orbit and Return,” discussing results of Project Empire (Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip Expedition) contract studies by Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Ford Co. Aero-nutronics Div., and General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp. Results of studies indicated: only marginal capabilities exist for allchemically propelled space vehicles; even with nuclear-powered upper stages, manned roundtrip flight would be difficult task; because of eccentricity of earth’s orbit, flights during 1975-80 period may be technically or economically unfeasible; manned Mars program would require unusually high degree of coordination within entire National space program. {NTT, 6/7/63, 11; Marshall Star, 6/12/63,1? 4) Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, said: “[Manned Mars mission] will be a very major undertaking exceeding the Apollo program In total cost and difficulty. For that reason, we must realistically recognize that one of the factors determining the timing of such a mission will be the availability of funds and manpower. We must recognize that we cannot undertake such a mission until the Apollo mission begins to phase out. “If, as will probably be the case, rendezvous in earth orbit and some orbital assembly or propellant transfer will be required to perform the Mars landing missions, an earth orbiting space laboratory will probably precede the accomplishment of the actual planetary missions. The cost of such a system would also be high but it would probably be a necessary stepping stone to the planetary missions .... “The unknowns in such a mission will require the accumulation of a great deal of basic information and . . . substantial development efforts for all of the systems and facilities that would be required in such a mission. I think it is to be expected that the time required for development of these systems puts the accomplishment of a manned Mars landing mission off until late in the seventies and more probably into the early eighties .... “I expect that large chemical rocket booster stages, in combination with nuclear rocket upper stages, will be used to accomplish the Mars landing mission. I expect also that such vehicles and propulsion systems will be used to perform the preliminary missions of manned fly-by trips around Mars and trips into orbit around Mars. It is conceivable that such missions could start in the latter part of the 70’s . . . .” (Text) A. James Shiner of nasa Man-System Integration delivered paper prepared by him and Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research: “A manned orbital research laboratory . . . becomes a distinct requirement to obtain human design requirements for a Mars vehicle system, whether that system be nuclear or chemical. The manned orbital research laboratory will help answer many of our questions about the space environment^ and man’s ability to not only survive, but to perform useful functions in prolonged space missions. The manned orbital research laboratory under study by the Langley Research Center will have to operate for prolonged periods of time to obtain the required human research and biotechnology data needed for design of advanced space systems. A manned orbital research laboratory will eventually be used to simulate Martian voyages as well .	. .” (Text) Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert predicted need for military patrol in space “to determine at all times what is hap741-623 0—64--16 pening in near-space and to deal with any threat there . . . . [Space patrol] would provide on-call protection for U.S. space activities, both scientific and military, in the event of hostile enemy actions.” (Rocky Mountain News [Denver], 6/7/63) Dr. W. M. Sinton, Lowell Observatory astronomer, said in June 7 address that possible vegetation on Mars would probaby resemble cactus, especially barrel or saguaro cactus. (AP, Balt. Sim, 6/8/63) Dr. Gerard de Vaucouleurs of Univ. of Texas described recent Mars observations from Pic du Midi in French Pyrenees. Studying spotted patterns of dark areas, Pic du Midi found seasonal darkening or Martian surface was actually a filling in of spaces between dark spots on the planet. Dr. de Vaucouleurs found it difficult to reconcile large-scale changes of dark areas with recent findings that Mars was extremely dry. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/63) Jwne 7: France’s President Charles de Gaulle opened 25th International Air Show at LeBourget Airport, visiting U.S. space exhibit as well as other exhibits. (NYT, 6/8/63,35)
“First conclusive detection” of water vapor on Mars was announced by Cal Tech. Mars’ water supply was found to be minimal—perhaps as little as half a cu. mi. compared with millions of cu. mi. on earth. Finding was made by analysis of spectrum of light from Mars gathered by Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories in California. (Hill, NYT, 6/5/63,17)
Soviet Army newspaper Red Star reported an account of a rocket failure, the first public mention of a rocket launching failure in the U.S.S.R. No date or program was named, only a report of heroism of a Lt. Col. Serebreynnikov. He reportedly pulled out a starting plug by hand after mechanism had failed, and only six seconds before the rocket exploded. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A35) During November: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, writing in the 10011 ft A /?/> mo /to innn	tlio '■	*	'	OKf \y lllUgU/JUiA Ol VUV \JIV11VA il Plnofrin	OQirl • “Space is not a gambit. It is not a gimmick. “Our national activities in space research and exploration are no longer in the category of a gamble. We are able to talk seriously about explorations and journeys, 26 million miles away to the planet Venus—or 47 million miles away to the planet Mars. “We have come a long way. In the new Age of Space which brings us together, we are destined to go a Tong way further. Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler. I confidently believe that the developments of the Space Age will bring the beginning of the longest and greatest boom of abundance and prosperity in the history of man.” (Challenge, Fall 1963,24—5) The Marquardt Corp. of Van Nuys, Calif., has delivered 30 production units of its Roksonde 200-1 to West Germany. The sounding rockets would be used for meteorological testing at the Salto di Quirra Test Range in Sardinia. The meteorological data gathering is part of the overall European effort in support of the iqsy worldwide programs. As part of the program, the Mar?[uardt Corp. will assist the West German government in two aunching series. The first series was currently in progress, scheduled for completion by mid-December; the second would be completed in early 1964. (Marquardt Release, 11/21/63, sin, Jan., 1964) During November: jpl scientists Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and Roland L. Carpenter reported in Science magazine on recent radar experiments using an 85-ft. parabolic antenna at a tracking station in the Mohave Desert. The planet Mercury was found to be quite rugged, more so than Mars and twice as rugged as Venus. The experiments also corroborated Mercury’s rotation period as 88 days. (Science Service, NYT, 11/6/63, 33)
Water vapor and carbon dioxide on Mars were detected by Stratoscope II, project scientists announced at Palestine, Tex., press conference. Results of data gathered by balloon-mounted telescope, which observed Mars from vantage point above 98 per cent of earth’s atmosphere March 1-2, were based on preliminary analysis of taped infrared-bolometer data; further analysis was expected to provide information on presence of other life-related compounds and on amount of the compounds present in Martian atmosphere. (AP, Chicago Trib., 3/5/63; Wall Street Journal, 3/5/63)	,	.
Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned lunar landing program: “There are three principal candidates for what might be called the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory; the further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplanetary travel. “One difficulty is the definition, mercury is a one-man orbital laboratory; gemini is a two-man orbital laboratory; apollo is a three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the duration of the trip to the moon. “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men ? “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We have agreed there should be only one project for the time being because this will be a 2 or 3 billion project. We have agreed we will not proceed unilaterally. A decision, of course, has to be made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this field or another .... “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and, figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few days. Or you might convert a whole lunar bug to a freight carrier to extend the length of stay. You can go from that to a lunar base where you try to build a station, as m the Antarctic, that man can occupy for some time .... “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and certainly Congress will be involved in it. “There are people who favor one or another of these projects. I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory as being the next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a trip to Mars or Venus and back. “As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say at this time when the hardware will be recommended by the administration. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has priority is the possible military application.” (Hearings . . . Independent Offices Appropriations for FT 1964, Part 3,242-243)
National Geographic Society announced two scientists with astronomical instruments were recently lofted by plastic-skinned balloon to 15-mi. altitude in experiment to record radio sounds from stars. National Geographic Society outlined other recent scientific contributions by man’s oldest means of flight, including balloon-lifted telescop e camera which made unprecedented photographs of sunspots and another instrumented payload which obtained man’s clearest observations of planet Mars. Balloon-carried instrumentation now probing upper atmosphere is obtaining valuable data on astrophysics, meteorology, and aeromedicine. {Chic. Trib., 8/20/63)
Speaking at the Fourth International Space Science Symposium in Warsaw, Poland, Dr. R. S. Young of nasa’s Ames Research Center, said that certain earth bacteria not only survive but grow satisfactorily in a laboratory-created Martian environment. Knowledge of growth of earth organisms on Mars is important for two reasons, Dr. Young said. First, the extremely complex problem of decontaminating earth spacecraft depends upon proof that earth organisms do not present a hazard to other planets. Second, as much information as possible about survival on Mars or on other celestial objects is needed for designing instruments on spacecraft to detect and analyze such life if it exists. (The Cleveland Press, 8/1/63)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D with unidentified satellite from pmr. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963) During July: nasa Marshall Space Flight Center selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth and Douglas Aircraft Co. to conduct parallel studies of manned Mars exploration flight “in the unfavorable time period” (1975-85). Under seven-month contracts, the companies would outline the mission and development program for the Mars flight, identifying spacecraft and booster systems and selecting mdst promising mission profile. (Space Bus. Daily, 7/5/63; LA. Times, 7/9/63; Marshall Star, 7/10/63,8)
Spectroscopic studies of Mars indicate Martian atmosphere is too thin (10 millibars pressure) for wing- or parachute-landings by spacecraft, according to Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona. Until recently, pressure on Mars was generally considered to be 85 millibars, based largely on observations by Dr. Audouin Dollfus of the Paris Observatory. Earlier this year, Dr. Kuiper had estimated surface pressure to be 17 millibars, but more precise analysis led him to 10-millibar conclusion, nasa scientists planned further observations for March 1965, when Mars is closest to earth, to gain decisive evidence. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/26/63,1)
Tass reported that a leading Soviet space scientist, Prof. Gleb Chebotarev, claimed U.S.S.R. would put satellites in orbit around the moon. Mars, and Venus “in the near future .... The regions of outer space around the moon, Venus, Mars and Mercury where stable movement of artificial satellites is possible have been determined by means of electric machines at the Theoretical Astronomy Institute.” (un, NTT, 11/21/63)
Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin of the President’s Office of Science and Technology told National Space Club in Washington that low reliability of Scout booster (50%) was because of difficulties in four-stage booster teclmology. A basic difficulty to be overcome in future space systems, he said, was development of long-lifetime components and subsystems. Today’s missile system technology requires operational lifetime of less than a half hour; but Apollo would require 400 times that long and Mars fly-by mission, up to 20,000 times that long. The other basic problem for future space systems, he said, was achieving greater reliability with less flight testing. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/18/63, 417)
Members of recent U.S. Mt. Everest expedition, William F. Siri, Univ. of California physiologist, and Prof. Maynard M. Miller, Michigan State Univ. scientist, said in New Delhi interview that laboratory study of rock and snow samples from Mt. Everest might provide clues to life on Mars. Siri said environment on Mars is “just a little bit worse” than on Everest’s peak, citing Everest’s thin air, low temperatures, lack of liquid water, and intense solar radiation. (AP, Richmond News Leader, 6/18/63)
nasa announced selection of 10 experimenters for Mariner spacecraft’s Mars fly-by mission, scheduled for 1964. Experiments for the probe, which would make measurements of interplanetary space as well as of vicinity of Mars, were: television, magnetometer, low-energy cosmic-ray experiment, cosmic-ray spectrum experiment, cosmic-ray ionization experiment, plasma probe, cosmic i -Ft*o nrl ormoIi*Amntn»* niff OpWtA VlllUtUi J Ulll U t 1U1UL pilwLl/lllUlUl Of and radio propagation, (nasa Release 63-71) Television broadcast of biweekly program narrated by Jacques Sallebert, French radio and TV correspondent in New York, sent direct from New York to Paris via relay i communications satellite for first time. Program consisted of views of lower New York City and of New York Harbor. Reception in Paris was described as considerably better than prerecorded broadcasts previously used and as comparing favorably with any TV program originating in Paris. (NYT, 4/12/63, 45) Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa Nuclear Systems Office and Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, testified before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “The space nuclear systems program involves large amounts of funds, manpower, and facilities in nasa’s program and, in addition, involves substantial effort on the part of the Atomic Energy Commission. We are convinced that the high performance potential of these systems for space propulsion and electric power generation justifies the substantial effort that we are devoting toward the early development of such systems. It is 741-623 I clear that if we are to perform extensive space exploration missions beyond our first manned lunar landings, it will be necessary to have available to us nuclear propulsion systems and if we are to establish large space laboratories, lunar bases, and are to travel to distant planets, we will have to rely on the availability of large nuclear electric power generating systems . . . .” (Testimony)
At jpl briefing of nasa Hq. scientists, it was reported that Ranger 6 would be ready for flight to the moon by about Thanksgiving and Mariner 3 would be available for flight past Mars by fourth quarter of 1964. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/63)
robes to the moon and Mars by 1970, by converting the Blue treak booster to use of liquid hydrogen, (cpi, Wash. Post, 11/15/63)	^
John L. Sloop, Director of nasa Propulsion and Power Generation in Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Propulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the moon in this decade will depend completely on chemical propulsion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propulsion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use each type in the application best suited to its characteristics. We see much larger chemical propulsion systems than we have today. Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satellites and between distant points on the earth. We see chemical propulsion packages carried dormant for months on long space missions but ready at the touch of a button or a signal from earth to perform their task. We see chemical propulsion systems for landing and take-off from the moon, Mars, and Venus where compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed. Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency use . . . .” (Testimony)
Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, prof, of biology at Princeton Univ., urged at National Academy of Sciences meeting in Washington that President Kennedy proclaim U.S. opposition to contamination of Mars by landing probes on that planet. He added that U.S. should make available its research on decontamination to U.S.S.R. Dr. Pittendrigh emphasized he approved decision to relax sterilization of lunar probes but declared his opposition to landing spacecraft on Mars where possibility of life exists. (NTT, 4/25/63)
Plans for modular Mars spacecraft as presented by D. M. Hammock, Assistant Chief of Spacecraft Technology Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, were described in Missiles and Rockets. Six-man crew would undertake 400-day expedition to Mars in three-module spacecraft—Mars mission module, Mars excursion module, and earth entiy module. Hammock said nasa was evaluating merits of manned space stations, permanent lunar bases, and Mars expedition as follow-on to Project Apollo, and that technology needed for Mars spacecraft would be simpler in many ways than that required for lunar base or space station. (M&R, 5/13/63,34)
Ford Motor Co.’s Aeronutromc Div. was selected by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center to investigate requirement for Mars excursion module (mem)—unit designed to ferry astronauts between orbiting spacecraft and surface of Mars, (msc Release 63-98)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director nasa Goddard Institute of Space Studies, speaking at the American Society of Newspaper Editors, attempted to explain the “scientific effort” in the context of the entire space program: “I think, personally, that there is also a powerful general stimulus wbich comes from the need for developing new ideas and technologies to operate in and master a new environment. One must go back to the explorations of the late 15th Century to find a parallel to what we are about to witness in the next 30 to 50 years. Those explorations 450 years ago and their results awakened interest in the world and an intellectual ferment which were the necessary foundations for the development of a scientific revolution. “The ideas of a scientific revolution could not have flowered in a static society with fixed ideas of what could and could not be done. It took the explorations of the 15th and early 16th centuries to shake established notions enough to permit the birth of modem scientific thought. In a subtle and deep sense, this is one of the reasons for the interest of the scientist in the exploration elements of the space program .... “I think that the history of the last 100 years demonstrates that we need not expect a very long wait before space research will feed back into everyday affairs and play a role in them. “In the 19th century, the lag was rather long. The Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell published a treatise on electromagnetism in 1864, but not until 1901 did Marconi transmit the first wireless signal across the Atlantic. “More recently, in 1932, Chadwick discovered the neutron in England. Fermi set the first atomic pile critical at Stagg Field in Chicago in 1942, only 10 years from the basic discovery to a very formidable application. “Still more recently, Bardeen and Brattain and Shockley at the Bell Labs discovered the transistor in 1948 and only six years later the first transistorized power amplifier appeared on the market .... “. . . the exploration of the moon has a very special role to play, precisely for the reason that would make one think the moon is uninteresting scientifically—specifically because the moon is a relatively lifeless body. It has no atmosphere, no oceans, nothing to wear away the record of the history of the solar system, and of whatever has occurred to the surface of the moon since its birth. “On the earth, record of even tremendous surface events disappear within 10 to 50 million years, a very short time compared to the age of the planet, and mountains form and are turned over. With the action of weather, everything changes and disappears as the millions of years go by. That is probably also true on Mars and Venus which resemble the earth in this respect. But the moon has no oceans, no atmosphere, no mountain-building activity that we can discern. For this reason, the moon is a kind of Rosetta Stone of the solar system from which we can read the past. That is why it is so interesting to the scientist. He has the opportunity to find there the record of the early history of the solar system. “To the student of the origin of the earth, the moon is even more interesting scientifically than Mars or Venus. “. . . if the moon and the planets were formed out of gas and dust in the condensation that surrounded the primitive sun, then we can expect such condensation to accompany the birth of every star. There are one hundred billion stars in our galaxy alone. Nearly every one of them we expect to have a planetary system around it. Some small fraction of those planets will be at the right distances from their suns, from their stars, and of the right size to have conditions favorable to the development of physical life as we know it. “If that is the case, it follows that life must be a relatively commonplace thing, physical life in the universe . . . “. . . there is one small instrument on the Tiros which has not achieved as much attention as it deserves. The size of a quarter, it is a black disc which detects the infrared energy radiated from the top of the atmosphere. That is the energy which is reflected back into space from the earth. We can accurately estimate the energy coming to the earth from the sun and we can take the difference between the two and calculate the amount of energy remaining in the atmosphere. “This energy deposited in the atmosphere constitutes the driving force that generates weather activity. With the aid of satellites, for the first time we can measure the energy difference and hope to break through from the day-to-day forecasting, which depends on immediately preceding events, to the week-long or two-week forecasts.” (Text)
jpl Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (dsif) at Gold-stone, Calif., succeeded in bouncing radar signals off planet Mercury 60,500,000 mi. from earth. Traveling at speed of light, signals took 11 min. to make trip from Goldstone to Mercury and back to Goldstone. Preliminary analysis of echo patterns indicated Mercury has rougher surface than Venus or Mars but same surface reflectivity as that of moon. Mercury experiment was to be conducted 12 hrs. per day May 6-29, at which time planet would move out of antenna’s range, (jpl twx, 5/29/63; Marshall Star, 6/5/63, 5)
nasa announced mariner ii Venus probe had been so successful that repeat flight scheduled for 1964 had been canceled. Interplanetary efforts would be concentrated instead on such projects as sending probe toward Mars in 1964 and later flight to Venus with advanced Mariner probe in 1965. (nasa Release 63-3; jpl Release)
Study of Soviet astronautics from 1957 through 1962 (RM-3595— PR) by F. J. Krieger of the rand Corp., under usaf contract, concluded that the Soviet space program is an integral part of the Soviet military program. Krieger listed four main categories of Soviet effort: (1) earth-orbiting man in space; (2) lunar scientific exploration; (3) interplanetary exploration; and (4) Cosmos earth satellites, paramilitary in nature. Cosmos satellites have come in two sizes—large ones similar to the Vostoks, launched from Tyuratam cosmodrome east of the Aral Sea, orbiting at around 65°, and brought back to earth; and smaller ones launched with smaller rockets from Kapustin Yar cosmodrome north of the Caspian Sea, orbiting at about 49°, and not recovered. Kreiger counted 10 Soviet attempts at interplanetary flight, of which 2 have been partially successful (one passing Venus, another Mars, but both with communications failure) and six have failed to get out of earth orbit. (M&R, 6/10/63,16)
Izvestia reported about 400 spectrograms of Mars had been taken this year at observatoiy of Astrophysics Institute, Kazakhstan Academy of Sciences, in project to investigate properties of blue haze concealing details of Martian surface. (Izvestia, 5/12/63, 6, afss-t Trans.)
Instruments onboard mars i interplanetary probe confirmed existence of a third radiation belt, Soviet news agency Tass announced. Third radiation belt had been discovered in 1959 by Soviet rockets which had gathered particles at 50,000-mi. altitude, Tass said, and its existence was verified when mars i recorded stream of charged particles far beyond the second radiation belt. Number of particles in this outermost belt greatly exceeded that in first two belts, according to Tass. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/17/63)
U.S.S.R. mars i probe lost contact with tracking stations when 65 million miles out because of malfunction in the spacecraft attitude control system, according to Alexandre A. Mironov, Soviet Embassy scientific adviser in Washington. (Av. Wk., 10/21/63, 28) During October: H. H. Koelle, Director of Future Projects Office, msfc, in “Trends in Earth-to-Orbit Transportation Systems,” in Aeronautics and Aerospace Engineering, noted that the next year would be interesting in that both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were expected to come up with big increase in payload in orbit. The U.S. Saturn I was expected to put 10 tons in orbit. “Also, I would not be a bit surprised if the U.S.S.R. launched a payload in the 40- to 50-ton class before this [next] year is over. The next step increase will be provided by the Saturn V in about 1967, when a 100-ton capability will be reached by the U.S. Many people hope that at least by that time the U.S.S.R. single-flight capabilities will have been equalled or exceeded.” Space transportation was developing fast, Koelle concluded: “While air transportation needed two generations to improve the efficiency of passenger transport by three orders of magnitude, we expect to improve the economy of Earth-to-orbit cargo transportation by four orders of magnitude in one generation.” {A&AE, Nov. 63,25-30)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that Goldstone Tracking Station nau uiaue nrst rauar contact o an. zL wnn pianet itiars in a Az-hour per day experiment which would end early in March. 25-billion watt signal made 125-million mi. round trip Jan. 21 (the return signal being only one-billionth of one-trillionth of a watt) and indicated Mars has both rough and smooth surfaces, (jpi. Release; Wash. Are. Star, 2/22/63, A2; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A10) February 21: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified to the House Armed Services Committee: “In recognition of the increased impact of space programs on our national resources and their direct effect on our future national security, Air Force space activities are closely coordinated with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. One example is the recent agreement between the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on the Gemini program. The intent is to insure that the scientific and operational experiments undertaken as a part of the Gemini program will be directed towards satisfying both military and nasa requirements and objectives .... “Our forward space development program integrates the rad work of many years into a cohesive space program. Funding for all facets of the program is not included m the FY 1964 budget, but the program will provide for Air Force space activities for the near future. “The Air Force has developed a solid foundation of space on which military capabilities can be built. These efforts have brought us to a point where significant military space possibilities are (dearly apparent. Utilizing the technological base so far established, the Air Force must translate these technical capabilities into actual defense systems. The time required to move from a development state to operational systems is measured in years. Yet, it is the ready military capability, not the technological base, that accomplishes deterrence. Accordingly, the Air Force proposes to begin some of these conversions at once. “The forward program aims at two basic objectives: “first, to enhance the general military posture of the United States by building a defense capability in space. Space is not only a new area of vulnerability to attack, but also affords important means of supporting the terrestrial forces of the U.S. in relation to a military threat posed by a hostile power. “second, to provide a capability within the space region for the purpose of denying to a hostile power the uninhibited military exploitation of space, and to provide a system of protection for U.S. scientific activities in space . . . .” (Text; A-N-AF J oumal and Regi ster, 3/2/63,17,37)
Soviet scientists lost contact with mars i interplanetary probe when it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth; however, no mention was made of this fact by the Russians until May 16 (see May 16). (Balt. Sun, 5/17/63; Av. Wk., 5/27/63,24)
Clarence A. Syvertson, nasa Ames Research Center scientist, said in paper presented at Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery Symposium at Edwards afb that future spacecraft based on M-2 lifting body design could satisfy requirements for maneuvering re-entry vehicles on missions from near-earth orbit and on return from manned Mars missions. With lift-drag ratio of over one, M-2 lifting body allows use of maneuvering technique to solve critical heating problems of re-entry. Choice of M-2 rather than spacecraft covered with heavy ablative material could save considerable spacecraft weight. (Ames Release 63-34)
Report by three-man nasa advisory committee concluded that “shielding [against radiation] of the crew for Project Apollo is not possible within the time and weight limitations of the project.” The crew “will simply have to accept the relatively low probability of encountering a major solar flare during their relatively brief excursion to the moon.” Report estimated 10,000 lbs. of polyethylene shielding would be required to protect men in 10-ft.-diameter spacecraft for a week. For flights to Mars or Venus, more than 20,000 lbs. of polyethylene would be required. “The accomplishment of manned flights to the vicinity of Mars and Venus may have to be delayed until some means are found for reducing these shielding weights,” report stated. (AP, NYT, 12/10/63,24; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/63)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contracts to naa Space and Information Div. and Space Technology Laboratories (stl) for studies of manned Mars landing-and-retum missions. Each contract called for nine-month studies to determine requirements for possible Mars missions and to decide what research would be required during next several years to implement such a flight program. Other studies of manned Mars missions were being managed by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, emphasizing use of Apollo-class booster and spacecraft; Ames-managed studies emphasized Mars-landing mission with no restrictions as to type of vehicle and spacecraft. (Ames Release 63-21)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, director of President Kennedy’s Office of Science and Technology, was asked in Voice of America interview whether an attempt to land astronauts on Mars in 1971 or 1973 “could be considered.” Dr. Wiesner replied: “I think it could be considered, but I don’t think it would be done. I think it is a very major effort, even considerably larger than the moon effort. We have made estimates of a Mars program cost and a round number like one hundred billion dollars seems to be a reasonable figure. It is obviously technically possible, [but] I doubt whether one could do it in the time period between now and 1970 without just an unbelievable crash program. I think that before the century is out we will probably have done just that, and it would be interesting to do, but I don’t believe anyone can deny the vital reason for undertaking the program of the kind you are talking about.” (Transcript)
Results of nasa research project reported: 18 species of earth bacteria survived in “Mars jars” in which atmospheric conditions of Mars were simulated. One type enlarged itself by four or five times in the Martian environment. {M&R, 9/2/63)
A Mars Excursion Module (mem) would be the best means of landing men on Mars, according to Temple Neuman of Philco Corp.’s Aeronutronic Div., which had just completed a study of the subject under nasa contract. The mem would carry two men, house and feed them for 40 days, and enable them to bring back 800 lbs. of equipment and samples, for a gross vehicle weight of about 55,000 lbs. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/2/63, 12)
F. J. Krieger, rand Corp. specialist on Soviet astronautics, said in report for usaf Project Rand that Soviet Cosmos satellites probably are “para-military” spacecraft of two types: (1) recoverable vehicle as large as Vostok spacecraft and (2) 4,400-lb., non-recoverable vehicle launched from another site and with different booster. Krieger also stated his belief that U.S.S.R. had six attempted probe launchings end in failure between August 25 and January 4 caused by inability to get fourth stage out of parking orbit. First three were attempted Venus probes; next two, Mars probes; last one, moon probe, (rand Memorandum RMOKAK TkT» *	A	TTT 7 j /Cia //**>	f\r\\ OUtfU—r JAj 111 II. V. YY tC^^/ZV/ oo, zz)
At aas meeting in Washington, S. Karrer and C. C. Kiess reported new evidence suggesting planet Mars has toxic clouds of oxygen and nitrogen compounds, probably nitrogen dioxide gas. Bv spectroscopic techniques splitting the light from the planet’s telescopic image, they found the pattern yielded by nitrogen dioxide gas. Kiess said that phenomena of the Martian appearance through earth telescopes can be explained by changes in the nature and color of nitrogen and oxygen compounds under changing Martian temperatures. (Barbour, Wash. Post, 12/28/63, B2)
James T. Dennison, of nasa Technology Utilization Office, said in paper delivered at annual meeting of National Association of Business Economists, Cleveland: “. . . We suggest that the greatest contributions of our government’s aerospace programs to the business economy have been the psychological boost of setting for ourselves an utterly impossible goal and then buckling down to reach it. And this adventure has come at a time when there were those who cried that our democratic capitalistic economy was sluggish, that we were being outdone by overseas and overland competitors, that gloom was here and that doom was close at hand. “The challenge of the exploration of space, of putting our fellow man safely into a desperately hostile environment, has provided a spur to great segments of our American business economy. And that spur will be keeping us on the jump until • we get those men to the moon and back, and, then perchance, take off for Mars.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. has failed in at least 13 attempts to send probes to Mars, Venus, and the moon since October 1960j Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported, and these failures were chiefly caused by inability of fourth stage to send the payload out of parking orbit. A&AE concluded, “it seems clear that the Russians have need for an improved upper stage to launch deep-space vehicles, and that Polyot I fills the bill.” (A&AE, 12/63,90) During 1963: Man’s conquest of space moved from spectacular hazard toward routine accomplishment, from the exhilarating peaks and slumps of first-generation hardware and experiments to the steadily improving reliability and capability of second- and third-generation launch vehicles and satellites, nasa launched 13 major space shots, with mission results of 11 successes, 1 partial success and 1 unsuccessful, compared with the 1962 record of 19 successes, 4 partial successes, and 3 unsuccessful. Project Mercury ended with L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; Project Apollo began its flight tests with two unmanned capsule tests. Communications satellites demonstrated near-synchronous orbit and Saturn and Centaur boosters moved toward operational status with successful test flights. U.S.S.R. conducted a 129-orbit tandem flight and orbited an unmanned prototype of a new manned maneuverable space capsule, nasa Administrator James E. Webb cited as nasa’s greatest specific accomplishment of 1963 the fact that his key staff people in Headquarters and the Centers had “learned to supervise the efforts at hand,” that he now has “the men matched with the job and the job matched with the men.” (nasa hhr-8 ; hhr-10 ; Space Bus. Daily, 1/3/64,10) During 1963: During the year the bud delivered two Minuteman wings to the Strategic Air Command, making an average of one icbm delivered per day in 1963. (afsc Release 312-R-114,1/1/64, 1) .
Soviet newspaper Pravda said mass i space probe was more than 26-million mi. from earth and successfully continuing its flight toward planet Mars. There was no mention of mid-course correction maneuver to bring the probe closer than its estimated 120,000-mi. distance from Mars in June. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/31/63)	... During January: Series of Gemini parachute design qualification tests was successfully completed at El Centro, Calif., for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Parachute system would undergo two more test series before qualification; system would be backup mechanism for two-man Gemini spacecraft recovery in case of water landings. ( msc Roundup, 1/23/63,1)
In speech to American Psychological Association, Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory and editor of Science, repeated his view that there were no predictable economic advantages to the exploration of the moon or possible subsequent flights to Mars. Much of the justification for manned lunar program was national prestige, ne said, but “the half of the world that is undernourished could scarcely the expected to place a higher value on landing on the moon than on filling their stomachs.” (Barbour, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/2/63)
Article in Pravda described Soviet radar observations of the planets Venus, Mercury, and Mars as “an outstanding achievement in Soviet science and technology.” The value of the astronomical unit was computed, as a result of radarastronomy measurements, to be equal to 149,599,300 km., with an error of ±2,000 km. Radar fixes on planets Mercury and Mars in June 1962 and February 1963 confirmed their reliability in determining the astronomical unit. First radio communications via Venus, transmitted in November 1962, also were described. Article was signed by M. Subbotin, Director, Institute of Theoretical Astronomy, and Member of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. (Pravda, 3/16/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden stressed to Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at opening of its third session in Geneva, that U.S. scientists shared the concern of those from other countries over possible contamination of Mars and other planets. (NYT, 5/23/64)
Success of ranger vu spotlighted NASA’s preparation for further lunar and planetary exploration, including two more Rangers (early next year), Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft, Lunar Orbiter photographing spacecraft, and Project Apollo manned lunar expedition, as well as two Mariner spacecraft to gather data from the vicinity of Mars (last quarter of 1964). (nasa Releases 64—196,64-205)
NASA and dod began implementing agreement on a single new system to improve communication and coordination of research and technology information between the two agencies. The agreement abolished certains forms and procedures which the two agencies had used independently for reporting on research and technology data, and instituted a new standard reporting form for common use. After the changeover is completed (July 1, 1965), all research and technology work of NASA and dod will be covered on the new form, and any scientist or staff member from NASA or dod will be able to obtain full information by fast machine processing on any given type of work. Signed by NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown, the agreement was worked out in a series of conferences over a period of more than one year. It was sponsored by and would be continued under the Supporting Space Research and Technology Panel of the Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (aacb). (nasa Release 64-258) October I: Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper told MIT conference on earth sciences that continuing research had verified Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to allow spacecraft to land by parachute. Density of Martian atmosphere, according to Dr. Kuiper, had been found to be less than two per cent of that at sea level on earth. The new measurement was made by spectro-graphic studies. (Abraham, Phil. Eve. BuU., 10/1/64)
NASA selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of contract for feasibility and preliminary design studies for automated biological laboratory (abl) to detect and describe indigenous life on the planet Mars. The one-year study would define life-detection payloads for Voyager-class missions, which were under study bv NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 64-182)
It was reported that contractors were accusing nasa of naming a Mars exploration idea “Project Beagle” just to appeal to President Johnson. NASA officials denied this and stated that the project was named after the ship in which Charles Darwin sailed around the world. (Av. Wk.. 7/20/64, 15)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, reviewed 1963 highlights in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Although direct measurements of the physical properties of the Moon await successful lunar flights, our Earth-based work has continued with some exciting results. Lowell Observatory scientists detected evidence of gas escaping from three different spots in the area of the lunar crater Aristarchus. This observation suggests that the Moon may be far from inert, and it has an important bearing on how we may conduct our lunar investigation. For example, if the Moon is seismically active, the seismograph may play an important role in the investigation of the lunar surface. . . . “Also, much effort was applied to clarifying the data from Earth-based or balloon observations of Mars. One important subject of controversy developed. Whereas it had been believed previously that the pressure at the surface of Mars is around 85 millibars, where 1000 millibars is roughly one atmosphere of pressure, it is now believed by many that the surface pressure on Mars may be as low as 10 or 11 millibars. This has serious implications with regard to landing a capsule on Mars. If the lower pressure is correct then retrorockets have to be used, whereas with the higher pressure atmospheric drag could be used to slow down the incoming capsule. “Significant new knowledge on the fundamental physical nature of the universe may have to await the launching of the first oao. In the meantime, sounding rocket experiments continue to provide data in ultraviolet and radio astronomy. . . . “Although the formal development of Scout had been completed, additional work was required to improve its reliability. The primary objective of the December 1963 Scout firing was to determine the efficacy of the measures taken to correct observed deficiencies. The virtually perfect vehicle performance during this firing encourages one to look for a high success rate in future Scout firings. . . . “Performance of all Atlas-boosted launch vehicles would be considerably improved by introducing a mixture of fluorine and oxygen (flox) as the oxidizer. Careful study shows this can be done with admixtures of up to 30% fluorine without major redesign of the propulsion system. We are, therefore, planning to flox the Atlas. A primary objective of this program is to provide for additional payload in the Surveyor investigations. . . .” (Testimony)
mariner iv Mars probe finally locked its sensor on the star Canopus after fixes on three wrong stars. Jet Propulsion Laboratory officials noted that picking up wrong stars was not critical in the early stages of the flight. If the mariner iv had not dropped these wrong fixes of its own accord, the action could have been commanded from the ground. Only if Canopus were in the sensor’s sights would the TV camera be aimed at the Martian surface when mariner rv flew past the planet 7% months from now; only with Canopus in vieiw would scientists know the spacecraft’s attitude with the precision needed for a midcourse rocket firing of maximum accuracy to refine the course of the trajectory and bring the mariner iv within about 8,600 mi. of Mars instead of the presently anticipated distance of 151,000 mi. (Miles, Wash. Post, 11/30/64; Witkin, NYT, 11/30/64, 1; National Observer, 11/30/64; Witkin, NYT, 12/1/64, 1) .
jpl had recommended use of a steerable entry vehicle or steerable parachute system for 1969 Mars probe, Missiles and Rockets reported, jpl wanted to land the complete vehicle and achieve telemetry from the Martian surface, notably on whether or not signs of life existed. Chief area of interest was Syrtis Major, prominent green area on Martian equator that might be one of the more likely spots to support life. (M&R, 4/20/64,11)
Lewis Research Center completed wind tunnel tests to study the aerodynamic forces which would occur on the launch vehicle when Mariner spacecraft was launched toward Mars, (lrc Release 64-55)
At NASA background briefing for news media, Doctors W. Randolph Lovelace II, Orr E. Reynolds, and Frank B. Voris made presentations on space medicine, biosciences, and effects of space environment on man. Dr. Lovelace described the close working relationship between the offices of Space Medicine, Biotechnology, and Space Science and Medicine. He pointed out Center responsibilities as well as the “detailed task-level technical coordination” completed at the NASA—dod level “which ensures most effective use of all existing facilities” throughout the Nation. In question period, Dr. Reynolds discussed timing of life-detector experiments for Mars:	. . we had hoped that it would be possible to have a landing capsule on Mars for the 1966 mission. Just as the plans for that were being developed, questions were raised by recent astronomical data about the density of the atmosphere of Mars that made it very difficult, if not impossible, to design the proper landing system. “At the present time we are hoping to have a landing vehicle for Mars for the 1969 opportunity. This is not an improved program. But we are working on the development of plans in that direction. It has already been decided that the biological sciences payload, that is, the life detector instruments, or whatever else the biological community thinks are most appropriate for that flight, will have high priority on any landing mission. “So I think the best guess now would be that certainly our first opportunity would be for 1969, and we certainly hope we will have such instruments aboard.” Discussing space radiation, Dr. Reynolds said: “. . . a number of committees and meetings that have been held by the radiobiologists in this country have recommended that an experiment be done below the radiation belt carrying a known source of radiation. The reason for this is that there have been reports from organisms, living organisms flown in the natural radiation belt, of a higher than expected effectiveness of the radiation. There is no good theoretical basis for knowing why this should occur. . . Experiment for checking this would be flown in first flight of Biosatellite, carrying known source and dosage of radiation below the area of the Van Allen belts. Asked about the previous data, Dr. Reynolds said : “There are experiments both by United States experimenters in piggyback flights, and the Russian experiments that show a higher than expected effectiveness of the ambient radiation in genetic effect and in systemic effect. These experiments we strongly suspect had this result due to lack of adequate dosimetry, measurement of the actual dosage that was encountered. For this reason the radiobiologists who have been advising us have recommended this experiment with a known source so as to eliminate any question of whether the dosimetry was wrong. . . .” Dr. Voris discussed “our studies into the biological effects of extremely low magnetic fields and into alternating and high magnetic field forces. Because of a recently expounded theory that individual neurons possess individual and isolated electromagnetic fields of their own, it is conceivable that the functions of the human nervous system may suffer impairment as a result of exposure to electromagnetic fields that deviate markedly from ambient terrestrial levels. . . .” Asked about slow rotation for manned space stations to provide partial gravity, Dr. Voris said that it presented “a problem in disorientation and in the effects of mal de mer. Slow rotation is fine if you can keep your head immobilized and become acclimated to it and stay in one spot. If you move around, move with the turn or away from the turn, or move from the periphery of a circular station into the center, you are changing the field force there, you are developing what is called a Coriolis effect, and you then disturb the balance mechanism or vestibular mechanism of the body and you develop recurrent effects such as seasickness.” (Transcript) .	' 766—508 O—65----12
Dr. Harrison Brown, Cal Tech geochemist, said in Science article that as many as 2,000 earth-like planets capable of supporting life may exist in the nearest corner of the Milky Way Galaxy. Based on studies of this portion of the universe—volume of 10,000 cubic parsecs—Dr. Brown theorized: “Virtually every main sequence star should have a planetary system associated with it.” He calculated there were approximately 1,000	such stars in the region and 60,000 dark bodies of Mars’ size or bigger, or an average 60 “dark companions” to each of the stars. He determined a typical star should have four such planets, and of these “on the average some two planets per visible star might provide suitable environment for the emergence of life- processes which are based upon chemical systems similar to those on earth.” Dr. Brown’s paper propounded higher probability of life in the universe than previously theorized. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/11/64)
Prof. Marcel Florkin of Liege Univ., a member of the Committee on Space Research (cospar), said that many American and Soviet scientists shared his belief that men cannot survive weightlessness in space for more than five or six days. He said that Soviet scientists had produced photographs showing abnormalities in cell division attributable to the sustained weightlessness some of their astronauts had experienced. Prof Florkin said that under present conditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the only alternative would be space vehicles that could produce artificial gravity to simulate normal human environment. (O’Toole, NYT, 12/24/64)
Preliminary design for re-entry spacecraft for manned Mars missions during 1971—75 period was submitted to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center after six-month study by Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Msc announced. The earth re-entry module would travel to Mars and 'back attached to 4- to 6-man Mars spacecraft, then would be detached and used for last eight hours. It is designed to withstand re-entry heating of about 35,000° F. at speeds up to 44,000 mph, protecting crew with ablative heat shield about 3^ in. thick, (msc Release 64-6; MSC Roundup, 1/22/64, 1, 3)
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
Details of Phoebus-powered nuclear rocket engine, as described by Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, in series of lectures sponsored by NATO Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development (agard) : The second-generation nuclear rocket would have 250,000-lb. thrust, using 5,000-megawatt Phoebus reactor. In clustered formation, the engines could launch manned spacecraft out of earth orbit on Mars trajectory. Ground-test firings of first-generation (low-power) Phoebus would be conducted in 1965-66, and tests of the heavier Phoebus reactor in 1967. (M&R, 10/12/64, 17)
Dr. N. A. Kozyrev of Pulkovo Observatory, U.S.S.R., told conference on geological problems in lunar research in New York that volcanic activity was evident in two of the moon’s craters—Alphonsus and Aristarchus. Overall, he said, “the Moon had an internal energy which can be not less than the internal energy of the earth.” And from analysis of certain light wavelengths, he believed there was “significant volcanic activity on Venus and only slight activity on Mars.” (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
Thomas Jefferson Wong, 40, internationally known research scientist and head of manned Mars mission studies at nasa Ames Research Center, died after apparent heart attack. Mr. Wong had been with Ames for 13 years. [Palo Alto Times, 3/2/64)
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. preliminary study of a manned Mars mission, called Project Deimos, was described by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal of the Armed Forces. Conducted by Douglas engineers J. L. Woodworth, G. A. Ursini, and Phil Bono, the study was based on six-man crew making 830-day round trip. Key to study was chemical-fuel rocket booster of 18,000,000-lb.-thrust power capable of placing 800,000	lbs. in earth orbit. Reusable booster would be fueled in orbit (by other reusable boosters making 10 trips) before sending spacecraft into Mars trajectory. (J/Armed Forces, 10/10/64, 8)
NASA announced industry design competition for Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) for detecting possible life on Mars. An abl would be landed by Voyager spacecraft to be flown in 1970’s. Proposals resulting from preliminary studies would lead to contract for a one-year effort to review scientific objectives, define an experimental payload suitable for landing and operation on Mars, and establish spacecraft and launch vehicle requirements, abl would incorporate several life-detection devices still in developmental stages and would be equipped to analyze and describe any organisms discovered by such devices. (nasa Release 64-134)
MARINER IV passed the 50-million-mi. mark on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars. The spacecraft was operating normally and transmitting items of information at a rate of 33%/sec. Nearly 10 million scientific and engineering measurements in space and outside the earth’s orbit had been transmitted in its first 29 days of flight, (nasa Release 64-326)
A policy statement issued by the Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human Welfare of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (aaas) charged that social and political pressures on the scientific community arising from such major U.S. space programs as Apollo, Starfish, and West Ford constituted a “serious erosion of the integrity of science.” The report was issued following a five-day meeting held by the association in Montreal, Canada. Commenting on the “spare race” aspects of NASA’s program, the committee said the pattern for orderly development of research had been altered by the “essentially political decision to pursue project Apollo.” The report concluded that Apollo did not appear to be based on the orderly systematic extension of basic scientific investigations. Another NASA program to come under fire at the AAAS meeting was the Voyager Mars exploration project attacked by Dr. Barry Commoner, professor of plant physiology at Washington University. Dr. Commoner said finding life in any form on Mars would have tremendous scientific significance, and that he was not opposed to the basic idea of searching for life on the planet. “I simply feel this country is not yet prepared to make a commitment of this scope,” he said. “We could at this time be a lot closer to resolving this question if the scientific community had been given the opportunity to fully discuss it.” He said even though the commitment had been made it was not too late to discuss fully the question of life on Mars before the 1971 launch. He said he hoped Congressional space committees would ask for complete justifications on the Voyager project. (Av. Wk., 1/4/65, 18; Abraham, Phil. Eve. BuU., 12/28/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/64)
Britain’s VC-10 long-range jet aircraft made its first commercial passenger flight—a boac flight'from London to Lagos, Nigeria. The aircraft featured rapid lift, allowing it to use shorter runways than its U.S. counterparts, the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/30/64,57)	_ April 29—May 1: Air Transport and Space Meeting and Production Forum held in New York, sponsored by Society of Automotive Engineers and American Society of Mechanical Engineers. At the meeting, NASA Ames Research Center scientists reported results of a study of a manned Mars mission: Nova-class launch vehicles and nuclear-propelled spacecraft, combined with extensive aerodynamic braking techniques at Mars and Earth, would allow manned Mars mission to be made with a single, direct launch from Earth. Use of aerodynamic braking at Mars and Earth would reduce total velocity requirements 50 per cent. (M&R, 5/4/64, 17)
mariner iv lost its lock on Canopus. “Current analysis supports the theory that a dust particle reflecting the light of the sun passed through the field of view of the Canopus tracker,” NASA said. Loss of lock on the star would not alter the spacecraft’s course, would merely affect its attitude, which would be of importance only when the spacecraft neared Mars and attempted to photograph the planet. NASA planned to command the spacecraft to reacquire Canopus soon. jpl, manager of the Mariner program for NASA, reported that a solar plasma probe experiment, which had functioned perfectly for eight days, had ceased to transmit useful information. (AP, Houston Post, 12/8/64)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
Soviet annual report to cospar listed 21 satellite and 114 rocket launchings for 1963. Omitting any mention of when U.S.S.R. might launch major spacecraft, report said past manned space flight had “set some new problems before scientists requiring immediate solution for successful preparation and realization of more prolonged space missions. ...” A major question to be answered was whether it was “possible for an astronaut, after two or three weeks stay under conditions of weightlessness, to endure satisfactorily stresses acting on an organism during re-entry.” Also studies must be made of methods to safeguard astronauts’ cardiovascular systems. Longest section of report was on medical and biological problems of manned space flight; it offered evidence that U.S.S.R. was paying increasing attention to weightlessness and other problems of manned space flight. Soviet report was first such version ever submitted in English and was thought to be strikingly free of propaganda. Possibly significantly, report referred to U.S. space research in correlation with Soviet research ; for example, findings of mars I were said to correlate with findings of U.S. explorer x and mariner ii. (AP, 5/9/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/64)
Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of NASA Biosciences Div., told Missiles and Rockets that it probably would be 1971 or 1973 before U.S. landed Automated Biological Laboratory (abl) on Mars: “I think it would be awfully optimistic to think that we could fly a fully integrated laboratory system to the Martian surface in 1969. I would like to hope such a mission would be feasible in 1971, and the 1973 launch window would also provide a good opportunity.” Other unnamed NASA officials were said to have considered launch of abl with Saturn V booster in 1971 as improbable, citing the high cost and “problems with sterilization methods which have to be solved.” abl missions would be part of the Voyager planetary program. (Mc&R, 8/24/64,15)
mariner IV, bound for Mars, began passing through a second stream of meteoroids. In its first 23 days of flight, the craft had made 7Y2 million scientific and engineering measurements in interplanetary space and was 3,748,352 mi. from earth, traveling at 6,970 mph relative to earth. Its velocity relative to the sun was 72,902 mph. The straightline distance from the spacecraft to Mars was 107,592,980 mi. (NASA Release 64-323)
Italy’s largest private monitoring center said it had recorded radio signals indicating a new Soviet space launch. It speculated that the Russians might have placed a satellite in parking orbit around the earth as a base for a Mars launch. {Phil. Inq., 11/7/64)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
Hurricane Dora with her 125-mph winds approached the U.S. Atlantic coast from Cape Kennedy to Myrtle Beach, S.C., and workers at the rocket launching center dismantled five of the six rockets being prepared for launch this fall. Only the Saturn ISA-7 rocket was secured in its gantry; removed were Titan II (for GT-2 Gemini launch), Atlas-Agena (for Mars probe launch), Thor-Delta (for Imp launch), Atlas-Centaur (launch vehicle development launch), and Atlas for USAF reentry test, (upi, NYT, 9/9/64, 1; Witkin, NYT, 9/9/64, 23)
President Johnson named Dr. Charles Stark Draper, head of Dept of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as a recipient of the National Medal of Science. Dr. Draper, a leader in developing aeronautic and astronautic instruments and controls, was one of 11 scientists to be so honored. (NYT, 11/28/64, 16) November 28: NASA mariner rv Mars probe was successfully launched into interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy, Fla., by an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. The Agena D separated from the Atlas 115 mi. up and injected itself into a parking orbit around the earth. It then reignited and injected itself into a Mars trajectory, mariner iv was detached and locked onto the sun for solar power and stabilization on one axis and opened its solar panels. Later, the probe would lock on the star Canopus for second-axis stabilization—the first time a star would be used for an attitude reference on a long space mission. In addition to equipment for televising the Martian surface, mariner iv carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near earth, Mars and in deep space. The trajectory as presently calculated would carry mariner iv within 151,000 mi. of Mars by mid-July, (nasa Releases 266, 288; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/64; NYT, 11/29/64; Miles, Wash. Post, 11/30/64)
Cornell Univ. announced that scientists at the Ionospheric Observatory at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, bounced a radar signal off the planet Mars while it was about 138,000,000 mi. from earth today. Cornell said this was the farthest distance at which Mars had been detected by radar. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/20/64)
mariner ill (Mars 64) was launched into interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy with an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle, but spacecraft communications failed when fairing did not jettison, preventing solar panel deployment. The Agena stage pushed the mariner iii into a parking orbit around the earth and coasted to the proper position for injection into a Mars trajectory. The Agena again ignited 32 min. after launching and sent the spacecraft toward Mars. Tracking data indicated that the second-stage Agena D booster shut down four seconds early on the second burn, mariner ill’s four solar panels, designed to use power from the sun to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries, were prevented from deploying by failure of nose fairing to jettison. Further, the spacecraft did not align itself properly with the sun so that the communications antennas would be properly pointed. In addition to TV equipment for taking pictures of the Martian surface, mariner in carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near Mars and in unmapped space after swinging past the planet. This launch marked the first use of the USAF’s new Agena D upper stage and also the first U.S. space mission requiring a second igniting of the Agena D. (nasa Releases 266, 288; ksc Release 20664; msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 7; Sullivan, NYT, 11/6/64, 16; Chic. Trib., 11/6/64; Balt.Sun, 11/6/64,1; hhn-48)
Martin Marietta recently completed NASA-funded, DOD-concurred-upon study of Centaur upper stage mated with various Titans. Most promising configuration—particularly for heavy Surveyor spacecraft and for advanced Mars missions—was using Centaur as trans-stage for Titan III-A (without the strap-on solids). (SBD, 5/7/64, 34)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Aviation Week & Space Technology that U.S. space program had “entered a whole new period,” in which U.S. was faced with exploring all the practical applications of knowledge suddenly gained through the space effort. “My view is to create stability, and the satellite may be one of the most important tools yet developed to create stability ill the world. ... In this effort, modern technology is going to play a very important role. The balance of technological power may be more important than any other form of power balance in the next decades ahead.” He said NASA was developing a broad technological capability to conduct missions with vast international application. “This will enable our nation to say to other nations of the world, ‘Join with us and we will undertake these missions together.’ ” “Overt expression” of this new focus of national space program planning would be expressed in forecast report NASA was completing for President Johnson, the article continued. Report would emphasize broad range of general space capabilities available in the future and describe specific possible post-Apollo missions—such as manned lunar base, earth-orbiting space stations, Mars probes—stressing that selection of such a goal should be a national decision. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64, 22)
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. concluded in its manned Mars exploration study for NASA Marshall . Tlight Center that future interplanetary space travelers should be no taller than 5'7" and no heavier than 145 lbs. Six of these “20 percentile” men—smaller than approximately 80 per cent of American men—on a manned Mars flight would require 1% lbs. less food per day than larger men, thus saving nearly 500 lbs. of food cargo weight on a one-year trip. Study said 70,000 lbs. could be saved in gross weight of Mars spacecraft if the six astronauts were 20 percentile men. (dm&ssd Apogee, 6/64)
Resolution approved at final session of cospar recommended that no spacecraft be landed on Mars if there were more than one chance in 10,000 that it was carrying earthly micro-organisms that could contaminate Mars. Resolution also said no nation should attempt an “unsterilized fly-by” of Mars if there were more than three chances in 100,000	of its accidentally hitting the planet. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 5/21/64)
The Soviet Union launched zond ii probe in the direction of the planet Mars. The purpose of the launching was said to be trying of the station’s systems under actual conditions of prolonged space flight and gaining of practical experience. Scientific investigations in interplanetary space would be carried out simultaneously. The probe was proceeding along a trajectory close to the computed one. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 12/2/64, 1, atss-T Trans.; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 12/2/64)
Two mathematicians at Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of Univ. of Calif. achieved first accurate description of the orbit of Mars, Univ. of Calif, announced. The mathematicians, Joseph L. Brady and Edna Vienop, calculated the planet’s orbit with aid of computers used to develop nuclear weapons. Brady said calculation left Mercury as the solar system’s only planet without accurate description of its orbit. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/2/64, A3)
mariner iv underwent a critical course change to make it possible for the craft to take useful pictures of Mars during the fly-by in July 1965. In response to commands radioed from earth, a small rocket on the base of the spacecraft, which could add anything between an eighth of a mile an hour to 188 miles an hour to the craft’s speed, was fired. Initial indications were that the correction was successful and accurate. Severed days later, tracking equipment and associated computers confirmed that the rocket firing had produced three changes in mariner iv’s flight path: (1) the Mars fly-by from 151,000 mi. in front of Mars to a closest approach of 5,400 mi. behind Mars; (2) the arrival date from July 16, 1965, to July 14; and (3) the flight path past Mars from the leading edge to the trailing edge of Mars. The maneuver was followed by sun and Canopus reacquisition. A second midcourse maneuver would not be required. The midcourse rocket used by mariner iv was the first to be used by this country that was capable of a second firing, (nasa Release 64-310; Witkin, NYT, 12/6/64,67; Miles, Wash. Post, 12/6/64)
At cospar, Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Carl Sagan said acetaldehyde gas, believed to exist in atmosphere of Mars, turns to sugar on contact with ultraviolet sunlight. Martian life, which probably is microorganic, possibly gives off the acetaldehyde gas and then feeds on the sugar that falls from the atmosphere, Dr. Sagan said. (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, head of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona, said at meeting of American Geophysical Union in Washington that Mars did not have enough water to support any but microscopic life forms. He described recent observations from McDonald Observatory in Fort Davis, Tex., that showed Mars to be enveloped in sheath of atmospheric ice crystals. Dr. Kuiper said in Martian spring the frost covering its pole during the wintertime evaporates directly into the air rather than melting. He estimated Martian air to be two parts nitrogen to one part carbon dioxide, with small amount of argon and even less water vapor and oxygen. Dr. Hyron Spinrad of Univ. of Calif. (Berkeley) described recent observations of Mars from Mt. Wilson Observatory. He said Mars was so cold that water melted only in the afternoon and when Mars was nearest the sun; amount of water in the Martian air was a thousandth of that in sea-level air in the arid southwestern U.S. The speakers rejected the idea that Martian air contained nitrogen-oxygen compounds, proposed last December by Georgetown Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess and chemist Dr. Sebastian Karrer. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/64,8)
Missiles and Rockets reported that NASA planned two Mariner-type flights to Mars in 1969 and a Voyager mission to Mars in 1971. M&R reported that D. P. Hearth, of the office of Advanced Lunar and Planetary Programs in the NASA Office of Space Sciences, said that he expected both new projects to be funded in the FY ’66 budget. According to Hearth, neither project had won program approval by top NASA officials, but the chances for both appeared good. Both 1969 and 1971 would offer attractive launch windows because propulsion requirements to complete the missions would be the smallest of any period in the next 15 years. (M&R, 6/1/64, 15)
Soviet Union announced that the spacecraft, zond ii, headed for Mars in an apparent race with mariner iv, had run into difficulties. The Soviet report said that in the first few radio contacts between zond ii and the ground “the power supply on board the space station was about half of the expected level.” Position information indicated the probe was 25,000 mi. from earth. (Witkin, NYT, 12/2/64, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64)
Frank Gifford of U.S. Weather Bureau, Oak Ridge, Tenn., postulated that “canals” on Mars are actually sand dunes 2,500 to 3,000 mi. long. Size of the dunes would indicate surface pressure of about 30 millibars, close to the 25 millibars calculated by jpl from spectrographic measurements. In Martian gravity and air density, wind speeds would have to be five to ten times those on earth to form dunes, and such winds have been observed in Martian dust storms. (M&R, 2/17/64, 21) During February: NASA Hq. contracted with rand Corp. for evaluation of alternate approaches to conducting Project Apollo and attaining its goal. (SBD, 2/14/64,248)
FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriation Bill containing $5,250 billion NASA appropriation, was signed into law by President Johnson. NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement on the effect of the appropriation, saying that nasa would “maintain the basic momentum and direction of the program as presented to Congress but will make a number of adjustments to meet the Congressional reduction of $195 million, to effect those specific changes directed by Congress, and to take advantage of experience gained from operations conducted during the nine months since the budget was submitted. “Although these adjustments will affect launch schedules and program milestones, Dr. Dryden, Dr. Seamans, and I are convinced that it is best to make a maximum effort to gain operational leadership in manned space flight and that the manned lunar landing should continue to be targeted within this decade. This will stretch NASA and its contractors to the limit, but we have advised the President that we are not at this time willing to give up this goal which is so challenging- and which is so important as a focus for the efforts we must continue to make in all our programs. . . . “The target date is only five years away. Our assurance that it can be met is less than under President Johnson’s budget, but we still hope that with hard work, dedication, continued successes, and continued support we can meet it. We are going to make a hard try. “This decision does not involve the transfer to manned flight of funds from space science and applications programs or advanced research and technology programs. These programs will require some adjustments, but will not be drastically reduced as would be necessary if funds were reprogrammed to benefit manned space flight. “In the program for unmanned planetary exploration, the combination of a heavy workload at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the short lead time available, and the importance of applying our resources to a major advance beyond the limited Mariner make it unwise to undertake a Mars mission in 1966 with the current Mariner-type spacecraft. The development of a spacecraft with much greater scientific promise for launch to Mars in 1969 is being initiated. . . .” (NASA Release 64-221)
In Washington Evening Star article, William Hines reported Georgetown Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess’ conviction that life cannot exist on Mars. Dr. Kiess’ spectrographic observations of the planet convinced him no oxygen or water vapor existed there. Nitrogen compounds have been detected, and Dr. Kiess believed Martian atmosphere is 97-99% pure nitrogen gas. He believed density of air at Martian surface is greater than is generally believed, meaning that nitrogen tetroxide could exist as gas, liquid, and solid—gaseous above 70° F, solid below 14° F, and liquid in between. In laboratory experiments Dr. Kiess had demonstrated that when various nitrogen compounds are subjected to temperature changes they turn color to duplicate “seasonal” color changes observed on Mars, even creating artificial “snow storm” and simulating waxing and waning of Martian “polar caps.” Dr. Kiess’ view was minority opinion, refuted by majority of scientists. Dr. Lewis Kaplan of jpl said in interview that Dr. Kiess’ conclusions were based on spectrographic analyses which had been refuted by better spectrographic analyses of Vancouver, B.C., scientists. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/4/64)
American Institute for Biological Sciences expressed concern that NASA was not giving sufficiently high priority to the investigation of extraterrestrial life. The Institute, a federation of biologists, said NASA should begin planning a project for detection of possible life on Mars when the planet comes into favorable position in 1969. Search for extraterrestrial life also was advocated by nas Space Science Board nearly two years ago. NASA originally had hoped to perform the Mars biology mission in 1964, but technical, scientific, and political obstacles delayed the attempt. (Finney, NYT, 6/11/64, 2; Wash. Post, 6/11/64)
Paul G. Johnson of aec—nasa SNPO said at aiaa meetings that early explorers of Mars may pass by planet Venus on way back to earth, to slow down spacecraft to safe re-entry speed. Side trip would lengthen voyage by a few months. Johnson also said that nuclear rockets might make Mars trip possible in 1980’s. Mission could involve six to eight crewmen and take from 400 to 500 days, (nasa Release 64-165)
Washington Evening Star editorialized about recent discovery that “Mars is covered by great yellow clouds of gaseous compounds of nitrogen and oxygen, or smog” and about scientists’ conclusion that the clouds preclude any chance of man’s finding life on Mars: “Quite the contrary. This clearly indicates that Martian life exists and the Martians are one, hopefully two, generations ahead of us in smogging up the atmosphere. As for landing there, all we need are spacemen from Los Angeles.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/64)
$12 million, 210-ft.-dia. antenna at jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station, Calif., was being readied to permit the tracking of very distant space vehicles sending faint signals to earth, including mariner iv, now in solar orbit. Called the Mars station, the antenna would be able to track a signal with a strength of only one-thousandth of one-billionth of one watt. (Wash. Post, 10/8/65, A3)
mariner iv was 70 million mi. on its 325-million-mi. flight to Mars after 40 days in space. All systems were operating normally (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/7/65)
The rash of reports on strange visitations to earth received comment from Walter Sullivan in the New York Times: “Whether or not [flying saucer enthusiasts] are aware of it, this is the time when space probes would be arriving from Mars, if inhabitants of-that planet were engaged in a similar effort [to the mariner iv Mars flyby]. The earth overtakes Mars every two years and two months, coming within a few dozen million miles of it. There was such an approach this spring. The United States and the Soviet Union anticipated it by firing vehicles toward Mars last November. If there were any Martians equipped to do so, they would have fired their vehicles toward earth at about the same time,” (Sullivan. ATT, 7/13/651
NASA’s mariner IV began feeling the gravitational pull of Mars a week before it was scheduled to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The tug was noticed at 5 p.m. edt in a slight change in speed as the 575-lb. spacecraft, 128,054,720 mi. from earth and 1,721,770 mi. from Mars, neared the end of its 228-day trip. At noon, the speed relative to Mars was 9,879 mph. Tracking engineers said the speed, which had been dropping two mph every six hours, would lessen because of Mars’ gravity at a rate of one mph every six hours through July 10 when the speed would begin to increase. No further sensing of the planet’s presence in space was expected until July 14 when instruments aboard mariner iv might detect an increase in radiation, (ap, NYT, 7/8/65, 13; ap, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
NASA announced it would request preliminary design proposals from private industry for the unmanned Voyager spacecraft that would land scientific instruments on Mars in 1971. From these proposals, several contractors would be chosen to perform a 3-mo. program design definition. Previous NASA studies had indicated the system might consist of a spacecraft “bus” or main body, a propulsion and braking system, and a landing capsule. (NASA Release 65-15)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff told mit students:	“The Russians are pretty cautious about disclosing much about their launch vehicles, but we know pretty well what vehicles they’re using.” Dr. Sheldon noted that ZOND II, the Soviet Mars probe, would pass near the planet perhaps one month after mariner iv. The U.S. Mars probe was due to come within 5,400 mi. of the planet on July 14.	(Boston Globe, 2/17/65)
Three members of the nas-nrc Space Science Board, Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, Dr. Harry H. Hess, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, appeared before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in its hearings on post-Apollo goals of the U.S. space program. They repeated the recommendation of NAS in its 1964 National Goals in Space 1971-1985 that emphasis be placed on unmanned exploration of the planets, especially Mars, and added that supplementary data would be forthcoming with the release of reports on the Space Research Summer Study—1965 (June 21-July 16). Dr. Hess noted that the 1964 study recommended highest priority be given to search for life on a neighboring planet. He said the only difference in the 1965 recommendation was to “give a somewhat higher priority to Venus but leaving Mars the number one objective.” (nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 5)	_
Evidence that the bright areas of the Martian surface contained iron oxides in a loose combination with water was reported by Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. to the Biophysical Society’s annual meeting in San Francisco. He said reflected light of hydrated iron oxides in an earth-bound laboratory matched the sunlight reflected from the Martian surface when viewed in the ultraviolet and infrared. Dr. Sagan believed that confirmation of the iron-water compounds on Martian deserts, which showed up as bright areas to earth astronomers, suggested conditions were once right for life to originate on Mars. He said he was convinced that when life of a primitive form had started, the chances were it had survived. (Balt. Sun, 10/18/65)
In a Washington Evening Star article, “Costs Soar in Lagging TFX Project,” Richard Wilson wrote: “Here’s the latest word on that $8 billion miracle airplane program, the tfx. It is costing about $5 million per plane instead of the estimated $2.2 million. It is too heavy for the Navy to use. It could have been ready now but it isn’t because the Kennedy administration lagged a year while evaluating and reevaluating the aircraft so that General Dynamics Corp. could get the contract. . . . “Nobody knows for sure that the Boeing plane would have worked out any better but the top military men all thought so. . . . So far as realizing any billion dollars savings as was at first advertised, this doesn’t appear very likely if the Navy has to have a lighter version. In view of the nearly doubling of cost per plane, it does not seem likely in any case. . . .” (Wilson, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65) September 13-18: International Astronautical Federation’s 16th Congress was held in Athens. Participants were greeted by King Constantine of Greece. Introductory speeches were made by the president of the IAF, Dr. William H. Pickering; chairman of the International Academy of Astronautics, Dr. Charles S. Draper; and president of the International Institute of Space Law, Dr. I. Pepin. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/12/65; Izvestia, 9/14/65, 5, atss-t Trans.) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, reported at a plenary meeting of the Congress that the Apollo program had now passed the half-way point and was moving forward at full momentum. He listed three primary commitments: “—the first Saturn V carrying an unmanned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1967. “—the first Saturn V carrying a manned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1968. “—the manned lunar landing is scheduled to be accomplished prior to 1970.” Following his presentation, von Braun told a news conference that “many Soviet and American scientists will participate to lay the foundation for extensive cooperation on the moon.” He said there were indications that the moon’s surface was solid enough to bear the weight of the spacecraft. Soft spots had been identified and would be avoided. He estimated that a landing on Mars would occur 15 yrs. after a successful lunar landing. (Text; NYT, 9/15/65, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, outlined broad objectives of the Saturn-Apollo applications missions, earth-orbital and lunar: “(1) Evaluate and extend man’s capabilities to operate in space effectively as an astronaut and as a scientist. “(2) Conduct observations of the Earth, extra-terrestrial phenomena, and experiments dependent on the space environment. “(3) Qualify systems and crews for subsequent long-duration space missions.
An article in Human Events expressed fear that Russian military space capability surpassed that of the U.S.: “. . . Four times in the past 2 months, Red Star (a newspaper published by the Defense Ministry) has trumpeted the claim that Russia now has orbital space rockets with the capacity of wiping any aggressor off the face of the earth. “There is no doubt at all about the intended identity of the aggressor and among American scientists back home there is little doubt about the weapon. “There is little doubt because the United States spent 7 years and $10 million between 1958-65 to plan the nuclear-powered space orbiting system called Project Orion. We have high-ranking scientists who believe the Russians have copied or adapted Orion, which has been declassified since October, 1964. The Russians might easily have cracked the secrecy before that. “It is a first generation vehicular system that is capable of carrying 8 men and 100 tons of payload to Mars and back. It is a jet-propelled engine or engines powered by a nuclear reactor which, in effect, bombs a shield at the rear of the vehicle and drives it forward. The usual limitations of temperature do not affect this vehicle because the hot debris of the explosions makes only a momentary contact with the shield. The limitations of using full nuclear power are also absent because the reactor is outside the vehicle. “Guidance, mobility, range, the exchange of crew-members, and the restocking of the payload are all within this space cruiser’s capability. Its potentials as a raider of earth targets, and as an interceptor of our space satellites, are almost limitless. It may not be the never-never ultimate weapon, but it will do until another comes along.” {CR, 8/25/65, A4807-08)
Two more MARINER IV close-up shots of Mars were released by NASA. The first three photographs showed an almost unbroken strip of terrain more than 600 mi. long. They revealed features down to two miles in length, including several crater-like objects, a kidneyshaped depression 20-30 mi. in width, and ridges and depressions similar to those on the moon. None of them showed straight-line features that might have been taken by earth-based observers to be canals. Except for the suggestion of an arid, wind-swept, desert-like terrain, the pictures did not bear directly on the question of life on the planet. During a press conference held at JPL, Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, said that mariner iv had been a “magnificent success.” The computer which had reconstructed the numbers transmitted by mariner iv into photographs had proved capable of cleaning up and intensifying the image to a remarkable degree. The pic tures were of a high quality, and, in addition, the lighting conditions were expected to improve the detail in later photographs. Comparison of overlapping areas—one picture in a pair exposed through a green filter and one through a red filter—might reveal some things about color on Mars that would not otherwise be obtainable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 7/18/65, 1, 50; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/18/65. Al, A6; WSJ, 7/19/65, 1)
Transmissions from MARINER IV were received by the nine-month-old Tidbinbilla tracking station at Canberra, Australia—one of three primary stations in the worldwide network of space tracking stations built for the Mars probe. Since February, a movable reflector antenna had maintained daily contact with MARINER IV, picking up signals from Goldstone, Calif., station in the morning and relaying them to the Johannesburg station nine hours later. As the signals were received from mariner IV, they were retransmitted over the Pacific cable teletype to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After completion of mariner iv mission, Tidbinbilla would be used to track Surveyor vehicles.	(NYT, 7/18/65)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, science adviser to President Johnson, told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that a manned Mars expedition would take from four hundred to six hundred days. He continued: “The longest manned mission we are currently planning is some 14 days. Whether such a long mission is physiologically or psychologically feasible is almost impossible to judge before we have more experience with Apollo, AES, and other manned systems. In any case, we would have to build systems of greater complexity and reliability than we have yet dreamed of. “. . . if we compare the probable scale and technical difficulties of a manned Mars expedition with Apollo it is hard to conclude that its probable cost could be much less than perhaps five times that of Apollo—that is, of the order of one hundred billion dollars.” (Text)
NASA invited scientists to propose, by August 15, the various experiments to be included in a continuing Voyager program of exploration of the planets. The Mars Voyager program would begin with a test flight in 1969 followed by an orbiter-lander flight in 1971 with other flights following in 1973, 1975, and beyond. The program would also include missions now under consideration for flights to Venus and other planets. The experiments to be included in the 1971 mission of the landing capsule would be subject to strict sterilization requirements. In following programs, there would be considerable latitude in the choice of experiments. (NASA Release 65-230)
MARINER IV set a distance record for communications from American spacecraft. The Mars probe transmitted data from 54 million miles out, exceeding the record of 53.9 million miles set by mariner ii in 1963. (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 4/14/65; nasa Releases 65-111, 65-117)
A full-scale model of NASA’s mariner iv Mars probe went on display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum. Panels explaining the Mariner program would also be displayed; photographs of the Martian surface would be added to the exhibit as they were received. (NASA Release 65-231)
Smithsonian Institution’s National Air Museum placed on display a quarter-scale model of the gt-3 spacecraft, a full-scale model of ranger IX along with some of the photos it took, and a model of mariner IV Mars probe. The spacecraft were part of an exhibit depicting NASA’s broad program of space research. (NASA Release
The first close-up picture of Mars transmitted by NASA’s mariner IV in an eight-hour broadcast over a distance of 134 million mi. clearly showed the edge of the planet. Transmitted to earth as a series of 5 million radio signals representing zeroes and ones, the picture was received at the Madrid and Johannesburg tracking stations and relayed to jpl. A jpl computer reconstructed the digits to produce images consisting of a series of dots of varying darkness. With transmission at 8.3 dots a second, 8/4 hrs. were required to receive the photograph. The photo sequence began when the bright edge, or limb, of Mars was seen by a light sensor which triggered MARINER iv’s magnetic tape recorder. Initial information came from an experimental device called a “cluge” which built up a rough pattern of the photo on a monitor screen as it was relayed from the tracking stations to jpl. Taken at a low angle with an oblique view, the first photograph did not show the detail expected in later photographs. At a news conference at jpl, Dr. J. A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa, said that during its Mars flyby, mariner iv had discovered with a variety of detectors that Mars had little or no magnetic field and, therefore, no radiation belts. This would indicate that the planet lacks a liquid core and thus differs basically from earth. Lack of a metallic core, liquid or solid, would be evidence that the planet never went through the churning internal processes that gave the earth its layered structure. Mars would not have continents formed of lightweight rocks and ocean basins underlain with basaltic rock as found on earth. W. M. Alexander, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explained that there was no evidence of a belt or unusual concentration of cosmic dust around the planet, nor, pointed out Dr. H. S. Bridge, mit, was there any evidence of a shock wave caused by solar wind flowing across the planet. The solar wind was the steady outflow of thin, hot, high-velocity gas from the sun. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, when questioned by newsmen on the possibility of higher life existing on Mars, pointed out that the absence of a magnetic field indicated the planet’s atmosphere was hit with all types of radiation and the existence of life would depend on how deep the atmosphere was and the extent of radiation that reached the surface. Asked if he were discouraged about the possibility of finding life on the planet, Dr. Pickering replied: “No, I have always felt we will find some sort of life on Mars.” Dr. Pickering pointed out that one explanation for the reddish hue of Mars might be the presence of limonite, an iron oxide. This would suggest that iron was uniformly spread through the planet rather than being largely concentrated in the core, as on earth. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 1/16/65, 1, 10; Miles, Wash. Post, 7/16/65, A1,A3; Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/65,1, 6)
. . . atmospheric effects, color, seasonal changes, and the large number of locations of interest will make Martian pictures 10-50 times more difficult to interpret than lunar pictures.” Robert L. Sohn, TRW Space Technology Laboratories, stressed value of earth-return missions and recommended serious consideration of round-trip missions and multi-plan round trips using DSIF as guide. He suggested that an 800-lb. spacecraft could make a fly-by of Mars, using the Venus swing-by technique and return to earth to enable recovery of a 50-lb. capsule. Use of swing-by techniques for round trips reduces earth launch velocities to those of the favorable years and also reduces earth reentry velocities. Additional advantages were closer passage with Mars at encounter and the opportunity to gather data on two planets. Elie A. Shneour, of Stanford University, said he “. . . could not say whether it was possible to draw up a set of experiments that would definitively search for life.” He maintained, however, that “discovery of any form of extraterrestrial life will be tantamount to a basic determination of the nature of all life on that planet.” (M&R, 2/22/ 65, 39, 41)	...
mariner iv received 12 commands from JPL to check out spacecraft equipment that would be used if the spacecraft was still operating normally when it reached Mars next July 14. These commands dropped a lens cover off the television camera, turned on a scanning platform that carried the camera and two Mars sensors, turned on portions of television system and checked out the capability of mariner iv to perform the encounter sequence. It was not planned to take television pictures during this sequence. The lens cover was dropped at this time rather than at planet encounter to shake loose any possible dust particles that might interfere with the Canopus sensor, a light sensing device that locked on the star Canopus to prevent the spacecraft from rolling. (NASA Release 65—43)
U.S.S.R.’s zond ii—launched Nov. 30, 1964—was believed still racing toward Mars, but with its radio power dead. Although zond ii’s specific mission was not disclosed, Tass had announced it was intended to “test the systems of the spacecraft in practical conditions of a prolonged space flight and to accumulate experience.” Tass had also said “unprecedented” plasma-jet engines were powering the Mars probe, (dpi, Houston Chron., 7/14/65)
NASA’s budget for fy 1967 received comment in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “nasa is nervously asking the White House for $5.76 billion for Fiscal 1967 and contends it must have at least $5.25 billion compared with the $5,176 billion Congress appropriated for this fiscal year. “The Apollo program to land a man on the moon appears—thanks to Russian competition—pretty safe from the budget cutters. But every other program is a potential target, including the $1.2 billion Voyager program to explore Mars and all kinds of proposals to exploit the Apollo hardware. . . . “The Johnson Administration has prepared a pat answer to complaints that its tight Fiscal 1967 budget will thwart new initiatives. With so much accomplished in this session of the 89th Congress, the argument goes, next year must be ‘a management year.’ ” {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 15)
Three basic capsule designs for the Project Voyager Mars lander vehicle were being studied by a special planetary missions technology steering committee at NASA Langley Research Center, reported Aviation Week and Space Technology. Low atmosphere density values for Mars determined by the mariner iv occultation experiment would have to be taken into consideration before final capsule design specifications could be prepared. (Av. Wk., 9/20/65, 28)
During a luncheon speech at the Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System, presented in Denver, Colo., by the American Astronautical Society, Mai. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, formerly NASA Director of Launch Vehicle Programs, said it was now generally agreed that the near-earth space area “looks more promising from the standpoint of potential military applications” than lunar bases, Mars flights, and other projects suggested earlier. USAF was seeking refinement of its knowledge in astronomy, geophysics, geodesy, and other areas. More pressing, he said, was to study the space environment as related to weapon systems and orbiting satellites. (Partner, Denver Post, 2/29/65)
In an article in the Orlando Evening Star, Barry Goldwater said: “Defense Secretary Robert McNamara has indicated that space weapons are too costly, as though any dollar cost is too high for the security of 190 million Americans and a billion allies and friends. The only major space-military program McNamara has permitted to stay alive is the Manned Orbital Laboratory, and he has so slowed and limited this that its orbit is apparently toward nothing but bureaucratic extinction. “We have deployed one or. two so-called ‘satellite killers,’ but they are a pitiful particle of what really is needed. “Pictures of Mars are fine. So is a trip to the moon. But the first job of any administration is to secure the nation against its enemies. “We will not remain the most powerful nation on earth for long if we do not reverse the suicidal Johnson-McNamara refusal to let us arm ourselves in space.” (Orl. Eve. Star, 8/4/65)
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
Houston Chronicle reported that preliminary funds for the unmanned exploration of Mars would be included in the NASA FY 1966 budget. On Oct. 30, 1964, the Space Science Board of NAS had recommended to NASA that Mars be the next goal because it was the likeliest of the planets to be inhabited by living things and would therefore be of greater scientific importance than the moon or proposed manning orbiting laboratories. (Mackaye, Houston Chron., 1/14/65)
mariner iv, launched two months ago, was 11,873,789 mi. from earth and moving toward Mars at a speed of 12,291 mph relative to the earth at 9 a.m. est. Velocity relative to the sun was 67,086 mph. (nasa Release 65-21)
A low-temperature, primal), non-rechargeable battery had been successfully tested over a range from —100° C to 68° C, NASA Lewis Research Center engineers reported. Designed by the Livingston Electronic Co., the battery delivered constant power and, when fully developed, could be used on Mars where the nighttime temperatures were —100° C and the average daytime temperature —30° C. (lrc Release 65-20)
Saturn V launch vehicle was under consideration by NASA for its Voyager program of unmanned planetary exploration, beginning with a 1971 Mars mission. NASA had considered developing a Saturn IB/Centaur launch vehicle, but the greater thrust of the three-stage 7.5-million-lb. thrust Saturn V would give more flexibility to planning early Voyager missions and would also provide the launch vehicle capability at the beginning of the Voyager program necessary for future missions. Saturn V, being developed by MSFC, would undergo its first flight test in 1967. (nasa Release 65-328)
Robert L. Sohn, scientist at Space Technology Laboratories, proposed to use the gravity field of Venus as a brake for manned spacecraft returning from Mars. “We don’t expect to have boosters powerful enough to launch spacecraft of the 1970s that can carry extra propulsion to brake reentry speeds. . . . The landing corridor will be so narrow that a small fractional error in navigation would send the spacecraft into an eternal orbit around the sun.” He said traveling near Venus on the return journey from Mars would slow a spacecraft as it passed through the Venutian gravity field. Then, with some midcourse maneuvering and navigation, the astronaut could return to earth and reenter earth’s atmosphere with greater margin of error. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 1/17/65)
In an article in Foreign Affairs entitled “Slowdown in the Pentagon,” Hanson W. Baldwin said: “The sprawling bureaucracy of big government; the control of major military or paramilitary projects by agencies over which the Defense Department has no direct authority, including the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Bureau of the Budget; congressional legislation and executive regulation—social, political and economic; the tremendous size and complexity of the Armed Forces; overcentralization and overregulation in the Pentagon; too much service rivalry and not anough service competition—all these and other factors have become builtin roadblocks in defense development and contracting. “The creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has provided another type of problem. NASA stemmed from the same kind of political philosophy that nurtured the AEC. Atom bombs were too powerful to allow the generals to play with them; ergo, a civilian agency must control nuclear power—and it must be channeled away from nasty military purposes. The same scientific-political pressure groups that advocated this concept helped (with President Eisenhower’s approval) to establish NASA, again on the theory that space efforts must be controlled by civilians and that space must not be used for military purposes. . . . “But in the case of NASA, the problem has been compounded. For while the aec is essentially a research and production agency, NASA is an operating agency as well. From a small highly efficient aeronautical research agency, it has now expanded into a gargantuan multibil-lion-dollar empire, with tentacles all over the country, managing the biggest program on which the United States has ever embarked—to place a man on the moon. “In its early years, NASA was sluggishly if at all responsive to military needs, and the Pentagon itself was inhibited from any effective space developments (though, curiously, the only effective space boosters available were military ballistic missiles). Gradually the liaison, due to Dr. [Edward C.] Welsh and others, has been greatly improved. Numerous military officers, active and retired, now hold some of the most important positions in NASA, and in addition the Armed Forces have furnished most of the astronauts and by far the most important part of the facilities and services used by the agency. The two-headed control still offers difficulties, but today the main stumbling blocks to the rapid development of military space projects are Secretary McNamara and his Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. Harold Brown, who in his new political role in the Pentagon has become a remarkably unadventurous scientist. “Often the President’s Scientific Adviser, whose contacts with Pentagon and other Government scientists cut squarely across organizational lines, has also acted as roadblock to new developments. He exercises tremendous power without either specific responsibility or specific authority; therefore, his intervention often not only delays but confuses. The Adviser’s great power stems largely from his White House status; unfortunately around him has grown up a small but important office manned by men more impressive as bureaucrats than as scientists, who represent, in effect, another echelon of delay. . . .” {Foreign Affairs, 1/65; CR, 2/4/65, 2007) During January: Committee assignments for both parties were made in both Houses of Congress. New members on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Joseph Tydings (D-Md.), Len B. Jordan (R-Ida.), and George D. Aiken (R-Vt) •	.	. New members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Roy A. Taylor (D-N.C.), George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), Walter H. Moeller (D-Ohio), William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.), Brock Adams (D-Wash.), Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.), Weston E. Vivian (D-Mich.), Gale Schisler (D—111.), and Barber B. Conable, Jr. (R-N.Y.). (Comm. Off.) During January: Marvin L. White. AFCRL’s Space Physics Laboratory, predicted the sun was encircled by “rings” of electric current totaling nearly 200 billion amps. Although total current was high, White postulated that the current density was low because the current was spread over a large area; he predicted current density to be about three trillionths of an ampere per square centimeter, the same order of magnitude as in the earth’s atmosphere. White’s calculations were based on particle flux data from mariner ii. (oar Research Review, 1/65, 1-2) With launch of two balloons to 87,000-ft. altitudes from Chico, Calif., AFCRL began one-year series of high-altitude balloon flights to measure moisture in the stratosphere. Series would consist of vertical soundings—25 in all, at the rate of two per month—in which all data would be obtained in recoverable instrumented payload parachuted to earth when balloon descended to 30,000 ft., and horizontal soundings—five 11-day flights at float altitudes averaging 75,000 ft.—in which data gathered over thousands of miles would be telemetered every two hours to ground stations, (oar Research Review, 5/65,15—16) In an article on detecting extraterrestrial life, William R. Corliss in International Science and Technology described some of the plans for collecting data on possible life-forms elsewhere and some of the factors making the search for extraterrestrial life so challenging. He noted the complications for Martian life-detection if retrorockets were necessary to brake the landing of a scientific package: “First, of course, they add weight to the landing package, right where it hurts the most. Also, their control adds complexity and increases the chance of failure. Finally and perhaps most importantly, they would make the problem of life-detection more difficult and any results more ambiguous; the rocket exhaust would tend both to fuse the surface of the landing area (maybe even killing any existing organisms), and to add combustion contaminants of its own in the most crucial area—around the lander.” He listed the variety of experimental instruments proposed for detecting extraterrestrial life (or clues of life) and explained why the dependability of these instruments—based on different physical and chemical principles—varied widely. (Int. Sci. & Tech., 1/65, 28-34)
Some highlights of the year in physics: Planet Mars has no substantial magnetic field, according to scientific experiments by mariner IV Mars probe. Because of this, Martian life-forms would have to be able to withstand intense radiation, but possibility of Martian life was not ruled out. mariner iv also reported Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to readily support parachute or glider-type descents for soft landings on the planet. Comet Ikeya-Seki, the brightest comet to enter the solar system this century, was discovered Sept. 18 and subsequently studied from the ground, airplanes, and rockets. The comet passed within 300,000 mi. of the sun and made a hairpin turn Oct. 21, when it broke into three pieces. Results of NASA’s testing of public reaction to sonic booms, begun in 1961, showed that no serious psychological or physiological effects result from sonic booms. Commercial use of the supersonic transport, to begin in early 1970’s, was expected to create sonic booms that, when Sst’s come into full use in the U.S., would be heard by everyone about once a day. On the subject of antimatter, two items: Swedish physicist Hannes Alfven theorized such cosmic phenomena as quasi-stellar radio sources (“quasars”), radio stars, and supernovae may be powered by matter-antimatter annihilations; and, antideutrons were produced in the laboratory by scientists of Columbia Univ. Unwanted noise from a BTL horn-reflector antenna being used in comsat research may have been radiation from the birth of the universe. This interpretation was based on the “big bang” theory of the universe’s formation and was propounded by a group of Princeton Univ. scientists. Decision was believed near on which of the three principal models of the universe was correct—the steady-state, expanding, or oscillating universe theory. Results in astronomy based on red-shifts of “blue-galaxies” (discovered in 1965) and quasars hinted at an oscillating universe, (aip News, 12/22/65) During 1965: Among highlights in the U.S. communications satellite program were: initiation of commercial comsat operations, with EARLY BIRD I in synchronous orbit over the Atlantic; initiation of a synchronous-orbit comsat program to furnish communications for Project Apollo and for expanded commercial service; and growth of the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium to 48 member nations, representing every continent. Communications Satellite Corp. represented the U.S. and served as manager for the consortium. (Com-SatCorp Release)
JPL scientists had sent notices to professional and amateur astronomers asking them to keep the strip of Mars over which mariner IV would fly next July 14 under surveillance from now on, with special emphasis on photography in March. “We don’t know what we may learn through this procedure,” a JPL spokesman said, “but we want all the information we can get. Suppose, for example, mariner photographs what looks like a dust storm. We’ll have a better chance of determining that fact if we have pictures of the same phenomenon taken through earth telescopes, even though it’s a different storm months earlier.” (ap, Seattle Post-Intelligencer, 2/15/65)
Soviet propaganda needs in the wake of Mariner 4’s flight to Mars appear to have been influential in determining the timing of the latest Soviet space shots,” wrote Harry Schwartz in the New York Times. He continued: “Moscow’s decision to send up last Friday two rockets—one putting five small satellites into orbit and the second orbiting the heaviest man-made object yet put into space—seems to Western observers to be a transparent Soviet effort to counteract the propaganda defeat Moscow suffered as a result of Mariner 4’s historic voyage. That defeat was all the greater because of the failure of the Soviet Mars probe, Zond, sent on the same journey at roughly the same time Mariner 4 was launched.” (Schwartz, NYT, 7/18/65)
MARINER IV was nearly 40 million mi. from earth, traveling 30,000 mph relative to the sun. It had covered 188 million mi. in its orbit around the sun. The Mars probe had transmitted to earth more than 160 million bits of engineering and scientific information about planetary space, (nasa Release 65-95)
NASA’s mariner iv spacecraft, at 8:02 a.m., EST, automatically switched from its omnidirectional antenna to fixed narrow beam antenna to communicate with earth, thereby becoming radio-ready for the remaining 130 days of its Mars flight. JPL received report from tracking station at Canberra, Australia, of a prompt increase in signal strength. (NASA Release 65-78)
mariner iv, nasa’s Mars flyby and photographic probe, reached the distance of one AU (Astronomical Unit) from earth at 9 p.m. EST. An Astronomical Unit is the mean distance of the earth from the sun that had been established, partially from data received from mariner ii, as 92,956,000 mi. The probe had traveled over 271 million mi. in its orbit; its velocity relative to the earth was 51,442 mph. (nasa Release 65-171)
British scientist Dr. J. E. Lovelock told the Third International Symposium on Advances in Gas Chromatography in Houston that although pictures taken from space probes indicated no sign of life on Mars as we know it, life may be there. Dr. Lovelock said it was urgent that the unmanned spacecraft that would land on Mars be designed “so they would not rule out the possibility that life may take different forms and be of some entirely different nature on planets beyond our own.” {Houston Post, 10/19/65)
NASA announced that mariner iv, scheduled to reach the vicinity of Mars July 14, had traveled over 168 million mi.—more than half way. (NASA Release 65-80)
Jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, speaking to the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., on “Exploring the Planets,” < :J: “Scientists interested in the solar system point out that all of the planets of the solar system present interesting challenges to the explorers. A study group at Woods Hole in Massachusetts this summer has set priorities on the exploration of the planets in the order of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter. We hope to make exploratory flights to all of these planets.” (Text)
nasa mariner iv was 85 million miles from earth and traveling faster than 48,000 mph, nasa announced. A radio signal from the spacecraft, traveling at the speed of light, would take more than 7% min. to reach a ground station. The Mars probe was returning scientific measurements and engineering data continuously and daily setting a new record for distance of communications, (nasa Release 65-167)
Plans for the exploration of Mars called for an engineering test shot in 1969 and an unmanned landing in 1971, Robert F. Fellows, NASA program chief for planetary atmospheres, said at Fifth Annual Space Conference at VPI. Additional unmanned Mars landings were scheduled for 1973 and 1975: larger capsules—up to three tons— were expected to' land in the early 1980’s. Fellows said that the 1971 mission would require two pieces of hardware: an orbiter that would circle Mars for up to 50 yrs. and a capsule that would be lowered to the surface of the planet. The orbiter would have a scientific payload up to 300 lbs. to relay information to earth for about a year. The capsule would penetrate the thin Martian atmosphere protected by a heat shield and, after landing, deploy its instruments, take soil samples, and relay the data to earth. Fellows confirmed that the interplanetary mission after Mars would be to Venus, with Jupiter next, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A10)
At a background briefing at NASA Hq. on Advanced Chemical Propulsion, Adelbert 0. Tischler, Director, Chemical Propulsion Div., NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, revealed that NASA would probably be “confined to the Saturn IB and V for the next decade.” A maneuvering vehicle would be developed sometime around 1970 but would not be available for manned use until 1975. Tischler said that an ion propulsion system would never be applicable for deep manned space flight because of “its abhorrent thrust-to-weight ratio ... it is going to take a long time to accelerate the vehicle out of Earth orbit to arrive then later at the planetary orbit, and to decelerate in the planetary orbit, and vice versa. . . .” Ion propulsion systems would be suitable for unmanned missions, however, because unmanned systems generally were small and ion systems were small; also, time was not a factor. In addition, they might be practicable as auxiliary devices for midcourse corrections 'on manned interplanetary trips. After agreeing that present planning limited the application of nuclear systems to interplanetary trips, Tischler said: “There has been, during the last two years, a real marked decline of interest . . . about exploring Venus. I don’t think that is a correct viewpoint at all. I think there is a great deal ... to learn about Venus. “We shouldn’t eliminate the possibility of some other planets. We could easily . . . visit the asteroid belt. There are some good-sized asteroids. Ceres is one of them. We could ultimately . . . land on the Moon of Jupiter with such a system. I doubt if we will undertake a landing on Jupiter until we know how to fight gravity. . . . “All of these possibilities exist. In fact, I would even mention Mars has a couple of moons that we might use to land on in preference to Mars itself.” (Transcript)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
The impact of a meteorite might have begun life on earth, Dr. Brian Mason, U.S. National Museum, told the annual meeting of the Geochemical Society of America in Kansas City. Scientists had speculated that the presence of organic compounds—substances containing carbon and nitrogen—in meteorites indicated that life exists, or had once existed, elsewhere in the universe. Mason noted that such compounds could be made without life, but added: “I believe . . . they may be a forerunner of life. A falling meteorite may be the way life got started.” Mason said that most meteorites appeared to come from the asteroid belt which orbits the sun between Mars and Jupiter. This belt might be a planet that never collected to become a single body, he suggested. Dr. Mason was conducting research on the chemical differences a man-earth environment had imposed on meteorites. (Houston Chron., 12/5/65)
Management of the Voyager landing capsule system had been assigned to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Harris M. Schur-meier, former Ranger Project Manager at Jpl, had been named Voyager System Manager. Currently in a design study phase, Voyager was planned for unmanned planetary explorations beginning with a Mars mission in 1971. (nasa Release 65-242; jpl Release 346)
Discussing the need for sustaining engineering funds for Centaur starting in fy 1966, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications: “A preliminary study and design phase is being initiated by NASA this Fiscal Year [for adaptation of the Centaur to the Saturn ib] . The primary mission for this vehicle is the Voyager. Initial studies indicate this vehicle is capable of launching a payload to Mars in excess of 8000 pounds during all of the opportunities in the 1970’s. Generally, the modifications necessary to create this stage combination are not particularly difficult. They do represent a large engineering effort, but there is nothing apparent at this time which indicates that new technologies will be required. The Centaur will be mounted, along with the Voyager, inside a fairing the size of the Saturn (260-inch diameter). By constructing this size fairing the technical problems associated with adaptation of the Centaur to this new booster are significantly reduced and the diameter required for all of the Voyager missions is obtained.” Dr. Newell described NASA’s sustaining university program as an effort “to broaden the national research base in areas of importance to the national space effort and increase our capability to replenish continually the reservoir of basic knowledge. . . . “In response to the continuing manpower requirements, NASA conducts a predoctoral training program, under which grants are made to universities to select and train outstanding students in space-related fields. Specialized training for selected students offers them identification with the national space effort, and involves them directly in the new programs of the space age. . . . “At the present time, about 1,957 students are in training at 131 institutions. The disciplines represented by these 1,957 students are distributed as follows: physical sciences, 51 percent; engineering, 37 percent; life sciences, 8 percent; behavioral sciences, 4 percent ... In September 1965, about 1,275 new students will begin their three years of study and research as NASA predoctoral trainees. At that time, 142 institutions, located in every state in the union, will be participating. With the proposed budget of $25 million for fiscal year 1966, about 1,300 new students would enter the program. Consequently, the NASA goal of an output of 1,000 Ph.D.’s per year will not be reached before fiscal year 1968 or fiscal year 1969 ... Of the students participating to date, 40 trainees have received their Ph.D. degrees. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634—35)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Pictures of Mars relayed to earth by mariner iv would be released to the public within 36 to 48 hrs. after they were taken July 14, NASA announced, mariner iv was expected to take more than 20 photographs in about 21 min. and radio them back to earth in digital form; while not as detailed as the Ranger photographs, they were expected to make a valuable contribution to space exploration. mariner iv would pass within 5,600 mi. of the planet. The pictures would be taken at somewhat greater distances while Mars was in sunlight relative to the spacecraft, fNASA Release 65-210; upi, NYT, 6/29/65)
A Centaur rocket similar to the vehicle launched successfully into a simulated lunaT-transfer trajectory Aug. 11 from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, and a model of mariner iv photographic Mars probe were being exhibited in the NASA display at Cleveland’s Natural Science Museum. NASA had contributed displays to the museum for about 10 yrs. (lrc Release 65-60)
mariner iv set world space communications distance record shortly after 3:00 a.m. EST when it reached a straight-line distance from earth of 66 million mi. Soviet scientists reported two years ago that they lost radio contact with their MARS I spacecraft March 21, 1963, after 149 days of flight at more than 65 million mi. (nasa Release 65141)
“One absolute certainty is that if the atomic bomb had not gone off at Alamogordo 20 years ago tomorrow, the spacecraft Mariner 4 would not have flown past Mars yesterday,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He continued: “Space and the atom are more closely interrelated than most people realize. We are in a space race today because—and only because—big rockets were developed by the East and West starting about 15 years ago. . . . Solely to carry atomic (and later hydrogen) warheads. There would have been no space race without big rockets because the staggering development costs for space applications alone could never have been justified. “The ‘aerospace business’ of the non-atomic ’60’s, then, would have been ‘airplane business’ pure and simple—and airplanes would be much different than they are today. There would be no ‘atomic energy industry,’ of course—and these two differences would have a measurable economic impact. Probably a million jobs nationwide depend either directly or indirectly on space and the atom. “Equally obviously, two vast bureaucracies dedicated to ‘running’ space and the atom would not exist. The Atomic Energy Commission has about 7,300 employes and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration about 33,000. Together they ‘own’ something like $18 billion worth of property.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/15/65)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of Science, editorialized: “To date the purely scientific results from our manned space program have not been impressive. With good reason, the engineering and medical aspects have been given overriding priority. In effect, our manned space program has consisted of a series of great technological stunts. . . . “Will the Space Agency be able to devise a continuing series of spectaculars of ascending dramatic quality? I think not. The first successful landing on the moon will be a climax. Just as succeeding climbs of Mt. Everest, after the first ascent, have drawn diminishing attention, later lunar travel will lose its novelty. “As for Mars, how many popular songs have been written about it? . . . More fundamental is the question, ‘How many people know where Mars is, or even care?’ Perhaps man will one day go to the planet, but the psychological and emotional impact of the trip will be pale in comparison with that of the first successful landing on the moon.” (Science, 10/29/65, 557)
Dr. N. M. Sissakian of the Soviet Academy of Sciences said in an article in Krasnaya Zvezda that the attention of Soviet biomedical researchers had been increasingly drawn to the complex effects of combinations of spaceflight factors. They were interested in the stability of cells and organisms to very low temperatures, and the effect of artificial cooling of animals on their ability to withstand oxygen deprivation, acceleration, radiation, and other factors. The ability of algae and lower animals to survive a vacuum was of interest to exobiologists, as was the ability of certain chemical compounds to screen out harmful effects of ultraviolet irradiation. As part of the continuing effort to simulate conditions existing on other planets and study their effects, soil infusoria were found able to adapt to the wide temperature range in a chamber simulating Martian atmosphere. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/3/65, 6)
mariner iv finished transmitting its 21 photographs of Mars and sent about 10 percent of a 22nd picture before its tape ran out. The later pictures were eagerly awaited by JPL scientists because they should show the dark regions of Mars that some people believed harbor life. The photos were scheduled to be released later this week. (Wash. Post, 7/25/65, A7)
A New York Times editorial by Harry Schwartz concerning Soviet-American cooperation in space: “The real issues relate to the advantages and disadvantages in the moon race itself—including, of course, its propaganda aspects. “The argument that cooperation will not mean significant savings is strongest for the immediate future, but its force weakens rapidly as one extends the time horizon of both nations’ future space efforts. Even in the next year or two both countries could gain from a full pooling of space technology and knowledge because this would reduce the number of Gemini-type flights each would have to engage in. . . . “Major cost advantages can certainly be gained by agreement on a division of labor between the Soviet Union and the United States, if it is accompanied by a decision to send mixed crews on major missions. For example, a pooling of information and resources might permit one country to focus on the hardware needed for the moon trip, while the other concentrated on the equipment needed to send men to Mars. . . . “But the major savings from real Soviet-American cooperation in space might come from another direction entirely. In both countries influential voices are urging major military efforts looking to the creation of armed national space fleets . . . The time is past due for decision between space cooperation, or the extension of a rivalry that could cost both Soviet and American peoples dearly—and perhaps not solely in terms of vast sums wasted.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/14/65, 31, 32) Dr. James H. Wakelin, Jr., president of the Scientific Engineering Institute of Boston, said in an address at the Conference: “We must look forward to undersea dwellings, laboratories and military installations in which men would live and work for the economic good and military defense of the United States.” Dr. Wakelin advised President Johnson to appoint a National Advisory Commission on the Ocean to develop a 10-yr. program for study, exploration, and use of the seas, (upi, NYT, 6/15/65, 6) Capt. Jacques-Yves Cousteau urged the organization to “preserve and protect the sea from pollution.” He also warned against conducting undersea explorations entirely with instruments and suggested: “Let us go down . . . and see for ourselves, with our eyes.” (Casey, Wash. Post, 6/16/65, A14) opening remarks, Maj. Gen. Don Ostrander, afosr Commander, said: “The purpose of these Cloudcroft meetings is to stimulate ideas—to act as an intellectual catalyst. . . . We all have a responsibility to try to understand the complex interrelationships between science and technology, and between technology and national defense; through understanding, to participate in the excitement and urgency of the creative turmoil which is such an inescapable part of the age in which we live!” Historian A. Hunter Dupree, professor of history at the Univ. of California (Berkeley) and a consultant to NASA, said that scientists with a negative attitude regarding the Nation’s manned space flight activities had a laboratory-limited view of scientific endeavor and had lost perspective of the contributions made to American and world science through exploration and survey expeditions in the field. He pointed out the relationship of the Pacific voyages of Capt. Cook to Darwin’s later theory of evolution and said: “One can as little predict the results of space exploration as Captain Cook could have predicted Darwin’s theory.” According to Dupree, it was the general expansion of knowledge that would lead to later fruitful developments. But to justify these developments immediately or to justify exploration in terms of predictable developments would be a mistake. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/16/65; afosr Release 5-65—2; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 106110) An artificial frog’s eye which could be sent to the surface of Mars to detect living organisms was described by Warren McCullough and Louis Sutro. Research had revealed there were four varieties of ganglion cells in the eye of the frog—each processing different information. The MIT scientists had proposed the following scheme to nasa: the artificial eye would be coupled to a microscope in a tiny computer. Samples of Martian soil would be seen by the frog’s eye through the microscope. When movement was detected, the eye would inform the computer, which would decide whether a picture of the moving organism should be taken for relay back to earth. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al) Theories on biological rhythms were proposed by Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. at the AFOSR seminar. He suggested that oscillations or biological rhythms were serving a fundamental function that was not yet fully identified and that all organisms undergo oscillations with a periodicity that matches that of the external world—roughly 24 hrs. Light, even in negligible amounts, could alter these oscillations. In Pittendrigh’s view, once the true face of biological clocks—time measuring mechanisms innate in all living organisms—was seen, science would have vital clues to how life developed on earth and how biological rhythms determine what it is all living things do. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/22/65, A6) Star collisions were suggested by astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. as one way that energy now associated with a host of new objects observed throughout the universe was released. He said a prime candidate for providing the right kind of environment for star collisions was elliptical galaxies. In their predeath condition, elliptical galaxies start to lose stars that comprise the galaxies. Star loss causes the galaxies to shrink and become denser. The remaining stars rush in and out through the heats of these galaxies at speeds possibly as high as 24 million mph—greatly enhancing the chance for star collisions. The effect of collisions at these speeds would be to release amounts of energy equivalent to that calculated to be stored in the quasi-stellar radio sources. Gold had not observed such star collisions, but dense regions on the “brink of destruction” had been detected. “We must inspect each in turn,” Gold said, adding, “maybe we will learn that something totally different is involved, a new type of energy source that physics doesn’t know about.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/23/65)
mariner iv successfully performed a final .tracking correction before its encounter with Mars on July 14. A preprogramed command electronically altered the look-angle of the star sensor to compensate for the changing relationship between the spacecraft, the sun, and Canopus. The star sensor must be pointed at Canopus so that the Mars probe would be properly aligned and stabilized in attitude. (nasa Release 65-198)
Dr. Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Lunar and Planetary Mission Studies, told Twin Cities aiaa Chapter in Minneapolis that NASA was “investigating and planning manned missions and experiments beyond the presently approved Gemini and Apollo programs. . . . “A logical sequence for future NASA manned space flight programs . . . begins with the Gemini and Apollo program base. The next logical development is the Apollo F.xtension System ( aes ) which is a stepping stone to advanced Earth-orbital operations, to lunar-orbital surveys, and to lunar surface exploration. The AES Earth-orbital activities are a development phase for an orbital research laboratory or early space station as well as a lunar exploration station. Based on the Apollo Command and Service module technology, we can also develop advanced logistic systems for larger orbiting space stations of indefinite life or for greater expansion of lunar exploration if desired. The advanced orbiting space station can likewise lead to an orbiting launch complex for planetary missions such as Martian flyby and exploration shelters or a lunar base for potential exploitation of the lunar environment. ... In Earth orbit, the AES can provide for experimental operations in the three major fundamental areas . . . : (1) flights to conduct scientific research in space requiring man’s presence; (2) Earth-oriented applications to increase the nation’s strength, and (3) development of advanced technology for support of both manned and unmanned space operations. ... In the field of Earth-oriented applications of manned space operations, NASA has been conducting studies and investigations jointly with the Departments of Commerce, Agriculture, Interior and Defense to determine how we might apply Apollo’s unique capabilities to improve our ability to forecast weather, to communicate globally at high data rates, to make an up-to-date inventory of the world’s resources, to monitor air and sea traffic on a global scale, to support a world-wide air-sea rescue service, to make better forecasts of food production and to provide a data-gathering system on a global scale. Experiments are also being evaluated to enhance over-all development of space operations. Biomedical, behavioral and other medical studies would be conducted as well as the development of advanced subsystems and technology for spacecraft. . . .” (Text)
Experiments at NASA Ames Research Center by Dr. John Young and Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma indicated that Mars may lie under a steady rain of edible sugars produced photochemically in the Martian atmosphere. It was speculated that the sugars and other compounds might drift to the Martian surface, seep into the soil, and form underground reservoirs of nutrients. Results of tests for survival of 50 strains of earth bacteria in simulated Martian atmosphere indicated that the strains of bacteria which form hard spores and are thus most likely to survive space flight are most sensitive to the freeze-thaw extremes of temperature that prevail on Mars. Thus, while the bacteria might survive on Mars in spore form, they would not grow there and would not contaminate the planet. Other bacteria would die en route. (S.F. Chron., 1/28/65)
The recommendation to NASA by NAS-convened study group [see Apr. 26] that Mars receive “the highest priority among all objectives in space science,” evoked editorial comment from the New York T imes : “The biological exploration of Mars will not be cheap, and available funds for scientific research and development are limited. “The likely costs and returns of the search for Martian life must be compared with those from, say, programs for stepped-up research into cancer or for building giant accelerators that would permit physicists to peer more deeply into the recesses of the atomic nucleus. That broader consideration may well suggest a less concentrated program than the scientists had recommended. “Such a decision would have the added advantage of allowing more time for an effort to make the search for Martian life a cooperative international project and not, . . . merely one more arena for the wasteful duplication that is the essence of Soviet-American space competition.” (NYT, 5/2/65)
Dr. Clyde W. Tombaugh of the New Mexico State Univ. Research Center was quoted in an editorial in the Kansas City Times as saying that the “canals” seen on Mars through telescopes were fractures of the planet’s crust. He said: “The origin may be due to asteroids impacting on the surface, much as what happens when a stone hits the windshield of a car. I think I have the right answer. . . .” (McCoy, Kansas City Times, 3/5/65)
MARINER iv’s tape recorder was turned off at the end of its second playback of the 21 pictures it took of Mars on July 14. A spokesman for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said the second run of pictures would be compared with the first as a check against possible errors in transmission and reception. No significant differences had been reported yet by scientists studying the photographs. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 8/3/65; NASA Proj. Off.)
Water could have been present on Mars during the first 3.5 billion years of the planet’s history and then disappeared before its craters were created by meteorites, said researchers Edward Anders of the Univ. of Chicago and James R. Arnold of the Univ. of California at San Diego in a report in Science. The scientists said they believed the Martian craters were only 300 to 800 million years old, compared with up to 4.5	billion years for those on the moon. They added: “. . . The crater density of Mars no longer precludes the possibility that liquid water and a denser atmosphere were present on Mars during the first 3.5	billion years of its history.” (Science, 9/24/65)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
United Press International (upi) reported that nasa had postponed until next week an attempt to have mariner iv photographic probe take pictures of the blackness of space. The pictures would provide scientists with a means of editing mariner iv’s photos of Mars. Communication problems forced the delay. (UPI, NYT, 8/27/65, 19)
We’ll be lucky if we have nuclear propulsion around 1980,” and electric propulsion is still further down the line for sometime after 1985, according to Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for research at NASA Lewis Research Center. Evvard gave his views on advanced propulsion systems at the sixth annual Space Technology Series sponsored by the Canaveral Section, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, at Brevard Engineering College, Patrick afb, Fla. A pioneer in electric propulsion and advanced nuclear rocket studies, Evvard believed such concepts should not be considered for Mars missions of under 100 flights per year. Only frequent flights would increase the need for higher specific impulse and would justify the expense, he said. Meanwhile, he predicted, chemical rockets of less than 500 sec. specific impulse would lift men to Mars, not by direct ascent but through a succession of parking orbits and assembly of hardware in space. Evvard told the meeting that since May 13, 1964, at least nine tests on Kiwi, Nerva, and Phoebus nuclear reactors had proved out a thrust greater than 50,000 lbs., at a specific impulse in excess of 750 sec. (Text)
In a luncheon address to the National Security Industrial Association in Washington, D.C., Lt. Gen. W. A. Davis (usaf), Vice Cdr. of Air Force Systems Command, discussed AFSC accomplishments in 1964:	. . Important strides were also made in the area of space. We carried out intensive studies on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). Last month the Secretary of Defense announced that proposals are being requested from industry for design studies to assist in developing the cost and technical information needed to proceed with full scale development of the MOL. Titan hi, the Standard Launch Vehicle 5A, completed two highly successful test launches. Systems Command also provided support to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This included the use of the Atlas-Agena combination to launch Ranger 7 on its successful photographic mission to the moon and Mariner 4 on its way to Mars. We also conducted the first launch of the man-rated Titan II. It was very successful. “There are a number of tasks ahead of us in space. One of our most promising present programs is the Titan ill space launching system. The Titan in will be used to launch the 24 satellites for the interim Defense Satellite Communications System. It will also be used to launch the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), which is designed to determine man’s capability to perform military functions in space. The mol will have an important bearing on our future space capabilities.” (afsc Release)	.
Photographs of Mars by mariner IV did not contradict his theory that life may exist on that planet, according to Dr. Joshua Lederberg, prof, of genetics at Stanford Univ. School of Medicine. His views were supported by Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Dr. Lederberg said important point was that “we still do not know the abundance and distribution of water on Mars. However much there is, almost all of it must be frozen.” Presence of water on Mars could be confined to frost covering the polar regions or could even be locked within the Martian crust. Pockets of water could be warmed by volcanic activity, forming pools where life could exist. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/65)
zond ill’s photographs of the hidden side of the moon received editorial comment in the New York Times: “Scientists and laymen from all nations will look forward to the pictures of the dark side of the moon that Moscow reports its Zond 3 satellite took last month. UnitI then the only photographic intelligence on the area had come from the pictures an earlier Soviet satellite took in 1959, a time when the available equipment—and consequently the quality of the result— was primitive by present standards. Six years ago' the marvel was that this feat could be accomplished at all. Now, in the wake of the photographic knowledge of the moon and of Mars obtained by this country’s Ranger and Mariner vehicles, world judgment of the importance of the Soviet accomplishment will depend upon the quality and the quantity of the new knowledge it provides.” (NYT, 8/16/65, E9)
President Lyndon B. Johnson was inaugurated. In his Inaugural Address, he said: “For every generation, there is a destiny. For some, history decides. For this generation, the choice must be our own. “Even now, a rocket moves toward Mars. It reminds us that the world will not be the same for our children, or even for ourselves in a short span of years. The next man to stand here will look out on a scene different from our own. “Ours is a time of change—rapid and fantastic change—baring the secrets of nature—multiplying the nations—placing in uncertain hands new weapons for mastery and destruction—shaking old values and uprooting old ways. . . . “Change has brought new meaning to that old mission. We can never again stand aside, prideful in isolation. Dangers and troubles we once called ‘foreign’ now live among us. If American lives must end, and American treasure be spilled, in countries we barely know, that is the price that change has demanded of conviction. “Think of our world as it looks from that rocket heading toward Mars. “It is like a child’s globe, hanging in space, the continents stuck to its side like colored maps. We are all fellow passengers on a dot of earth. And each of us, in the span of time, has only a moment among his companions. “How incredible it is that in this fragile existence we should hate and destroy one another. There are possibilities enough for all who will abandon mastery over others to pursue mastery over nature. There is world enough for all to seek their happiness in their own way. “Our own course is clear. We aspire to nothing that belongs to others. We seek no dominion over our fellow man, but man’s dominion over tyranny and misery. . . .” (Text)
NASA’s mariner iv, en route to Mars, passed the 20-million-mile mark in its distance from earth. The spacecraft was functioning normally and was transmitting data on scientific measurements taken in interplanetary space, (nasa Release 65-58)
Five lunar and Martian experts applied geological methods to interpreting Mars and the moon at the Geological Society of America Symposium in Kansas City. They found similarities between Mars and the moon: both bodies were subjected to slow erosion from showers of micrometeoroids from space; there was no evidence of surface water on either. Dr. Robert P. Sharp, Caltech, said that Martian craters were three-and-one-half times more numerous than on the lunar maria, but not as numerous as on the moon’s uplands. He believed the planet had an extremely thin atmosphere of carbon dioxide, temperatures ranging from 35° C to —100° C and no liquid water. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, related experiments on earth with features on the moon in effort to explain why the moon was being eroded. A nuclear explosion in Nevada, for example, created a meteorcrater-like hole, resulting in hundreds of secondary impact craters. “I think the surface is a fluffy material, about one meter thick, resting on the floor of small craters,” he said. “The bulk of matter is moved by the impact of small micrometeoroids. Probably a good deal of the material is melted and the melt may fly off into space.” Bruce C. Murray, Caltech, said that physical observations by studying emissions and radiation showed the moon emits light and other wave lengths in the same way that “fine, loose powder does.” He believed the outer one-half millimeter is covered with dust. Infrared heat samplings showed variations indicating a heterogenous type of rock near the surface. Dr. E. C. T. Chao, U.S. Geological Survey, discussed tektites—small, dark, glass, button-shaped objects, which he believed had been formed by meteoric impact, presumably on the moon, and had splashed off to fall on earth. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, showed a geological map of the moon with the ages of various areas in different colors. He said the Survey had mapped three million square miles in the potential landing areas on the equatorial belt. He found five different “episodes of movement” on the surface. (McCoy, Kansas City Times, 11/6/65)
usaf scientist Dr. Hubertus Strughold told the Aviation and Space Writers Meeting in Washington, D.C., that the possibility that frozen oceans beneath the surface of Mars may support life cannot be ignored. Men may even find enough moisture there to provide them water and oxygen for an expedition, “and thus a critical problem of extraterrestrial resources would no longer exist,” he said. The idea that an underground water table exists on the otherwise arid planet was only a hypothesis with no evidence at present; but a combination of older theories by other scientists plus “common horse sense” led him to speculate the water was there, Dr. Strughold said. (Text)
NASA announced it had determined the areas of Mars to be photographed by mariner iv’s tv camera during the July 14 fly-by. Recording of the first picture would occur when the spacecraft was approximately 8,400 miles above the Martian surface, mariner’s camera would be pointing at the northern Martian desert, Amazonis. The camera would then sweep southeast below the Martian equator covering the Mare Sirenum, the southern desert Phaethontis, Aonius Sinus, and into the terminator or shadow line. The spacecraft would be about 6,300 mi. above Mars for the final picture, (nasa Release 65—42)
mariner iv, 49,373,799 mi. from earth and traveling 34,738 mph relative to earth, had covered 206,868,340 mi. in its journey toward Mars at 9:00 a.m. est. (nasa Release 65-111)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
Experts had observed that some plants had an unusual ability to adapt to the most severe physical conditions, reported Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. Plants had been deprived of oxygen or supplied with very small amounts of it, had been exposed to argon or nitrogen atmospheres, and had been exposed to extreme cold in experiments which tested the effects of a simulated Martian climate on plant growth. It had been found that the cucumber, a heat-sensitive variety of plant, could withstand an argon atmosphere and frost; lettuce, tomatoes, beans, turnips, and other plants had been grown in compartments supplied with extremely small amounts of oxygen. This led to the speculation that not only lichens but small shrubs might be indigenous to Mars and that there may in fact be a rich and varied Martian flora. (Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika, 8/65, 96)
Referring to a French rocket launching site, comparable to Kennedy Space Center, that would be operating in French Guiana by 1968, Pierre J. Huss said in the New York Journal American: “French experts claim the Guiana location makes it possible to fire toward the east at an angle that makes use of the earth’s rotation speed. They say it also offers optimal conditions for launching vehicles to the moon or Mars.” (Huss, N. Y. J/Amer., 7/8/65, 9)
usaf announced a high vacuum test chamber that would simulate space environment and altitudes up to 990,000 ft. was being constructed at Wright-Patterson afb. Liquid metal system components such as space radiators, and expandable structures such as solar reflectors, would be tested in the chamber. Chicago Bridge and Iron Co. was constructing the facility, which would be completed in Sept. 1965, under a $699,780 contract awarded in Nov. 1964. (afsc Release 1.65) During March: Asked in an interview for the San Diego Union if the U.S. would succeed in landing a man on the moon in this decade, Dr. Donald F. Hornig. special assistant to President Johnson for science and technology, said: “When you lay down a schedule, it says that if everything goes as I see it, making allowances for reasonable difficulties, this is what Fll do. It’s a tight schedule and will take a lot of doing. We also have to acknowledge that unforeseen problems may arise. . . . When we started in 1961 on a nine-year program it was not wishful thinking but it was a purely paper exercise. We have slipped some on our schedules, but in a sense we have gained ground in that we have not run into any serious difficulties yet. We are now entering the hardest period of all, when the pieces begin to come out of the factory and have to be put together and tested.” Answering a query if there would be a manned expedition to Mars one day, he said: “It would be harder than going to the moon. I don’t anticipate he will go soon. But we have started the unmanned exploration. The results may whet our appetite or may prove that conditions are so inhospitable that it isn’t worth the effort.” (San Diego Union, 3/7/65)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Alfred Eggers, speaking to the Aviation Space Writers Association in Washington, D.C., said one of the basic programs now underway in oart was to establish a mission capability flexible enough to satisfy most mission requirements for the balance of the century. Describing the capability as a “platform” that could support whatever mission the Nation wanted, he cited the present indecision over the mission that should be undertaken after the lunar landing. Given the difficulty of obtaining a consensus from the American public and government in the matter, the only useful alternative was to develop such a platform. He said the present oart program would enable this country to go to Mars, Venus, the asteroids, or the moons of Jupiter before the end of the 20th century. (Text)
mariner iv, speeding toward Mars for a rendezvous in July, has knocked out the romantic notion that the ruddy planet is the site of a dying civilization millions of years older than ours and far wiser,” wrote David Dietz in the Knoxville News-Sentinel. Continuing: “This theory holds that the planet is drying out, losing its atmosphere and its water supply and that the inhabitants have taken refuge in underground cities. “Well, if this is the case, one thing is certain. The Martians forgot to take their radios with them. For the past five months, Mariner 4 has been sending a steady stream of radio chatter back to earth ... If little Mariner 4 can do that, there is no apparent reason why the Martians couldn’t do the same, providing, of course, that there are Martians of superior intelligence.” (Dietz, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/21/65)
Refined data on Martian atmosphere’s density, ionization, and composition, based on analysis of radio signals from mariner IV during its occultation experiment, were reported by scientists at American Geophysical Union meeting held at Southern Methodist Univ., Dallas, Tex. Martian atmosphere was now thought to be much thinner than previously believed: it now seemed that air pressure at Martian surface was only about one-5,000th that of earth. Theory that Martian atmosphere was more dense at heights of 25 mi. or more above the surface than earth’s at comparable elevations was not upheld; observations reported today indicated Martian atmosphere was thinner than earth’s at all elevations. Temperature was about —250° at location of maximum ionization in Martian atmosphere (78-mi. altitude, about one-fourth the expected height). In earth’s ionosphere, temperature is higher than 2,200° F. Atmospheric composition that would account for the mariner iv observations, the scientists said, would be largely carbon dioxide. (Earth-based observations of Mars had shown the presence of carbon dioxide in its atmosphere.) Only scant amount of carbon dioxide is present in earth’s nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere. The scientists making this report were Dr. A. J. Kliore of jpl and Dr. Von R. Eshleman of Stanford Univ. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/4/65,1,12)
Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), interviewed by a group of women correspondents, was critical of the Administration’s failure to “pinpoint” objectives beyond its 1970 goal to put a man on the moon. She said she found it “hard to believe” the Administration wasn’t thinking beyond the moon to Mars and Venus but that “it’s difficult to get the answers.” (Dean, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/65)
Editorial comment on the successful transmission to earth of pictures of Mars taken by mariner iv: “There is something absolutely staggering about the idea of a piece of machinery from this country’s workshops finding its way to Mars and then pausing on schedule to make picture signals which bounce back here 12 minutes later. “Such a feat cheers up the most confirmed pessimist. After all, if man has the genius to reach back and forth into the universe, surely he will discover a way for peoples, nations and ideologies to live and survive together back here on this insignificant little planet.” (Wash. Post, 7/18/65) “Though all its findings are not yet in, it is already clear that Mariner 4’s historic journey to Mars is the most successful and most important experiment man has yet conducted in space, as well as one of the most brilliant engineering and scientific achievements of all time. “The triumph scored by mariner 4 in this first successful attempt at the exploration of Mars emphasizes a point suggested by the earlier achievements of instrumented probes, notably the Ranger photographic voyages to the moon. That point is that a great deal of scientific information about earth’s nearest neighbors in the solar system can be obtained relatively cheaply and without risk to human life by utilizing fully the potentialities of existing instruments. Cameras and other research devices can undoubtedly be placed in orbit about or landed softly on the surfaces of the moon and nearby planets. And intensive exploitation of the capabilities of unmanned rockets can make far safer the ultimate dispatch of man into far distant space.” (NYT, 7/16/65)
Pictures of Mars taken by mariner iv during the July 14 flyby received editorial comment in the Washington Post: “. . . If some people are disappointed because Mariner 4 did not produce any conclusive documentation on the existence of the long-suspected life on Mars, it should be remembered that this was not one of Mariner 4’s objectives. Even the Tiros, circling earth at far less distance from its surface than Mariner 4 was from Mars, has indicated only once in the thousands of pictures taken that the life we know exists here actually can be spotted from far out in space.” (Wash. Post, 7/31/65) During July: The support of science in the U.S. was discussed by Dael Wolfle in the Scientific American: “From 1953 until 1960 about 8 percent of the Nation’s research and development budget was devoted to basic research. The percentage has been rising since 1960, reaching almost 12 percent in 1965. As for the Federal Government’s funds, in 1953, less than 7 percent went for basic research. The figure has been rising since 1960, to about 11 percent in 1965. The universities are relatively much more prominent in basic research than in the total research and development effort, being responsible for almost half of all basic research. In contrast the industrial laboratories, which dominate in development activity, conduct only about a fourth of the basic research.” (CR, 7/14/65, A3760-61)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, director of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona and principal scientific investigator on the Ranger project, replied to Robert C. Cowen’s article, “Was the Ranger Worth the Cost?”, which appeared in the Christian Science Monitor Nov. 18. Mr. Co wen had raised four principal questions: (1) Was the recent ranger vii mission scientifically justifiable? (2) Was it well planned and executed? (3) Were the results up to expectations? (4) Where do we go from here? Dr. Kuiper said in letter to CSM: “Ranger was the U.S. pioneering program of deep-space research and accomplished much more than getting the 4,300 lunar photographs. It established the worth and feasibility of the ‘parking orbit’ and other concepts of space ballistics, power supply, and communication, as well as preparation for Mars and Venus probes. . . . The cost of the 4,300 lunar records is therefore not the full $270 million (which moreover includes Rangers vm and ix, not yet flown) but, say, $50-$100 million. No ground-based effort, even with the 300-400-inch telescope costing over $100 million, would, even in the absence of our disturbing atmosphere, have yielded 100th of the magnification (resolution) obtained in Ranger vii. I definitely know of no better and cheaper way to get high-resolution photographs. . . .” In a reply to Dr. Kuiper, Mr. Cowen quoted from a letter by Dr. Andrew T. Young of Harvard College Observatory and published in Science:	. . It is clear that there are some things that can only be learned above the atmosphere, and it is important that we have a program directed at learning them. . . . [But] many things that can be learned from above the atmosphere can also be learned, much more cheaply, by ground-based techniques. For example, some of the most convincing evidence for life on Mars is based on a few hours of twilight observations with the 200-inch telescope. . . . But the 200-inch telescope has been available for planetary research only a few times, generally during daylight or twilight. . . . Rocket-borne research involves many costly failures, but a duplicate 200-inch telescope could easily be built and staffed for the $28 million that Ranger 7 alone cost. . . .”	(CSM, 1/4/65)
Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “A strong smell of sour grapes is beginning to emanate from the Soviet propaganda machine with its waspish comments on recent U.S. space achievements. . . . “This . . . was evident in the Soviet propaganda barrage aimed at the Gemini 5 flight when it became apparent that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad would surpass the world space flight endurance record set by Soviet Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky in June 1963. Tass . . . charged that U.S. space officials were endangering the lives of the two Gemini Astronauts by keeping them in flight after the initial fuel cell problems in a supposedly rash effort to surpass the Soviet mark. Red Star, the official Defense Ministry newspaper, joined in by ‘exposing’ the Gemini 5 flight as a Pentagon plot to develop better space reconnaissance techniques and charged the peaceful scientific aims of space exploration were being subverted in Gemini by its military experiments. . . . “What is really significant about these Soviet sour grapes is that they reflect a realization that the USSR has been overtaken and is being passed in the space race by the U.S. program. The U.S. superiority in unmanned space probes has become clearly recognized by the world with the Ranger lunar pictures and the Mars data from Mariner 4. Gemini 4 and 5 finally erased the Soviet lead in the manned space flight. The solid operational foundation of the Gemini program has made possible the swift and sure pace which promises to eclipse significantly the Voskhod flights in the immediate future. . . .” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 21)
A new theory stating that molecules adsorb on the surfaces of ionic (electrically-charged) surfaces by unbalanced electrical fields of force had been developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory under sponsorship of the NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, NASA announced. Knowledge of the exact mechanics of gas adsorption would be vitally important in innumerable scientific, industrial, and medical fields. (NASA Release 65-340) During October: jpl Director William H. Pickering, describing mariner iv’s Mars mission in Astronautics and Aeronautics, wrote: “This mission has proven to be of immense scientific and engineering importance. New scientific information is now available on regions of the solar system never before penetrated with instruments. Observations from the vicinity of Mars suggest entirely new concepts about the nature of that planet. Spacecraft performance has shown our ability to design and construct a remotely operated device of astonishing complexity. Its continued operation establishes a standard of reliability seldom, if ever, attained. Even maintaining two-way communications over distances exceeding 100-million mi. remarkably demonstrates advances in communication technology which were not thought possible a decade ago. “The design concepts underlying Mariner date back to 1959 when the Jet Propulsion Laboratory began the Vega program. In 1960, Vega was modified to become Ranger. The Mariner series took its present form in 1961, when a mission to Venus was planned for the planetary opportunity in August 1962. . . .” (Pickering, A&A, 10/1965,20-21)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
Second XB-70a research bomber underwent a 10-min. heat-friction test from Edwards afb withstanding 530°C heat at 1,900 mph at 70,000 ft. The air inlets control system was also tested at twice the speed of sound at 63,000 ft. in the 145-min. flight, (ap, NYT, 12/23/65, 43) December 22: NASA deferred the first unmanned Voyager planetary exploration mission until 1973 and scheduled one 1967 Mariner flight to Venus and two 1969 Mariner flights to Mars. First Voyager mission had been planned to orbit Mars in 1971 and a second to orbit and land instrumented capsules in 1973; no further Mariner missions had been scheduled. Changes in the planetary exploration program were being made to obtain the greatest possible return from funds available for FY 1966, those anticipated for fy 1967, and from information available from previous missions, (nasa Release 65-389)
mariner tv approached within 5.500 mi. of Mars and took the first close-up pictures in history of that planet. At 10:28 a.m, edt, a signal from the tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, had commanded mariner iv to turn on the encounter equipment. Obeying the command 12 min. later—the time it took the signal to reach the spacecraft across 134,000,000 mi.— mariner iv’s scan platform with TV cameras and two Mars sensors began searching for the planet; the tape recorder began a 10-hr. warmup. By 1:10 p.m., the spacecraft’s sensors had found the proper angle from which to photograph Mars. On orders from JPL, the Johannesburg tracking station ordered the camera and its light sensor to stop the scan at 7/10 of a degree of the optimum aiming point. Throughout the day, the spacecraft continued transmitting scientific and engineering information via the telemetry system. At 7:50 p.m., the Mars probe made its first “sighting” contact with the planet. The telemetry system then shifted and began sending only information from the scientific experiments. At 8:20 p.m. edt, the first light from Mars struck the light sensor aligned with the camera and the 25-min. picture-taking sequence began. 21 frames were exposed and recorded on magnetic tape to be telemetered to earth over a 10-day period. Transmission of each picture would require 8 hrs. 25 min. Near the end of the fly-by, signals received at Goldstone tracking station had indicated a malfunction in the tape system. Telemetry received after the pass, however, showed no indication that trouble had occurred. At 10:12, mariner iv flew behind Mars, remained obscured for 53 min., and re-emerged beyond the planet, its transmitter beaming radio signals through the Martian atmosphere. From this occultation experiment, scientists might be able to gauge the depth, thickness, and component gases of Mars’ atmosphere by measuring how much these signals were bent and their speeds changed. Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, told a news conference that signals indicated all instruments on the spacecraft had performed properly during the flyby, (nasa Release 65-227; Sullivan, NYT, 7/15/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/15/65; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/15/65) July 14: A 44-day test of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Environment Simulator (Ses) had just ended, gsfc announced. In this project, the early performance of a scientific spacecraft in orbit around the earth was compared to the performance of a sister craft “orbited” inside the Ses: the uk-d scientific spacecraft—backup model for ARIEL II (uk-ii) launched successfully into earth orbit by U.K. March 27, 1964—was “flown” inside the Ses; flight plan for UK-D followed general flight plan of initial flight days of ARIEL n. Preliminary data indicated operation of the Ses was good throughout the test period. The spacecraft inside the simulator even experienced the same minor malfunction its sister spacecraft had experienced in orbit, (gsfc Release G-17-65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at the dedication of the Space Science Laboratory at Univ. of Chicago, said: “The space effort is really a research and development competition—a competition for technological pre-eminence, which demands and creates the quest for excellence. . . . Should we fall behind in the area of space technology, we would jeopardize our ability to progress, on earth as well as in space. At stake is the technological balance of power in the world. . . . “The influence of our technological progress and prowess is and has been the deciding factor in keeping the peace; technological and scientific capabilities constitute a basic source of national power. Preeminence in the field is an instrument in international relations, and influences our dealings with other nations involving peace and freedom in the world. . . . “By mastering the restrained but decisive use of the power that modern science and technology give us, we are providing the Nation with the capability to achieve greater cooperation toward a world consistent with the ideals we seek for others as well as ourselves. . . .” (Text) nasa still assumed that life on Mars was possible, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, JPL, said at the dedication. Although photographs relayed by MARINER IV had indicated Mars was extremely cold and lacked oxygen and water vapor, some terrestrial organisms might live comfortably in this environment, he said. Horowitz felt that the unexplained seasonal color changes in the dark regions of Mars might indicate plant growth. (Kotulak, Chic. Trib., 10/14/65)
A warning that “In looking for life on Mars we could establish for ourselves the reputation of being the greatest Simple Simons of all time” came from Dr. Philip H. Abelson in an editorial in Science. Dr. Abelson was editor of the magazine and director of the Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory. He said he did not believe that life, particularly life resembling that on earth, would be found on Mars and proposed “a few inexpensive experiments” on earth to save years, billions of dollars, and the possibility of “considerable eventual disappointment” if the search for life on Mars should prove fruitless. Attempts to sterilize spacecraft to prevent them from carrying earth organisms to Mars might add “many years and billions of dollars” to the cost, the editorial said. It suggested, instead, careful selection of experiments to be sent to Mars and “relatively inexpensive studies here on earth” to determine whether sterilization were really necessary. (Clark, NYT, 2/13/65; Wash. Post, 2/13/65) During February: Dr. Leo Steg, manager of General Electric Co.’s Space Sciences Laboratory, Missile and Space Div., was named Engineer of the Year—1964. He was cited for outstanding contributions to the advancement of space science and the engineering profession. The award was presented by an amalgamation of 41 societies during the 1965 National Engineers’ Week in Philadelphia. (Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 13)
Dr. Barry Commoner, professor of plant physiology at Washington Univ. in St. Louis and chairman of the aaas Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human Welfare, told Aviation Week and Space Technology that the question of the probability of finding life on Mars had not been “fully and fairly aired,” and that an “overbalance of the positive viewpoint has been presented to Congress and the public by NASA officials.” Dr. Commoner said that if asked his views on Voyager as a tax-paying citizen, his feeling would be that “the value of pursuing a program to find life on Mars at this time is not worth the $1.25 billion to be invested because the problem of finding life there has not been adequately explored.” He had made similar charges in a speech at the aaas meeting last December in Montreal. Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, was reported by Aviation Week and Space Technology as listing six major points in defending NASA’s position regarding Mars exploration: (1) Numerous competent scientists had said there was little liquid water on Mars and that the planet had a dry, dusty surface with high ultraviolet radiation. Changing patterns on the planet indicated some form of seasonal change, however. (2) With the evidence at hand, it was not possible to say there was life on Mars, only that life might be there. (3) If there were life on Mars it might be similar to basic life forms on earth. (4) The only reasonable approach we could take to the exploration of Mars would be to make sure we looked for life before the planet was contaminated from earth. If life was not found on Mars, it still would be valuable to determine how far the planet’s chemical processes had progressed toward life formation. (5) The Voyager program had not been sold to Congress on the basis that there was life on Mars. It has been pointed out during budget hearings that there might not be life on the planet but nobody could responsibly take the position that there wasn’t. Therefore, the early emphasis of Project Voyager was on bioscience. (6) The Mars exploration was part of an overall program to explore the solar system, including the moon, comets, and other planets. Mars happened to be the planet NASA was focusing its attention on because it would be in the optimum launch position through the mid-1970’s. (Av. Wk., 1/4/65, 18)
Photographs of Mars returned by NASA mariner iv showed surface features which could be interpreted as possible Martian canals, wrote Eric Burgess, a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in London in a letter to the Society. Burgess interpreted a dark, 30-mi.-wide streak shown on photograph No. 11 as a rift valley. This surface feature occurred at the same location on Mars where some astronomers claimed to have seen canals. Burgess said the photograph revealed that the escarpments passed through the rim of a large lOO-mi.-wide Martian crater, indicating that this particular rift valley appeared after the formation of the crater. (L.A. Times, 8/16/65)
A detailed report on the progress of the Mars-bound mariner IV spacecraft was presented at annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C.: mariner iv, launched Nov. 28, 1964, was on course to fly by Mars shortly after 9 p.m. edt on July 14. Four of mariner iv’s six experiments were still working well. The ionization experiment had ceased to function and data from the solar plasma probe were only partially interpretable. At 3 p.m., mariner iv was 58,176,037 mi. from the earth. It had traveled 221,330,000 mi. on its journey of 325 million miles. mariner iv had returned a considerable amount of scientific data. A cosmic ray telescope aboard the 575-lb. spacecraft had, for example, “observed” more solar protons than alpha particles from the sun. John A. Simpson of Univ. of Chicago said this indicated there was a “different kind of mechanism operating on the sun for accelerating these particles in space.” A report from a team of scientists from NASA GSFC and Temple Univ. indicated that mariner iv was encountering increasing amounts of cosmic dust as it moved further away from the sun. mariner iv’s cosmic dust detector had been hit 95 times. Dr. James A. Van Allen predicted that if Mars had a magnetic field no stronger than '/sod1 the intensity of the earth’s, MARINER iv would detect it in July. Richard Sloan of JPL said he and his colleagues planned to try to establish a radio lock with mariner iv in September 1967 after it had journeyed through space and come back to within 40-50 million miles of earth, (nasa Releases 65-117, 65-117-A, 65-117-B, 65-117-C, 65-117-D, 65-117-E, 65—117-F; Transcript)
A 37-man study group chaired by Dr. Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. and convened by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences at the request of NASA had reconfirmed the Academy’s appeal for exploration of Mars to receive “the highest priority among all objectives in space science—indeed in the space program as a whole” and endorsed NASA plans to use the 1969-73 favorable Mars window for intensive study of the planet with the Voyager spacecraft. In its final report transmitted to NASA Administrator Webb, the group said that “given all evidence presently available, we believe it entirely reasonable that Mars is inhabited with living organisms and that life independently originated there,” and thus that “the biological exploration of Mars is a scientific undertaking of the greatest validity and significance.” The panel noted, however, that “while we are eager to press Martian exploration as expeditiously as the technology and other factors permit, we insist that our recommendation to proceed is subject to one rigorous qualification: that no viable terrestrial microorganisms reach the Martian surface until we can make a confident assessment of the consequences.” The group made seven basic recommendations: (1) “every opportunity for remote observation of Mars by earth-bound or ballon-and satellite-borne instruments should be exploited”; (2) “. . . An adequate program for Martian exploration cannot be achieved without using scientific payloads substantially larger than those currently employed in outer unmanned space research program. . . . We see very substantial advantages in the use, from the onset, of the new generation of large boosters which are expected to become operational toward the end of the decade”; (3) since flyby missions “yield at best a fleeting glimpse of the planet” and carry a relatively small array of instruments, “we deliberately omit an explicit recommendation in favor of any flyby missions additional to those already executed or planned”; (4)	“Every effort should be made to achieve a large orbiting mission by 1971 at the latest. This mission should precede the first lander. . . . By ‘large’ we mean a scientific payload that would include instrumentation for infrared and television mapping, microwave radiometry and bistatic radar, infrared spectrometry, and optical polarimetry”; (5)	“The first landing mission should be scheduled no later than 1973 and by 1971 if possible” and will “ultimately demand a large lander” like Abl (Automated Biological Lab) ; (6) “The task of designing an Abl should be initiated immediately as a continuing project”; and (7) to maintain “a continuing dialogue among all potential investigators and the engineers responsible for implementing their scientific goals,” the Academy’s Space Science Board should have a standing committee, (nas Release; Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/26/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/26/65, 2; Sullivan, NYT, 4/27/65, 1)
President Johnson signed into law the High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 (pl 89—220) in White House ceremony. He said: “. . . In recent decades, we have achieved technological miracles in our transportation. But there is one great exception. “We have airplanes which fly three times faster than sound. We have television cameras that are orbiting Mars. But we have the same tired and inadequate mass transportation between our towns and cities that we had 30 years ago. “Today ... an astronaut can orbit the earth faster than a man on the ground can get from New York to Washington. Yet, the same science and technology which gave us our airplanes and our space probes, I believe, could also give us better and faster and more economical transportation on the ground. And a lot of us need it more on the ground than we need it orbiting the earth. . . . “The High-Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 really gives us, for the first time in history, a coordinated program for improving the transportation system that we have today, and making it a better servant to our people. . . .”	( Text, Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 329-30)
Detection of the existence of life on Mars could be accomplished by a manned Mars-orbit mission without the necessity of a Mars landing, according to two NASA Ames Research Center officials in a Copley News Service interview'. Alvin Seiff, Chief of Ames’ Vehicle Environment Div., and David E. Reese, Jr., Assistant Chief of that division, said life on Mars could be detected from as far away as “several hundred thousand feet” from the planet’s surface. “We think we could get good accuracy during even hypersonic flight around Mars. . . . We don’t need to land men on Mars to find out what goes on there. We can find out about its atmosphere and whether life exists there through the use of a variety of instruments we now have at hand,” Seiff said. Seiff and Reese were in Denver attending aas Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System. (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 2/10/65)
NASA had compromised the scientific value of the interplanetary research program by spending too little on the Deep Space Net communications system, according to Frank Drake, prof, at Cornell Univ., in Saturday Review article. Drake noted that mariner IV would only be able to relay 22 photos of Mars back to earth and that these would be of lesser quality—all because of communications limitations: “. . . one concludes that the space program could well use an array containing a hundred or more 85-ft. antennas. One array might cost $40,000,000, still only a few per cent of what will almost certainly be spent on planetary exploration in the next ten years.” (SR, 1/2/65)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 155.5 km. (96.6 mi.) The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Because of an attitude control system failure no experimental results were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Studies carried out under NASA contract by the Union Carbide Research Institute had demonstrated the ability of many life forms to adjust to at least partial Martian conditions. It had also been demonstrated that lack of oxygen produced surprising results: turtles with little or no blood; plants that could endure lower temperatures than plants raised in normal air. Such temperature resistance would be an advantage on a cold planet like Mars. Dr. Sanford M. Siegel disclosed these findings during a press tour of Union Carbide and said that if earth life could withstand Martian conditions so well, Martian life, if there ever had been any, must have been able to evolve to cope with the situation there. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/1/65)
U.S.S.R.’s zond ii would pass within 900 mi. of Mars on Aug. 6, according to Soviet space scientist Prof. Mstislav Keldysh. This announcement was relayed by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, who quoted Keldysh as saying ZOND II weighed about 2,000 lbs. Dr. Sheldon speculated that the probe’s considerable weight—four times more than mariner iv—could mean “it may be doing something more than a simple fly-by” of Mars, (upi, Denver, Post 3/10/65; upi, NYT, 3/11/65, 42)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant mission results: “U.S. scientific satellites achieved the following firsts: discovery of the radiation belt, determination of the earth’s irregular geoid, ionospheric topside sounding (with Canada), solar spectroscopy, x-ray and ultraviolet satellite astronomy, polar orbits, and highly eccentric orbits to map the earth’s magnetosphere. Our deep space probes achieved the first successful direct monitoring of the interplanetary environment, the first lunar surface detail, and the first successful flight to Venus. We may soon achieve the first successful flight to Mars, if mariner iv completes its mission. In launch vehicle development, this program has yielded the first rocket stage using the high energy propellant combination of hydrogen and oxygen. It has also yielded the first and only all solid propellant space booster. U.S. meteorological satellites have yielded the following firsts: daylight cloud photography, night cloud observations including surface and cloud top temperatures, world cloud coverage, global heat balance and stratospheric temperature measurements, and direct cloud picture transmission to local users. Our communication satellites have been first in the following achievements: erection of large structures in space and their use as passive reflectors of radio signals; active repeating of radio signals at various altitudes and orbits of interest to system designers; transoceanic and intercontinental relay of teletype, facsimile, voice, data, and television; and achievement of the first true geostationary orbit. “The specific record of 1964 space missions of the Space Science and Applications Program ... is particularly informative because most major program areas achieved at least one highly significant success in 1964. Of the 10 scientific satellite missions attempted, 7 achieved full success and 2 partial success.” Dr. Newell observed that syncom ill communications satellite had been placed in a “virtually perfect circular equatorial orbit,” then maneuvered “to within about 1 mile of its station over the western Pacific where it successfully performed all its planned experiments. . . . The Syncom maneuver was comparable to the feat of Ranger VII in flying to within 6 miles of its target on the Moon. “Having completed our experiments with Syncoms II and III, we are turning them over to the Department of Defense. ... If required, full-time communications could be provided between the United States and southeast Asia by Syncom m. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 136-62)
“A manned expedition to Mars within 15 years seems entirely feasible,” North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information Systems Div. President Harrison Storms told William Hines of the Washington Evening Star. In charge of building the spacecraft for the Apollo moon landings, Storms offered an approximate timetable for a Mars expedition: “Start planning for it in 1970, start cutting metal in 1975 and go in 1980.” A recent report from the National Academy of Sciences had suggested 1985 as a feasible target date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
“On Wednesday, if all goes well, one of the epoch-making experiments in the history of science will take place as mariner iv comes within 6,000 miles of Mars and takes pictures for transmission back to earth. Not since Galileo first trained his telescope on the moon has there been such a prospect for a quantum leap in man’s knowledge of a nearby world. “Whatever the results of the picture-taking experiment, the accomplishments of mariner iv are already historic. Launched last Nov. 28, it has traversed a preassigned course for more than seven months. During this time it has flown roughly 350,000,000 mi. while communicating back to earth new scientific data as well as a steady flow of information on its flight and its internal condition. This performance far exceeds all similar earlier feats. “For comparison we may note that mariner ii—justly famed for its flight past Venus in 1962—needed to fly only three and a half months and 180 million miles to reach its objective. And while mariner II sets a record signalling to earth from a distance of 53.9 million miles away, mariner iv has recently been transmitting from the neighborhood of Mars, now over 130,000,000 miles distant from this planet.” (NYT, 7/11/65, E10)
Dr. Roman Smoluchowski of Princeton Univ. said at the American Physical Society’s meeting in Washington, D.C., that there was no life on Mars. All seasonal changes in the color of the planet could be traced to bombardment of minerals with energetic radiation under varying temperatures. Dr. Jane Blizard of Boulder, Colo., also speaking at the APS meeting, suggested that any astronaut braving a 400-day journey to Mars would be likely to get a fatal dose of radiation. Maybe, she said, long range forecasting of solar storms can be perfected in time. Or maybe “superconductive magnetic doughnuts” could be devised to shield spacecraft from barrages of protons spewed out in solar storms. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/65)
At aiaa/aflc/asd Support for Manned Flight Conference in Dayton, Ohio, Temple W. Neumann of Philco Corp. reviewed studies of manned Mars missions and discussed the importance of “early biological precursor missions” to Mars. He concluded: “It has been shown that the lack of biological, as well as critical environmental, data about Mars can have important ramifications in not only the cost, but possibly even in the feasibility of performing early manned missions to Mars. The importance of preliminary knowledge about the interaction of possible Martian organisms with man and his equipment has been shown to significantly affect surface operations, decontamination requirements, and equipment reliability. Further, the need for some preliminary data about the nature of Martian organisms is necessary in order to intelligently design an experimental program for use by the first manned landing expedition. The conclusion can therefore be supported that a precursor biological mission, such as that represented by the current ABL studies, is mandatory in the early 1970 time period if manned missions are to make effective use of the mid-1980 launch opportunities.” (Text, aiaa Paper 65-249)
usaf successfully launched its first Minuteman ICBM of 1965 from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. The missile was sent on a 5,000-mi. course toward a target in the Pacific, (upi, L.A. Herald Examiner, 1/21/65) January 21:	mariner IV completed nearly one-quarter of its 7%-mo. journey to Mars and was more than 10 million mi. from earth. The craft was traveling 10,680 mph relative to the earth; velocity relative to the sun was 68,255 mph; total distance traveled was over 93 million mi. After 54 days in space, all systems were functioning normally except the solar plasma probe which ceased returning intelligible data one week after launch, (nasa Release 65-17)
Dr. Robert B. Leighton, Cal Tech professor, summarized the results of the mariner IV mission to President Johnson in a White House ceremony during which the remaining photos transmitted by the spacecraft were presented to the President and the Nation. Dr. Leighton said: “Man’s first close-up look at Mars has revealed the scientifically startling fact that at least part of its surface is covered with large craters. . . . “The existence of Martian craters is demonstrated beyond question; their meaning and significance is, of course, a matter of interpretation. The seventy craters clearly distinguishable on Mariner photos Nos. 5 through 15, range in diameter from three to 75 miles. It seems likely that smaller craters exist, and there also may be still larger ones than those photographed, since the Mariner photographs, in total, sampled only about one percent of the Martian surface. “The observed craters have rims rising a few hundred feet above the surrounding surface and depths of a few thousand feet below the rims. Crater walls so far measured seem to slope at angles up to about 10 degrees. “The number of large craters per unit area on the Martian surface is closely comparable to the densely cratered upland areas of the Moon.” Dr. Leighton said that no earth-like features were recognized and that clouds “were not identified and the flight path did not cross either polar cap.” Some of the fundamental inferences drawn from the MARINER IV photos were: “1. In terms of its evolutionary history, Mars is more Moon-like than Earth-like. Nonetheless, because it has an atmosphere, Mars may shed much light on early phases of Earth’s history. “2. Reasoning by analogy with the Moon, much of the heavily cratered surface of Mars must be very ancient—perhaps two to five billion years old. “3. The remarkable state of preservation of such an ancient surface leads us to the inference that no atmosphere significantly denser than the present very thin one has characterized the planet since that surface was formed. Similarly, it is difficult to believe that free water in quantities sufficient to form streams or to fill oceans could have existed anywhere on Mars since that time. The presence of such amounts of water (and consequent atmosphere) would have caused severe erosion over the entire surface. “4. The principal topographic features of Mars photographed by Mariner have not been produced by stress and deformation originating within the planet, in distinction to the case of the Earth. Earth is internally dynamic giving rise to mountains, continents, and other such features, while evidently Mars has long been inactive. The lack of internal activity is also consistent with the absence of a significant magnetic field on Mars as was determined by the Mariner magnetometer experiment. “5. As we had anticipated, Mariner photos neither demonstrate nor preclude the possible existence of life on Mars. The search for a fossil record does appear less promising if Martian oceans never existed. On the other hand, if the Martian surface is truly in its primitive form, the surface may prove to be the best—perhaps the only —place in the solar system still preserving clues to original organic development, traces of which have long since disappeared from Earth.” Dr. Leighton noted that “one of the most difficult problems associated with the Mariner photographic mission to Mars was the wide illumination range” that was encountered. Assisting Dr. Leighton in his presentation were: Prof. Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech; Prof. Robert P. Sharp, Cal Tech; Richard K. Sloan, jpl; and J. Denton Allen, jpl. President Johnson said he was a bit relieved that mariner’s photographs “didn’t show more signs of life out there.” He described the Mars pictures as “awe-inspiring” and said that “the flight of Mariner 4 will stand as one of the great advances of man’s quest to extend the horizons of human knowledge.” President Johnson presented the following awards: to Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPL, the NASA Distinguished Service Medal; to Jack N. James, Assistant Director of jpl for Lunar and Planetary Projects, the NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement; and to Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, the NASA Medal of Outstanding Leadership. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 7/30/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 7/30/65, Al, A3)
According to Dr. Colin Pittendrigh, Dean of the Graduate School and biology professor at Princeton Univ., mariner iv photographs of Mars did not provide any new evidence that life could not exist on that planet. Even though Mars appeared virtually waterless in the photographs, he pointed out, the area photographed was only a small fraction of the planet’s total area. “A scan across our Atlantic Ocean might lead some to say there is no land on earth.” (ap, Miami Her., 9/19/65)
Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill, Dr. Rolf H. Dyce, and Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., reported to the meeting of the American Geophysical Union that through radar studies with Cornell’s l,000-ft.-diameter radiotelescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, they had found an apparent “flat spot” on the planet Mars that seemed to correspond to markings seen there through telescopes. They also reported that radar observations indicated the planet Mercury rotated on its own axis once each 54 to 64 days, exposing all sides to the sun in a year. Its full day, corresponding to a 24-hr. earth cycle, would be about 180 earth days long. It was inconclusive whether Mercury rotated in the opposite direction from its orbit—a retrograde rotation—or in the same direction as its orbit—a direct rotation. Dr. Gold also speculated that Mercury could not have been in its present orbit for much longer than 400 million years. Otherwise, he postulated, the sun would have held the planet over a long enough period of time to force it into a synchronous or 88-day rotation. This suggested to Gold that Mercury might once have been a moon of Venus but broke away or was tugged away to establish its own orbit around the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/65; Clark, NYT, 4/21/65, 17; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/21/65)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, Voyager project manager at jpl, told the Christian Science Monitor in an interview that NASA had decided to launch the Voyager spacecraft with the Saturn V booster instead of the Saturn IB. “This,” Dr. Burcham said, “means we can put a heavier retro-rocket pack on the spacecraft. It will enable us to release the lander after the spacecraft has gone into orbit around Mars instead of 10 days before reaching the planet, as planned earlier, and that will give us a better chance of putting a lander on the surface.” (Cowen, CSM, 12/1/65)
William Hines, science writer and columnist for the Washington Evening Star, was presented the AAAs’s top award for science writing in 1965 at the Association’s annual meeting in Berkeley, Calif. His award-winning entry was a series of articles on the journey of mariner iv to Mars. The articles appeared from Nov. 6, 1964, to Aug. 12, 1965. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/65, A2)
Soviet astronomer Sofia Kozlovskaya reported at the All-Union Conference on Planetary Cosmogony in Moscow that the density of matter on Mars and Venus was greater than that on earth: matter of Venus had approximately two per cent more iron; Mars had approximately six to eight per cent more iron than earth. In making these calculations, Sofia Kozlovskaya used a new “more exact model of the earth” which she had built with the data from recent seismic observations. (Tass, 7/20/65)
mariner IV had functioned in space for more than 1,100 hr. on its 6,000-hr. flight to Mars, and had flown 81.3 million mi., leaving some 245 million mi. to be travelled before the spacecraft would encounter Mars next July. The earth-MARiNER distance was 8,342,946 mi. at 9 a.m. EST with the spacecraft travelling 9,276 mph relative to the earth and 69,462 mph relative to the sun. (nasa Release 65-12, 1/14/65)
Alternate methods for re-establishing communications with mariner IV on its next closest approach to earth around Sept. 4, 1967, were being considered by Mariner project planners at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported: (1) attempted reacquisition beginning in early February 1967, making use of the spacecraft’s high-gain directional antenna to obtain data from the spacecraft for up to 10 mo.; (2) reliance solely on mariner iv’s low-gain antenna for transmission, permitting two-way communications for four to six weeks around September 1967. In the 10-mo. plan, reacquisition would be initiated when the spacecraft was about 135 million mi. from earth. Due to relative sun-earth positions in February 1967, the angle at which the high-gain directional antenna would be permanently fixed would enable it to' be aimed at the earth by having mariner iv roll about its longitudinal axis, which would be pointed at the sun. The 100-kw. transmitter at Goldstone tracking station would send the necessary commands to mariner iv. In the latter plan, use of the 210-ft. antenna, expected to become operational at Goldstone in January 1966, could extend reception of intelligible telemetry signals to as long as six weeks, compared with four using the standard 85-ft. dishes of the Deep Space Network. W. A. Collier, assistant Mariner project manager at jpl, told Aviation Week that mariner iv would be of particular scientific interest in 1967. First, there were no other interplanetary probes being sent away from the sun at that period. Second, when mariner iv passed within 6,000 mi. of Mars July 14, the gravitational pull of the planet had tilted the plane of the spacecraft out of the plane of the ecliptic. mariner iv, 5.3 million mi. above the ecliptic in September 1967, would give scientists their first chance to compare interplanetary findings outside this plane with those obtained in it. Preliminary estimates were that the 10-mo. plan would cost between $5 million and $15 million, while the four-to-six-week project would cost less than $1 million. mariner iv, launched Nov. 28, 1964, was in solar orbit with a period of 567.11 days, perihelion of 103.1 million mi., and aphelion of 146.2 million mi. (Watkins, Av. Wk., 8/2/65, 32)
mariner iv was performing normally after nearly 10 weeks in space, nasa announced. At 9 a.m. est the Mars probe was 14,421,246 mi. from earth and had traveled more than 117 million mi. in its sun-circling orbit. It was moving at a velocity of 14,478 mph relative to earth and 65,670 mph relative to the sun. Instruments aboard mariner iv Mars probe detected a solar flare and the spacecraft telemetered data to a tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, for relay to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, (nasa Release 65-30; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/6/65)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was successfully launched from White Sands, N. Mex., to a peak altitude of 154.5 km. (96 mi.). The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, gsfc provided the payload instrumentation, (nasa Rpt. srl)
mariner iv spacecraft was functioning well on its mission to Mars, but the public should not “expect too much” from the photographs of Mars it was scheduled to take July 14, NASA scientists said during a press briefing. It was conjectural whether the 21 photographs the Mars probe, would take would be clear enough to disprove or verify the theories held by some scientists that there are canals and some form of life on Mars. Scientists who would study the photographs pointed out that 21 pictures would only enable them to see 1% of Mars. Nevertheless, any pictures of the surface would be far superior to the best observations now obtainable with earth-based telescopes. The first few photographs might be made public immediately after being received, but the others probably would not be released until they had been studied for weeks or months. (Transcript, Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/23/65; Hill, NYT, 6/23/65, 7)
. . . The Biosatellite Program is a second-generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and development. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to test critically major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will help delineate hazards to astronauts and assist in determining and defining effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights may involve, for example, physiological changes such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. Also, the effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown. “Twenty experiments have been selected for flight to study the effects of weightlessness and decreased gravity during 3- to 30-day orbital periods. The experiments include a wide variety of plants and animals from single-cell organisms to higher plants and animals. The effects of weightlessness will be studied on the primate, especially the central nervous, the cardiovascular, and the skeletal systems during orbits of 30 days’ duration. “Experiments have been selected to study the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation to determine if there are any antagonistic or synergistic genetic or somatic effects on various organisms. “Experiments are included to study the effects of the unique environment of the Earth-orbiting satellite and removal from the Earth’s rotation in relation to biological rhythms of plants and animals. . . (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, outlining progress made toward the objective of solar system exploration, said:	“ ... It would appear . . . that enough experience and know-how has been accumulated to make the move to a five-ton Voyager spacecraft on the Saturn IB Centaur launch vehicle a reasonable next step in the unmanned exploration of the solar system. There is no question but that the size and weight of Voyager, plus the increased demands that will be placed upon it, will make the development of the Voyager a complex and difficult undertaking. But certainly, the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory and Mariner have shown us that we can deal successfully with complexity. As a matter of fact, the increased weight and size may afford considerable relief from the need to tailor every last function to a gnat’s eyebrow in order to achieve the intended mission, as has been the case hitherto. . . .” Dr. Newell said that reliability was probably the most difficult problem for deep-space long-duration missions and that “. . . the development of adequate spacecraft systems will not be the problem. The most serious threat to long life operation will lie in the potential random failure of one or more [spacecraft] components.” He added that this would probably be an ever-decreasing problem as we gained experience with launch vehicles and that “. . . launch vehicle reliability is far less a difficult program than that of long spacecraft lifetime for very deep-space missions.” In conclusion, Dr. Newell said:	"... Nevertheless, the time has arrived when many thoughtful people urge a vigorous program of solar system exploration. The President has in his Fiscal Year 1966 budget request included funds to support initial conceptual and design studies of a Voyager spacecraft. Funds are also included for the development of a launch vehicle consisting of the Saturn IB plus the Centaur. Final decision as to whether to move ahead with the development of the Voyager spacecraft would come a little over a year from now.” (Text) Missiles and Rockets reported that scientists at the Symposium had differing opinions on Mars goals. Gilbert V. Levin of Hazleton Laboratories opposed the 1971 scheduled landing of the Voyager:	“. . . although we insist that Mars should not be contaminated by terrestrial life before we search for Martian life, we fail to recognize that this is tantamount to saying that the U.S. must get there first, because the U.S. appears to be the only nation willing and able to sterilize its spacecraft. “I’m all for Voyager, but an initial step in the Voyager program should be some early landers at the earliest opportunities. We should go ahead and devote efforts to develop a program to land on Mars in 1969.” Temple Neumann, Automated Biological Laboratory program engineer with Philco’s Aeronutronic Div., agreed with Levin:	“If the planetary biological exploration task is to be performed in a sound scientific manner, the U.S. must do it—first.” Lawrence B. Hall, NASA Special Assistant for Planetary Quarantine, re-emphasized “the disastrous effects that an unsterilized spacecraft could have on Mars. ... If a single micro-organism should land on Mars and have a replication time of 30 days, it could grow to the bacterial population of Earth in eight years. This could not only compete with Martian life but could result in drastic changes in the geochemical and atmospheric characteristics of the planet.” JPL’s Gerald A. Soffen said that “since the decision between Mariner landers and Voyager missions has not been made yet, scientific experimenters have to think in terms both of small payloads and large ones. Numerous small missions would provide a good opportunity to perform experiments in different locations and during different planetary seasons.” Bruce C. Murray, of Cal Tech, said:	“. . . finding the right location, getting there, and interpreting the biological experiment results in a way that would indicate definitively whether life was or was not present would call for at least 100 times more photography than was currently assumed.
mariner iv changed the rate of sending scientific data from 33^3 to 8U; bits of information per second by an automatic switching operation. This was the first command initiated by the spacecraft itself since it performed its mid-course maneuver Dec. 5. mariner iv had traveled nearly 63 million miles in its 325-million-mile flight to Mars; the straight-line distance between earth and the spacecraft was 6,156,704 miles. Systems were operating normally after 36 days in space. (nasa Release 65-4)
NASA requested that final proposals for scientific experiments for the 1971 Voyager missions to Mars be submitted by Nov. 19. Selection would be made by July 1, 1966. All 1971 Voyager experiments on the landing craft would be subject to strict sterilization requirements. (nasa Release 65-297)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the American Society of Photogrammetry and the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, convening in Washington: “. . . since the dawn of the Space Age—in less than eight years—one of our most important tasks has been that of mapping—mapping the surface of the world and its geodetic figure; mapping the world’s weather, as revealed in its cloud patterns as seen from above; mapping the earth’s outermost atmosphere in three dimensions, and exploring its interaction with the newly-discovered solar wind; seeing and mapping astronomical sources for the first time in ultraviolet and X-radiation from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and mapping areas of our moon to an accuracy 2,000 times better than that now achievable from earth, and preparing to map areas of Mars to an accuracy as much as 100 times better than that attainable from earth. . . .” (Text)
mariner iv spacecraft took and recorded IOV2 photographs of black space on command from the Goldstone Tracking Station in California. Playback of five of the black-space pictures began on command, mariner iv now was more than 171 million miles from earth, 11 million miles from Mars, (jpl Release)
Three Univ. of California (Berkeley) scientists concluded on the basis of their laboratory studies that Dr. William M. Sinton’s spectroscopic evidence of organic matter on Mars was not valid. Dr. Sinton of Lowell Observatory had made spectroscopic studies of Mars in 1959 that suggested infrared radiation from dark portions of Mars was comparable to that produced by some terrestrial plant life. The California chemists—James S. Shirk, William A. Haseltine, and George C.	Pimentel—concluded Dr. Sinton had detected vaporized “deuterated water” (TLO plus heavy hydrogen—deuterium) rather than plant-produced molecules, (upi, S.F. Chron., 2/28/65)
NASA awarded $100,000 in initial funds to General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Div. to determine vehicle design modifications and ground support requirements for combining the Centaur as a third stage with the two-stage Saturn ib launch vehicle. The combination was being proposed to launch unmanned Voyager spacecraft to Mars in 1971. Study would be under direction of lrc. (nasa Centaur Proj. Off.; Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release)
Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for Research at NASA Lewis Research Center, discussed possible propulsion systems for future space-flight beyond the moon before the Conference on Civilian and Military Uses of Aerospace sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences. He cited a manned Mars project as a prime example of a mission that could be performed by a number of different propulsion concepts. For example, manned trips by chemical rockets would be weight-restricted, but chemical rocket systems would have the advantage of having been extensively flight-tested on many other missions. Although the reactor for planned nuclear propulsion systems had only been ground tested, evaluations of complete nuclear rocket engine systems were expected within the next few years. Electric propulsion systems for manned spaceflight were even further in the future and might not be ready by 1980; but by then the mission capability of the nuclear rocket would have been so thoroughly demonstrated that it would be more attractive than chemical engines for those missions requiring increased propulsion capability. Even further into the future were nuclear systems such as the gaseous-corecavity reactor which would yield higher performance, (lrc Release 65-5)
nasa selected Martin Co. for negotiation of $3-million, incentive-fee contract to build 11 experimental spacecraft equipped with parachute payloads "to investigate parachute designs and techniques for landing instrumented capsules on Mars.” Four would be launched by high-altitude balloon systems and seven by Honest John-Nike rockets under ' LaRc’s Planetary Reentry Parachute Program, (nasa Release 66-229)
nasa Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968 at ieee conference in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain; or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee /., 10/25/66)
msfc had awarded General Electric Co. a $147,884, 12-mo. contract to study design and systems requirements of an electrically propelled space vehicle for manned Mars landing missions and to identify areas of technology in which concentrated research would produce maximum benefit to manned planetary program, (msfc Release 66-271)
North American Aviation, Inc., received a one-year, $48,229 contract from msfc to "investigate the best methods and hardware for performing manned Mars and Venus flybys with maximum use of Apollo/Saturn systems ... as a stepping stone to manned landing missions.” (msfc Release 66-187)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Space Sciences Subcommittee, recommended in Astronautics & Aeronautics that manned and unmanned earth-orbital missions be given major emphasis in the next few years. He suggested lower priority be assigned manned planetary exploration and establishment of manned lunar bases, but that unmanned Voyager Mars and Venus missions be given more extensive support. (A&A, 9/66, 12-14)
Six years of exploratory work at jpl and nasa centers on practical problems of landing on Mars was summarized by R. P. Thompson of jpl in Astronautics & Aeronautics. He concluded that: (1) design of first lander should be simple and conservative, and capable of thorough testing so that no single failure mode would cause "catastrophic failure of mission”; (2) independent backup should be provided for every critical event in landing sequence with "selective” redundance to achieve high reliability; and (3) capsule should be instrumented to allow diagnosis of failures. (A&A, 7/66, 66-73) During July: David H. Stoddard, M.D., Director of NASA Occupational Medical Division, cited in Hospital Topics two "ideal” physiological monitors developed in space medicine—biotelemetry, which permitted immediate observation of data, although subject was aware he was being monitored; and electrocardiocording, which did not allow immediate observation but "permits the subject to go where he pleases, do what he pleases and to almost forget that he is being monitored.” (Hospital Topics, 7/66, 39)
U.S. had current "edge” over U.S.S.R. in overall space capability but this status had been "recently acquired and is not sufficient to form even the slightest basis for complacency,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn. Industrial Luncheon in Washington, D.C. Dr.Welsh analyzed the areas of relative accomplishment: "(1) Number of spacecraft. The United States has placed almost 400 spacecraft into earth orbit and on escape missions, while the USSR has put slightly less than 200 on such missions. . . . However . . . Soviets have placed each year a greater total weight of payloads. ... (2) Lunar and Interplanetary. The United States has been far less active but considerably more successful in its interplanetary activities. . . . We have photographed Mars and had a productive fly-by of Venus while the USSR’s active interplanetary program has been primarily plagued by failure. In addition, we have taken some 17,000 photographs of the moon and are taking hundreds more by the magnificent Surveyor spacecraft. ... (3) Manned Flight . . . U.S. . . . has a distinct lead over the USSR with about 1500 man flight hours in orbit compared with about 500 . . . with the longest individual flight as well as the longest extra-vehicular activity. Also, the U.S. has had two controlled rendezvous maneuvers, one docking experiment, and considerable manned spacecraft maneuvering experience. So far, the USSR has achieved none of these latter goals. (4) Space Applications. The United States has navigation, weather, and communications satellite systems in regular operation, while the USSR is still in the developmental stage in such activities. (5) Scientific Data . . . the larger number and greater variety of U.S. scientific payloads, as well as the wider and freer dissemination of the information obtained, may well have added more to the world’s store of knowledge. (6) Propulsion . . . the USSR has surpassed the United States in the field of propulsion so far as the amount of thrust is concerned [but] this thrust advantage is much less true today as both countries have in operation and under development larger and more advanced propulsion systems.. . (Text)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, jpl Voyager program manager, told Aviation Week in an interview that heavy funding for the Voyager Mars program was anticipated with FY 1968 funds if the Vietnam war did not create new funding problems. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 40)
NASA had invited 33 firms to submit proposals on a 12-mo. study of Mars and Venus flyby missions in 1975-1982 period using Saturn/Apollo hardware with minimum modifications. Study would emphasize earth escape stages based on modifications of the upper stages of Saturn V launch vehicle (S-II and S-IVB), orbital tanking and assembly operations, launch windows, spacecraft, and probes to be launched from spacecraft to planet’s surface, (msfc Release 66-73)
Mars polar caps are white with dry ice, not frozen water in the form of frost, wrote Dr. Robert B. Leighton and Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech in Science. Their argument was based on mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, flyby which indicated that planet’s atmosphere is very thin and largely composed of carbon dioxide which, in frozen form, is dry ice. Theory that white on Mars polar caps is ordinary frost was based on observations of its reflectivity in the infrared and on manner in which it affected orientation of light waves. Authors believed there might be frozen water on Mars, but suggested it is all underground in the form of permafrost. (Science, 7/8/66, 136-44)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
Employment in aerospace industry would increase to 1,266,000 by June 1966—a gain of 94,000 or eight per cent from September 1965, reported Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn. Aircraft employment was expected to show greatest increase, with missile and space employment remaining relatively stable. (Aerospace News, 3/15/66) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, delivering the first Annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture, stressed the importance of the contributions of men such as Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden to the dramatic development of the space program: "The history of nasa reflects much of Dr. Dryden’s understanding of how progress can be made and what the conditions are that produce effective responses to the challenges being faced. A pivotal concept that has guided NASA administration has been that of the relation of the research and development project to many rapidly growing disciplines of science and technology. A project serves a larger purpose than its own defined immediate ends. A project is a disciplined and organized effort directed to a specific objective; one of its principal characteristics is that it has a schedule. As such a project provides a creative and driving force in the total achievement of science, engineering, and technology _____” (Text) Wesley A. Kuhrt, United Aircraft Research Laboratories, predicted interplanetary and translunar tourist travel for FY 2001: "A six-day round trip to the moon via 35-passenger, nuclear-powered 'clipper’ ships would cost each adventurer $10,000. For an 18-month trip to Venus, the passenger would pay $32,000. Steerage class to Mars, a two-year undertaking, would cost $35,000. But for $70,000 a passenger could ride the Mars Express to and from the red planet in 11 months. . . .” All fares assumed the Government would underwrite the cost of developing the spacecraft, Kuhrt said. Other predictions made at the symposium included teams of superhuman astronauts bred over several generations as a result of present studies in genetics and molecular basis of life; communications between ordinary persons in their homes and anyone, anywhere; versatile robots to perform human tasks; cosmic cargo transported at $10 per pound; network of satellites to link everyone in the world so they could speak in their native languages via rapid automatic translating computers; and man-shaped robots sending back threedimensional pictures to human masters hundreds of miles away. Harvard astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that the trip from other galaxies had already been made and that earth had already been visited from space at least once. (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) told a luncheon audience that "we must lay out basic objectives far enough ahead that they will serve as relatively fixed goals—or in non-technical terms, as dreams. Such an early dream of man was to fly like a bird; later, we gradually translated this dream into making it easy for everyone to fly in an aircraft. We have these dreams and they affect our progress strongly. ...” To meet these ends, Karth recommended forming a "Hoover-type” Commission to review planning and decision-making system in the area of science and technology. In addition he cited the need for "frequent, systematic, large-scale surveys and analysis of science and technology from the near-term to the distant frontiers of knowledge. . . .” (Text) In a prediction of what the "Space Age Society” would be like in 2001, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told the symposium: "The major development over the coming years will be the speed of change. We already have great difficulty maintaining our perspective regarding the change which has taken place during the last 8 or lO years. Well, that rate of change is like the tortoise pace compared with what; is coming in the future. ... "Some with fertile imaginations foresee the time when there will be large scale emigration from earth to growing settlements on the moon and the planets. While I see the great growth in the ability to travel to such distant spots safely and speedily, I see little likelihood of any sizable movement of population even though nuclear reactors would furnish much of the competence to make conditions in such places both livable and productive. My reason for not predicting such movement is due to the simple belief that living conditions are going to be so improved here on earth that few would want to leave. .. . "As for space travel, we can certainly let our imaginations soar, as we are now only in the infancy of growth. The space child has barely learned to walk. The future with its space travel being almost as common as airplane travel is today is yet to come . . . but it will come. Interplanetary trips, at speeds many times what we now attain, will take place in craft as reusable as the jet plane is today, with at least as many passengers aboard. . . . "One more thing I can predict with great confidence. The debate on the worthwhileness of space technology and space exploration—still continuing on the part of those of little vision—will have disappeared completely within a decade or so. The benefits will have become so obvious and the potential so exciting that even the most near-sighted will be aware of the rich space harvest. . . (Text; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/16/66, A10; Hoffmann, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/16/66) Importance of materials science and space vehicle technology was discussed by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa Hq. oart. "The structural designer of future launch vehicles will face many new and challenging problems. Launch vehicles ... [will be] larger, complex, and more costly. If we are to reuse these launch vehicles without having to spend large sums of money either to bring them back or to refurbish them after recovery, major advances will be required in structural and materials technology.” Development of new materials and methods, such as "superinsulations” to prevent heat leakage; stronger shielding materials to protect spacecraft from meteoroids and intense radiation; advanced lifting-body designs for greater reentry precision; and folding spacecraft parts which could be reassembled in space, would play a major role in U.S. space program before the year 2000, he said. (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, nasc staff member, discussed overall economic outlook for space age up to FY 2001. Sheldon noted that U.S. space program took about one per cent of gross national product and estimated that "Soviet Union is putting about two per cent of their Gnp into space efforts . . . .The close tie with military rocketry has speeded space development in these recent years, but it has also saddled space technology with an expendable ammunition philosophy rather than aiming at the lower operating costs of a recoverable transport philosophy. . . . "Today we probably are headed toward an age of conservation, and one of deliberate recycling .. . the task of the remainder of this century may include the development of closed ecological systems for long-duration space flight, and on a different scale, heroic measures to recycle waste water and to reprocess industrial and consumer wastes into reusable products. . . . "If our urbanized society requires closed ecological systems even here on Earth, we can, in effect, air condition whole cities.” Discussing weather modification and climate control, he said: ". . . whether we bend nature itself, or create new sealed urban units, each almost self-sufficient in its ability to control its temperature, clean and recycle its air and water, and put all other wastes to productive use, some such heroic measures will be needed as this century runs out.” (Text)
NASA successfully conducted second rocket-launched test [see Nov. 5] of a Mars entry parachute as part of an advanced technology effort to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected parachute at 120,000-ft. altitude. Parachute descended to earth 40 min. later carrying 200-lb. payload with instrumentation for measuring shock of parachute opening and its oscillation characteristics. Experiment series was managed by LaRC. (nasa Release 66-298)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
Comparing U.S. and U.S.S.R. Mars exploration efforts in Science, Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech Associate Professor of Planetary Science, and Merton E.	Davies, rand Corp., said of nasa’s mariner iv July 14, 1965, flyby: "The American scientific community should, and evidently does, feel proud and gratified that the Mariner mission to Mars, through successful utilization of national resources, not only accomplished a remarkable technological feat but also discovered extraordinary new facts ... beyond the reach of earth-based instruments.” Authors termed "disappointing” U.S. decisions to terminate Mariner program, fly extra Mariner C spacecraft to Venus in 1967, drop plans for 1971 Voyager launch, and "fill the gap” with an abbreviated 1969 Atlas-Centaur program. U.S.S.R., they noted, had spent "between five and ten times as much on flight programs for planetary exploration” as U.S. and, in spite of "six consecutive failures in their efforts to explore Mars,” may have developed a reliable 2,000-lb. spacecraft for Mars flyby. Authors predicted U.S.S.R. would launch two Zond spacecraft in December 1966: "It will be surprising to us if at least one . . . does not reach the planet and return new facts about it.” They suggested 1971 as earliest likely date for Soviet landing of survivable payload on Martian surface and concluded that by 1967 "the U.S. will be ready to make an enduring national commitment to the exploration of the planets, and be ready to demonstrate intellectual appreciation of discovery as well as enthusiasm for technological achievement.” (Science, 2/25/66, 945-54) Week of February 28: NASA delegation extended President Johnson’s invitation for European participation in U.S. manned and unmanned space programs in discussions with officials of West Germany, France, U.K., and Italy. Delegation had been instructed not to make any offers or commitments but to express potential opportunities of participation in future U.S. space flights on equal basis with U.S. scientists. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 2/28/66, 23) During February: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, summarized progress in development of electric propulsion in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "The first laboratory experiments with electrostatic thrustors began in 1958. In the early thrustor models, power efliciencies and propellant-utilization efficiencies were 20-30%; lifetimes did not exceed a few hours; ion-current densities were less than 1 milliamp/cm2; the problem of beam neutralization was unsolved— was not even well understood. Mission applications seemed far in the future. Today, only seven years later, electrostatic thrustors are very close to flight readiness. Two systems, the ion-bombardment system and the surface-ionization system, have reached power efficiencies and propellant efficiencies above 90%; they produce ion currents of about 20 milliamp/cm2. Beam neutralization has proven in the laboratory as well as in actual space tests, and engine lifetimes of several-thousand hours have been demonstrated. With a few more years of refinement and quality engineering, these ion thrustors will be ready for extended missions into interplanetary space. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 71-2) During February: Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, noted two viewpoints on achieving Soviet cooperation in space research in Astronautics & Aeronautics:	. . the one holds that the answer . . . lies in finding a suitable device, either bilateral or international—a new idea, an imaginative approach, a twist ... for example, a proposal for an international space laboratory. . . . "The other view is that the device is substantially irrelevant and that it is the basic relationship between the two countries, the basic political and military realities, which will determine at any given time whether cooperation is feasible or not.” (A&A, 2/66, 20)
Daniel J. Haughton, president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., suggested at American Petroleum Institute meeting in New York that aerospace and petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint exploration of earth’s continental shelves. He said that within 35 yrs. the world’s population would have doubled and a large segment of this population would be hungry: "The oceans represent the last great source for feeding them and providing the chemicals and minerals and water to meet all the future needs of man.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/16/66, C12) NASA Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), in report on "Management Scheme for Apollo,” concluded: "There is no single approach to program management that will guarantee success. The development of and experience with various management systems, techniques and tools in the past several years have contributed extensively to a more scientific approach. The 'art’ element remains, however. The integrated implementation of those concepts and their associated procedures and disciplines is sometimes confronted with considerable resistance within an organization. This has merit, for it forces management to thoroughly screen new concepts as to validity, feasibility and salability. Once a new management system is approved, however, it deserves and requires the personal support of the program director through line channels to stimulate its overall implementation and acceptance at the grass roots level. . . (Text) DeMarquis D. Wyatt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Programming, said that NASA’s cost model had "significantly facilitated management decision making in complex on-going programs by providing an overnight computational capability of great capacity. The computer program is capable of handling the interrelated cost influences of up to 60 different hardware configurations at an unlimited number of plants and an unlimited number of production fines within each plant. It can . . . summarize program costs for as many as 24 fiscal years and can subdivide and allocate these costs to up to 8 different funding sources or users.. . .” (Text) . Franklin P. Dixon, Director, Planetary Mission Studies, NASA omsf, outlined manned Mars landing program for consideration as U.S. national space goal. Proposal called for seven-step program based principally on extension of mission-duration capability and including earth-orbital "Space Station/Mission Module,” Mars and Venus flybys, and Mars landing. Discussing long-range NASA planning, he noted: "At the present time planning for the Saturn Apollo Applications Program includes subsystem developments for long duration manned flights. . . . This provides a logical growth pattern toward manned planetary travel with the easier flyby missions within technological reach by the 1975 to 1980 time period for actual operational flights.” (Text)
Checks of distributions of Martian and lunar crater diameters indicated that the visible surface of Mars was 2.2-to-3 X 109 years old, Alan B. Binder, Univ. of Arizona, reported in Science. This result implied that in the early history of Mars large-scale subaerial erosion occurred. Of 69 Martian craters with diameters greater than 10 km., 13% had central peaks. This compared favorably with the frequency (11.7%) of central peaks among lunar craters and may indicate the peaks resulted from the impact mechanism rather than post-impact volcanism. Well-defined system of lineaments shown in mariner iv photographs may indicate that Mars had lost appreciable angular momentum during its history. (Binder, Science, 5/20/66, 1053-5)
NASA mariner iv, launched from etr Nov. 28, 1964, for Mars flyby July 14, 1965, was 216 million miles from earth—greatest distance it would reach before gradually returning to within 30 million miles in 1967—and still operating. Goldstone Tracking Station of NASA’s Deep Space Network (dsn) tracked a signal from the spacecraft, but no attempt was made to receive data because of the extreme distance, dsn would continue attempting to contact mariner iv once a month to see if it was still operating. Daily engineering and scientific data from the spacecraft had been suspended Oct. 1, 1965, by ground command that set new space communications record of 191,059,922 mi.—more than twice the distance from earth to the sun. {nasa Release 66-7)
Analysis of available evidence concerning possibility of an advanced form of life on Mars by Univ. of Maryland astronomy professor Dr. Ernst J. Opik appeared in Science. Dr. Opik said the most heavily eroded craters visible in photos taken by mariner iv during the July 14, 1965, flyby dated from the earliest period of the planet’s history, implying that Mars had never had a dense, moist, earth-like atmosphere for any extended period and would therefore be a poor prospect for life. Dr. Opik argued strongly for at least a primitive form of vegetation, citing in particular a region of 1.2 million sq. km. that had darkened rapidly from 1946 to 1954. He likened this to the change a distant observer would have seen on earth as a consequence of the virgin lands development program in U.S.S.R. Vegetation was the best explanation for such changes; however, if it were not vegetation, "it must be something specifically Martian.” The planet, he added, "may become a source of great surprises in the future.” (Science, 7/15/66, 255-65)
New absorption bands, probably caused in part by reduced gases in the Martian atmosphere, had been found in near-infrared spectrum of Mars by Fourier spectroscopy, Lewis D. Kaplan, jpl, and Janine and Pierre Connes, Observatoire de Meudon and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France, reported in Science. The authors believed the presence of such constituents might have "important implications for the possibility and nature of life on Mars.” (Science, 8/12/66, 739-40)
jpl selected Litton Industries, Inc., Guidance and Control Systems Div., for negotiation of a $3-million contract to design, fabricate, and check out data automatic subsystem (Das) for 1969 Mariner (unmanned) flights to Mars, jpl had management responsibility to NASA for Mariner/ Mars project, (nasa Release 66-289)
Evidence for volcanic origin of lunar craters was presented in a letter to Nature by Univ. of Western Australia geologist G. J. H. McCall. Eleventh frame of photographs by nasa’s mariner iv spacecraft revealed scalloping in walls of Martian craters comparable to scalloping in terrestrial calderas—such as Krakatau, Indonesia, Aso, Japan, and Crater Lake, Ore. McCall had also detected scalloping in lunar craters, which he believed "closely resemble terrestrial volcano-tectonic craters.” Taking "pronounced scalloping ... to be a valid indication of volcano-tectonic subsidence,” McCall questioned whether lunar craters could be explained by hypervelocity impact. (McCall, Nature, 9/24/66, 1384-5)
One of the world’s largest and most sensitive automatic space tracking and telemetry antennas was officially dedicated at Goldstone, Calif. Newest facility in nasa’s Deep Space Network (dsn), 210-ft. dish antenna was U.S.’s largest fully steerable antenna and world’s largest built for research by spacecraft. Operated by jpl, $14-million antenna would be used to track future Mariners and other spacecraft to Mars, Venus, and even Pluto on the outer reaches of the solar system. Dedication ceremonies, hosted by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, included addresses by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), chairman of Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of Science and Astronautics Committee. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, also participated, (nasa Release 66-88; msc Roundup, 4/29/66)
First of series of high-altitude experiments to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be incorporated into Voyager spacecraft scheduled for unmanned soft landing on Mars in 1973 was conducted by nasa from Walker afb. The 15-ft.-diameter, 1,600-lb. disc-shaped flight unit containing packaged test parachute, instruments to record loads and parachute deployment, and ring of 12 small rockets for acceleration was carried by balloon to 120,000- to 125,000-ft. altitude then released on ground command. Acceleration rockets apparently ignited as planned, propelling unit upward at about 850 mph into arching trajectory. Parachute deployed; system descended in planned recovery area at wsmr. Test was apparent success; extensive performance analyses were being made. Balloon system had been tested July 18. Parachute project was managed by LaRC and coordinated with jpl, which managed Voyager program, (nasa Release 66-225; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/31/66)
Cosmonautics Day in U.S.S.R., celebrating fifth anniversary of first manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin, was marked by condemnations of military orientation of U.S. space efforts and predictions of Soviet space successes. Cosmonaut Gagarin, speaking in the Kremlin, said: "American scientists and cosmonauts have carried out a number of interesting experiments. This is to their credit. It is to be deeply regretted, however, that American cosmonautics is increasingly falling under the influence of the Pentagon, which regards outer space as the theater of future military operations.” Gagarin pledged "all his energies and knowledge” to help in the lunar mission and said man must make himself at home on the moon "to establish stations which will serve as points of departure for longer space voyages and also as astronomical observatories and scientific laboratories.” Cosmonaut Gherman Titov, speaking in a taped interview on Moscow television, predicted that "builders and assemblers will one day exit into space and put together various parts of space stations, assemble spaceships and stations on the moon, and build various structures.” In a Pravda article Marshal Konstantin Vershinin, head of Soviet Air Force, predicted a new manned space mission that could take several cosmonauts through the Van Allen radiation belts. He noted that biomedical data from the cosmos cx flight would "doubtlessly . . . be used in preparing new manned space flights.” In an interview published in Prague, Cosmonaut Konstantin Feok-tistov predicted that man would land on Mars and Venus between 1970 and 1980. (Pravda, 4/12/66, 2; Wash. Post, 4/11/66, A8; AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A8; upi, NYT, 4/14/66, 7; Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A14; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 4/13/66)
Data from onboard cameras and other recovered instruments had confirmed success of NASA’s first high-altitude experiment to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be used to land instrumented capsules on Mars. Launched aboard a balloon Aug. 30 from Walker afb, experiment had "provided a solid data base with which we can compare and correlate the results of later flight tests involving parachutes and flight units of different sizes and shapes,” Project Manager John C. McFall reported, (nasa Release 66-241)
System of two interconnected balloons 815-ft. long designed to test parachute deceleration system of nasa’s Voyager spacecraft—scheduled to land on Mars in 1973—was lofted by usaf from Holloman afb. Helium in small upper balloon inflated main balloon—largest ever launched— to 26-million-cu.-ft. capacity as both rose to 130,000-ft. altitude where atmosphere was believed to be as thin as that on Mars. 1,800-lb. simulated Voyager spacecraft payload was jettisoned by radio command seven hours after launch, successfully parachuted to earth, and was later recovered near Phoenix, Ariz. Main balloon rose to higher altitude and ruptured as expected. Parachute program was managed by LaRc; Voyager program by JPL. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/66; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 34)
Redeye, usa’s shoulder-fired antiaircraft missile system designed for forward-area defense against low-flying aircraft, had successfully completed Arctic phase of service testing at Ft. Greely, Alaska.. (Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release) Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, told the conference that "all technologies are sufficiently developed to make flight [to Mars] in 1986 appear possible.” Five Saturn V launch vehicles would carry the components of electrically powered Mars spacecraft and of Nerva II-powered nuclear earth-escape stage into 300-mi.-altitude earth orbit. After assembly and checkout, nuclear stage would accelerate electrically powered spacecraft to escape velocity. Flight time to Mars on a direct transfer trajectory would be 145 days; 280 days would be required to return to earth. Spacecraft would enter high earth orbit outside Van Allen radiation belt and astronauts would be brought back to earth by commuter rocket. Dr. Stuhlinger said: "Of the key developments still necessary, the electrical power system undoubtedly requires the major technological and funding effort.” Coauthors contributing to the paper presented by Stuhlinger were Joseph C. King and Dr. Russell D. Shelton of msfc Research Projects Laboratory and Gordon R. Woodcock, msfc Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-67) LRC scientist J. Reece Roth described an electric rocket life-support system that would supply interplanetary crews with meals which, when metabolized, would serve as fuel for spacecraft’s engine. According to Roth’s concept, some or all of the propellant, in the form of food, water, and oxygen, would be metabolized by crew to carbon dioxide, water, and solid wastes. C02 and water could then be used as propellant for an electric engine while solid residues would be small enough to be stored or discarded. Propellant reserve could be used for food, navigational corrections, and radiation shielding—enhancing safety of the crew. Weight savings from integrated propulsion and life-support system would be so great, Roth said, that a somewhat less efficient thruster could be used with no overall loss in performance, (lrc Release 66-12) Human experience most similar to one-to-three year space flight was life on submarine, according to Dr. S. B. Sells, Director, Institute of Behavioral Research, Texas Christian Univ. Dr. Sells presented results of NASA-sponsored study designed to formulate problems of "group organization, structure, and interpersonal interaction of crew members in the environmental circumstances of a typical space mission.” Fifty-six social system characteristics of extended space flight—such as motivation, status, background, training, and command structure of crew, as well as conditions of confinement, isolation, and environmental hazards—were compared with those of 11 other social systems. (Text) nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright said: "Thousands of dedicated people have laboriously laid . .. stepping stones to Mars. This nation is ready and able to step up the exploration of Mars, Venus, and the rest of the solar system. Just when such a program will get a go ahead depends on many factors. This coming year will be a crucial one for the decision makers. "Of one thing I am absolutely certain: comprehensive exploration of the planets is inevitable. Who will be leading this exploration seems less certain; but we can if we choose.” (Text)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded three new study contracts totaling $400,000 to investigate launch vehicle needs and best methods for sending manned spacecraft on planetary flyby trips: North American Aviation, Inc., received $100,000 to study feasibility of modifying Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) for use as an orbital injection stage; Douglas Aircraft Co., $100,000 for feasibility of using Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) as part of a planetary vehicle; and TRW Systems, Inc., $200,000 for alternate mission modes for manned Mars and Venus orbital and landing missions, (msfc Release 66-223)
Inactivity in Soviet manned space program could be explained by "strict economy” and preparations for ambitious new manned missions, Radio Prague’s Moscow correspondent reported. The new missions—"flights of much higher standards”—would include "a flight of man to the moon and the creation of a large orbiting laboratory.” Correspondent also predicted that the U.S.S.R. would launch a "group of rockets”— presumably unmanned ones—toward Mars about Jan. 4. (NYT, 12/23/66, 12) New York Times later editorialized: ". . . The possibility is raised that the Soviet strategy for a manned lunar landing may be based on a direct earth-moon trip. In that case there would be no need for the rendezvous and docking maneuvers. . . . Enormously powerful rockets would be required . . . but if Moscow has them they might make possible the spectacular achievement of a goal the Kremlin must want very much: a manned lunar landing on the moon by the fiftieth anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution next Nov. 7.” (NYT, 12/26/66, 20)
jpl had awarded $200,000 contract to Avco Corp.’s Space Div. for task work in jpl’s new $1.5 million Sterilization Assembly Development Laboratory (sadl). Starting in mid-1967, SADL would be sterilization testing headquarters for Voyager spacecraft, scheduled for Mars landing in the 1970s. (jpl Release)
mariner iv spacecraft, which took the world’s first close-up pictures of Mars July 14, 1965, was again in contact with earth, reporting on the space environment and its own operating performance after 18 mos. of flight. NASA said telemetry from mariner iv, received over a 197.5-million-mi. radio link with the Deep Space Network’s Goldstone Tracking Station, indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating properly. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, mariner iv had exceeded its design life by more than 100% and gave indications it might function until 1968. (nasa Release 66-135; jpl Release)
nasa would negotiate $1.25-million contract with Texas Instruments, Inc., for design, fabrication, and testing of telemetry subsystem for 1969 Mariner missions to Mars. Motorola, Inc., was selected for design, fabrication, and testing of command subsystem for Mariner spacecraft under $2-million contract. Both contracts would be managed by jpl. (nasa Release 66-186)
NASA had tentatively selected six experiments to be carried on two Mariner Mars spacecraft scheduled for launch by Atlas-Centaur boosters between early February and mid-April 1S69: two television cameras, infrared spectrometer, infrared radiometer, ultraviolet spectrometer, celestial mechanics experiment, and S-band occultation experiment. Experiments were selected to extend knowledge of Martian atmosphere and visible features of Martian terrain and to gather additional data to continue planning for landing instrumented capsules on the planet, jpl had project management responsibility for Mariner Mars 1969 missions. (nasa Release 66-174)
First anniversary of first close-up photos of Mars taken by nasa’s mariner iv from distance of 134 million mi. Spacecraft was launched Nov. 28, 1964. (NYT, 7/26/66, 49)
Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the U.S. was the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S JL, U.K., and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal, or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3) January 24-26: At aiaa Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 aiaa president. Dr. C. Stark Draper, chairman of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of "informetics” in modern flight systems. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell chaired a special "Space Sciences Report” plenary session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ environment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus "swingby,” according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: "Yesterday, President Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. . . . This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating resources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing commitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing commitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemployment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested. . .. "It is within this framework that the nasa program has been hammered out—not representing the sum of our program demands. However, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past weekend, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration and unmanned probes and satellites. "We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so rich in other needs. . . . "We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities are in hand instead of in the future. ". . . The program that we have laid out for nasa for the coming year will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong competition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific investigation, technological application and operational experience. It provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between the intellect of man and the unknown.” Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convocation by L/G James Doolittle (usafr) : "On the second of December 1965 the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders; aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its advancement; astronautics lost its great ambassador at home and at large and those fortunate of us—who had been privileged to know and work with him—lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. "Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person—a man who strove prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. . . . "Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and gratitude, for excellence endures.” Goddard Award, aiaa’s highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P. von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson afb, for "his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first successful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W. Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D. Lewis, Project Engineer, uac Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for "their contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket engines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his "production of two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design innovation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing techniques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S. ascendency in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for "basic research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases, and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; aiaa Release; aiaa Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
Scientists were considering "capturing an asteroid” and, through nuclear propulsion, placing it in earth orbit where it could be analyzed, reported John Wilford in the New York Times. He said "experts” believed "capture of an asteroid will be possible as soon as it is possible to send manned expeditions to the surface of Mars or Jupiter.” Astronauts would take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor to asteroid’s surface. Rocket would have to "produce long-duration burn but because of asteroid’s low gravity would not have to be very powerful to push the asteroid toward a new orbit.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, E7)
NASA’s lunar and planetary programs were discussed by NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications: "It is important to note that the Mariner IV photographs do not determine whether life exists on Mars. Even before the flight of Mariner IV, it was known that pictures taken at this resolution could not give any direct evidence of life forms. . . . "We propose to continue the exploration of Venus and Mars begun so well with Mariners II and IV, respectively, by utilizing for the 1967 Venus opportunity an appropriate modification of the spare spacecraft from the Mariner IV program. This will be launched on an Atlas-Agena vehicle.” Cortright presented prepared statement by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell summarizing comsat and sounding rocket launches: "The first launching by NASA of a satellite for the Corporation [ComSatCorp] took place on April 6, 1965, when the Early Bird satellite was placed in orbit using a thrust-augmented Delta launch vehicle. The launching was carried out under an agreement between Comsat and NASA, signed in December 1964, which detailed the services to be performed by NASA, financial arrangements, etc. . . . "Although the original agreement gave Comsat options for as many as seven additional launchings through March 1967, none of these options has been exercised. In the meantime, Comsat has inaugurated tbe HS-303A program, and has advised NASA that it will require two or three HS-303A launchings in 1966, beginning in August. The HS-303A is larger and heavier than Early Bird, and will need the capabilities of the thrust-augmented improved Delta launch vehicle. Otherwise, launch services are expected to be similar to those provided in support of the Early Bird. "The Corporation is now negotiating for development and procurement of spacecraft for the eventual global system. These spacecraft are expected to be deployed beginning in 1968.” Referring to the NASA sounding rocket program, Dr. Newell said: "Since 1959 to the present NASA has launched 668 sounding rockets for scientific investigations in space and 516 of these were for investigations in the areas of physics and astronomy.” He mentioned as significant the International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) Mobile Launch Expedition carried out in spring 1965 using an aircraft carrier as a launching platform: rockets carrying instrumented payloads were launched off west coast of South America from 5° north latitude to 60° south latitude with the greatest concentration of flights at the geomagnetic equator near Lima, Peru. 45 Nike-Cajun/Nike-Apache rockets and 32 single-stage Areas rockets were flown carrying experiments furnished by NASA, usn, usaf, universities, and industry. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 233-4, 359, 375-6)
Graduate Research Center of the Southwest president Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner addressed msc employees. Outlining postlunar landing exploration, Dr. Berkner said: "The very broad strategic objectives for the exploration of the solar system are clearly outlined in the National Academy of Sciences Summer Study that was done last summer. . . . It is urgent and imperative that this study be adopted, or something like it, as our major basic strategy beyond the moon. The first job is to adopt a national strategy. This is not just a decision of NASA; it is a decision of the administration, of the Congress, of the American people. "And second it is urgent and imperative that this study be translated by joint actions of NASA, the National Academy of Sciences and American scientists into specific tactical plans for a specific program with dollars attached to it. For example, in my opinion, it makes little sense to undertake the first Martian landing without some precedent exploratory steps. We must first orbit and map the planet and ascertain where a landing would be profitable. "To do the planetary exploration job effectively, we now need a tactical program of specific flights on specific dates with the instru-. mentation necessary to plan to accomplish those tasks. I remind you that what we are doing today was planned in 1961. And yet, when we get to our planetary program in the 1970’s, we don’t have corresponding specific plans.” He reemphasized the urgency by saying: "If we are to achieve in the planetary exploration of the future in an intelligent way, in light of the objectives of the Space Act, the time has come to get our scientists started now. Your vehicle program is already ahead of us.” Dr. Berkner said that the long-range program should meet certain specifications: "(1) step-by-step advancement of experiments in the proper order; (2) use of the right vehicles to carry out the experiments; (3) effective use of Saturn capabilities, from unmanned missions to the ultimate manned landing on Mars and perhaps Venus, and (4) proper phasing-in of smaller vehicles with the larger ones, and reasonable time/cost programming.” (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 3)
Edmond C. Buckley, nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, reviewed nasa’s tracking and data acquisition network program: "During fiscal year 1965, the network, under the management of Goddard Space Flight Center, successfully supported four Gemini missions, two of which were manned. So far in fiscal year 1966, three manned Gemini missions have been supported, including the highly successful Gemini VII/VI rendezvous in December.. . . "During 1965, an average of 32 satellites was supported at any given time. This included satellites launched in prior years which were still transmitting useful data plus new satellites which were launched during the year. In 1966, the average number of satellites to be supported is expected to increase to more than 35 including flight of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, the Biosatellite, and Applications Technology Satellite. "In 1967, the average number of satellites to be supported is estimated to exceed 40 with the spacecraft, collectively, contacting the network stations more than 650 times daily. Contributing to the extensive workload in 1967 will be the additional flights of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, Biosatellite, Applications Technology Satellite, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. . . . "During fiscal year 1965, the [Deep Space] network successfully supported the Ranger VII, VIII, and IX missions and the cruise phase of the Mariner IV mission. The precise operation of the facilities at Goldstone and the control center at Pasadena in support of the Ranger missions was essential to the accuracy achieved in impacting on the surface of the moon, and to the activation of the cameras and transmission of live television pictures of the moon’s surface. In fiscal year 1965, 85-foot antenna facilities at both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, became operational and participated in Mariner IV support.. . . "The excellent support provided the Mariner IV mission permitted the spacecraft, after a flight of 325 million miles and an elapsed time of 228 days, to pass Mars with a deviation of only 1,000 miles from the projected fly-by distance of 5,000 miles and to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The Deep Space Network continued to support the Mariner IV spacecraft after encounter and established a new twoway communications record of 191 million miles between network stations and the spacecraft. .. . On January 4, 1966, the Goldstone facility received a signal from the Mariner IV spacecraft over a distance of 216 million miles.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 608, 727-9)
NASA’s mahiner iv had completed two years in space, flown 1,025,082,830 mi., and continued to operate properly, reporting its condition to earth three times a week. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, spacecraft had completed primary mission Aug. 2, 1965, after transmitting to earth 22 pictures of Martian surface. Photos were made when it flew within 6,118 mi. of planet July 14, 1965. (nasa Release 66-304; jpl Release)
Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn, named William Hines of the Washington Evening Star recipient of the Robert S. Ball Memorial Award for excellent writing. Cited for his continuing coverage of NASA’s mariner iv Mars probe, Hines would receive a trophy and $300 at the Association’s annual meeting in New York May 24-26. (AP, NYT, 5/5/66, 6; AP, Wash. Post, 5/5/66, B2)
NASA Lewis Research Center, first Government laboratory devoted to flight propulsion in all its aspects, celebrated its 25th anniversary. Authorized by Congress in 1940, the naca facility was originally called the Aircraft Engine Research Lab.; it was renamed the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1948 in honor of Dr. George W. Lewis, former naca Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). In 1958, when naca facilities and personnel were absorbed by the newly created NASA, the facility became the Lewis Research Center. From an initial Congressional appropriation of $2 million in 1941, LRC had emerged as a major research and development laboratory valued at $200 million. Marking the anniversary, LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein said: "Man isn’t going to be held to a single conquest or success. The past decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, but we’ve just started to realize its potential. The present generation will live to fly better than 2,000 mph in commercial aircraft and to observe at close range the interplanetary exploits of U.S. astronauts. The past 25 years have witnessed truly remarkable strides in aeronautics and space activities. In 1941, man had the capability to fly 300 mph and to attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 ft. Today, he orbits the earth at 17,500 mph and in a few years will set foot on the moon and possibly later Mars.” (lrc Release 66-1; Lewis News, 1/23/66, 1-12; upi, Miami Herald, 1/24/66)
Optimistic assessment of prospects for exploring Mars during the next decade and finding some form of life there was presented by scientists at the AAS-sponsored symposium on "The Search for Extraterrestrial Life” in Anaheim, Calif. Carlos De Moraes, director of planetary program studies for Martin Co., visualized a series of space flights from 1969 to 1979 and culminating in the landing of two 3,500-lb. "space buses.” First flight, in 1969, would be of an 850-lb. spacecraft that would provide televised mapping of the Mars surface and take measurements of the atmosphere. After a series of intermediary flights, the space buses would land in 1979 and release both automated biological laboratories and roving vehicles that would explore and gather samples at points away from the immediate landing area. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of jpl noted that "any form of life, however primitive, found on Mars would be of immense scientific value.” He said that no matter how bleak the picture, the possibilities of life on Mars should be explored to the fullest because that planet appeared to be the likeliest site for life beyond the earth. GE engineers P. G. Thome and Ernest J. Merz described giant clamshell under development that would be part of a system launched by a Saturn V booster in 1973. The thick disc-shaped object would open like a giant mollusk when landed on Mars, releasing devices that would start gathering information on atmosphere, weather, soil, and life. Information would be telemetered back to earth. Disc could be powered by radioisotope-fueled generator that could keep it in operation for up to six months. (Texts) Speculating about meetings with intelligent beings from or on another planet, Harold D. Lasswell, Yale Univ. professor of law and political science, asked: "Would earthlings unite or wage interstellar war? Would we have to kow-tow to a more advanced civilization, or dominate an inferior one? Suppose they had no more, or even less, feelings of love and responsibility? Might meeting with an advanced society push man further toward creating a culture of frantic fun?” (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
Missiles and Rockets reported prediction of Japanese rocket engineer Dr. Hideo Itokawa that Japan might launch 60-lb. probes to Mars and Venus after orbiting its first satellite in 1968. Itokawa said the Mu series launch vehicle, under development by Univ. of Tokyo Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, would produce enough thrust— 400,000	lbs.—to launch interplanetary probes. (M&R, 1/3/66, 7)
Dr. Norman F. Ness of gsfc Laboratory for Space Sciences described in Science the new view of earth’s magnetic field afforded by satellite mapping. Among developments in space physics, he pointed out studies in planetary magnetism leading to comparison of earth with a "magnetic comet” and results obtained by mariners ii and iv indicating the unique strength of earth’s magnetic field, compared with those of Venus and Mars. He noted the importance of these data and other satellite measurements for paleomagnetic research. (Science, 3/4/66, 1041-52)
Solar electric propulsion of unmanned spacecraft to Mars appeared entirely possible by the mid-1970’s, reported jpl researchers John Stearns and Donald W. Ritchie at AIAA meeting in San Diego. Four 55-ft.-long folding rectangular solar-cell panels would furnish power that could be harnessed to a set of small ion-chamber engines to propel spacecraft with approximate 7,000-lb. payload toward Mars. Trip would take about 300 days and culminate in orbit around Mars. Report also envisioned 850-day mission by solar-electric-propelled spacecraft to and beyond Jupiter in late 1970’s, (jpl Release; NASA Release 66-53)
Six-week NASA-sponsored exploration trip to search for plant life in Chile’s Atacama Desert—area resembling Martian terrain because of its extreme aridity—was begun by Richard W. Davies, jpl Advanced Studies Section, and two other jpl scientists. Explorers, who planned to send back 1,000	lbs. of sandy soil for analysis, would concentrate on high plateau near Calama, 80 mi. inland and 5,000 to 8,000 ft. above sea level. Similar trip last year had yielded a microflora in top four inches of sand. (jpl Release)
nas Space Science Board issued the first in series of three reports entitled Space Research: Directions for the Future. Report, prepared at NASA’s request, outlined research objectives for planetary and lunar exploration in 1970-1985. Compiled by working group led by Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at ucla, Part I repeated nas’ 1964 recommendation that top priority in post-Apollo program be assigned to unmanned exploration of Mars. Report suggested secondary importance be divided equally between detailed investigation of lurain and unmanned exploration of Venus, and completed priority list with other major planets, comets and asteroids, Mercury, Pluto, and interplanetary dust. Major recommendations were: launching an orbiting planetary observatory, delivering a drop sonde to resolve question of high Venusian surface temperature, developing fine-pointing control, accurate to 10 sec. of arc, for rocket guidance, and considering enlargement of NASA deep-space communication capabilities beyond present plans. To support outlined scientific program, report recommended: (1) increasing manpower and facilities available to lunar and planetary science programs; (2) development by NASA of substantial program for observation of planets through ground-based telescopes; (3) early opportunities for experienced observational scientists to explore the lurain; (4) joint study by NASA ossa and omsf of early use of Saturn V for planetary exploration, with special emphasis on a Martian capsule landing in the early 1970’s; (5) increased attention by NASA to development of research and educational capabilities in theoretical sciences related to study of the solar system. Regarding funding of space research, the report said:	. . since we believe that the exploration of the solar system bears so directly on the major central scientific questions of our time, we anticipate that unmanned experiments will probably provide the most significant contribution to the program of planetary exploration ... we recommend that the percentage of support of lunar and planetary exploration be maintained over the 1965-1985 time period and be devoted predominantly to scientific objectives and that programs whose objectives are other than scientific be started only as additional resources become available.” It said there should be a gradual shift in emphasis from the moon to the planets, progressing toward nearly equivalent expenditures for lunar and planetary exploration in the 19701985 period. (Text; nas-nrc Release)
Computer technique developed by JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan and applied to 12 photos of the lunar surface transmitted by NASA’s surveyor i spacecraft revealed details as small as 1/50 of an inch and, in some cases, apparently doubled observable characteristics. Enhancement process had been used successfully to intensify photos transmitted by NASA’s three Ranger spacecraft and mariner iv Mars probe. (nasa Release 66-206; jpl Release)
Threat of contamination of Mars made search for that planet’s indigenous life, at any stage of evolution from prebiotic to extinct, an urgent undertaking, according to Biology Working Group’s section on exobiology in third and final report of nas Space Science Board Summer Study (June-July 1965) at Woods Hole, Mass. Report, Space Research: Directions for the Future, Part Three, said: ". . . the exploration of Mars, with initial emphasis on the detection and characterization of possible Martian life, should constitute the major scientific goal of the United States space program in the period following the manned lunar landing.” High priority in field of environmental biology was given to study effects of weightlessness, with particular attention to "synergistic or antagonistic effects from simultaneously imposed stresses of radiation and weightlessness.” Orbiting research facilities with six- to eight-man crews to study effects of prolonged space flight preceding extended manned missions were recommended by Medicine and Physiology Working Group. Report urged series of manned flights, ground-based studies, and biosatellite experiments to yield data for planetary exploration. Group examining NASA-university relations urged increases in training budget and facilities and research grants, plus a program providing graduate students'with flight opportunities. (Text)
Team of jpl scientists left Cal Tech on first NASA-sponsored investigation of Antarctica. Scientists would spend 2lA mos. in Wright, Victoria, Taylor, and Beacon Valleys taking samples and conducting tests that might prove valuable in future unmanned exploration of Mars. (jpl Release, 11/13/66)
New studies of Martian atmosphere had rekindled hope of finding life on Mars, Dr. Lewis D. Kaplan of Jpl reported at Western meeting of American Chemical Society in San Francisco. French scientists Drs. Pierre and Janine Connes of the Observatory of Haut-Provence, using improved spectroscopic equipment designed by Dr. Connes, had found concentration of hydrogen compounds around Mars 1,000 times greater than in earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Kaplan, who analyzed observations obtained, said the hydrogen compounds—considered necessary to life— probably included methane derivatives and perhaps methane itself. Methane appears on earth as gaseous hydrocarbon product of decomposed organic matter and is known to he produced by anaerobic bacteria not requiring the oxygen essential to most life on earth. Dr. Kaplan’s work was sponsored by NASA and by France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) and the Meudon Observatory. (AP, NYT, 10/18/66, 9)
LaRC would test parachutes for possible landing of instrumented unmanned capsules on Mars beginning in summer 1966, in support of NASA’s Voyager planetary exploration project. Parachutes would be carried by balloons and sounding rockets to 130,000-ft. altitude—where thin earth atmosphere simulates Martian atmosphere—and would then be deployed behind test units accelerated to mach 1.2 in level flight [see Aug. 30]. (nasa Release 66-90; LaRC Release)
nasa’s decision to launch Mariner E—mariner iv’s backup probe—to Venus rather than Mars was criticized by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: "As a Venus probe, just about everything conceivable is wrong with Mariner-E. Its solar panels are too big, but without them its center of gravity would be all wrong; its earth-seeking radio antenna— essential for long-distance communication—is oriented the wrong way; it is protected against cold rather than heat; its instruments are designed to explore a small planet with a thin atmosphere rather than an earth-sized object with a dense one. "Another Mariner flight to Mars promises far greater return . . . than a jury-rigged mission to Venus.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/6/66)
nasa selected Northrop Corp. for final negotiations on $5-million contract for design, development, fabrication, and testing of "engineering mechanics subsystems for Mariner Mars ’69 spacecraft.” Contract would be managed by JPL. (nasa Release 66-170)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
Vexing problem of the direction and period of Venus’ rotation had acquired a new dimension in recent ultraviolet photographs, according to an article in Science by Bradford A. Smith of the New Mexico State Univ. Observatory. Smith recounted the history of 60 yrs of visual and spectroscopic observation of Venus that produced inconclusive evidence. Radar observation begun in 1961 by 1967 had produced what was considered firm evidence that the solid globe of Venus in 244 days rotated once in a direction retrograde to that of its planetary neighbors earth and Mars. Recent ultraviolet photos taken at the New Mexico State Univ. Observatory with a new 61-cm reflector indicated that ultraviolet clouds of the Venusian atmosphere rotated retrograde in five days. This large discrepancy between movement of the globe and atmosphere of Venus could be explained only by the existence in the Venusian atmosphere of a persistent and widespread planetary wind system blowing at more than 180 mph, Smith said. Although earth’s jet stream reached such speeds, it was narrow and zonal, in contrast to the massive system that would have to exist on Venus if these observations were correct. {Science, 10/6/67, 114r-6)
Communications with NASA’s Mariner IV Mars probe, launched Nov. 28, 1964, were terminated because of greatly reduced telemetry availability. Spacecraft had responded to series of commands Oct. 25-27 and had continued operating satisfactorily until it exhausted its gas supply in the attitude control system Dec. 7 and began to pitch, roll, and yaw. On Dec. 10 and 11 Mariner IV recorded 83 micrometeoroid hits which apparently induced severe perturbations in pitch and yaw causing degraded signal strength. During its 3.06-yr lifetime, Mariner IV had traveled more than 1.5 billion mi in heliocentric orbit, taken world’s first closeup photos of Mars from 5,500-mi altitude, and returned excellent data, (nasa Proj Off; AP, B Sun, 12/23/67; W Post, 12/23/67, A5)	_
jpl had selected TRW Systems, Inc., for negotiations on a $1-million contract for design, modification, fabrication, and testing of the propulsion subsystem for the 1969 Mariner Mars mission, (nasa Release 67—4)
Laser applications in industry and space were rapidly increasing, William Smith noted in the New York Times. A solar-powered laser was being developed for communication across the 50 million mi between earth and Mars, and Dr. Henry Lewis, director of rca’s David Sarnoff Research Center, predicted the laser would also play a very important role in tracking space vehicles. Said Dr. Lewis: “The laser fits the bill with greater accuracy than radar is capable of obtaining.” (Smith, NYT, 1/15/67, FI)	.	.	„
NASA had awarded Electro Optical Systems, Inc., a $2-million contract for design, fabrication, and testing of the power subsystem for the 1969 Mariner Mars mission, (nasa Release 67—17)
NASA reported its space engineers at jpl’s Space Flight Operations Facility, using Goldstone dsn station, had sent commands to check Mariner IV’s camera and data storage system; spacecraft, launched Nov. 28, 1964, had now traveled about 1.5 billion miles and was circling sun between earth and Mars. Mariner IV had been commanded to take TV pictures of black space and record on magnetic tape after long space environment exposure. The spacecraft had responded perfectly. Commands also were sent to switch Mariner V’s transmitter from high gain directional to low gain omnidirectional antenna, mission of spacecraft being terminated; Mariner V, launched June 14, had completed its Venus mission and was in solar orbit between orbits of Venus and Mercury, about 74 million miles from earth and about 60 million miles from sun. NASA reported that it might be possible to recontact Mariner V in Sept. 1968, when spacecraft’s antennas would be pointed once again toward earth. Both Mariners would remain in solar orbit indefinitely; however, 'because Mariner IV’s stabilizing nitrogen gas supply was expected to run out in the next few weeks, spacecraft would drift and solar panels would no longer face the sun. Data reception would end because storage batteries would no longer receive charge, (nasa Release 67-291)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXIV into orbit with 39,750-km (24,699mi) apogee, 500-km (311-mi) perigee, 715-min period, and 64.5° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/67) During August: “Despite the rancor and doubt of the moment [about U.S. space program], the evidence is persuasive that the nation has been well served indeed,” Fortune magazine said in an article reviewing NASA problems, shortcomings, and accomplishments. The article, “Jim Webb’s Earthy Management of Space,” said: “Webb . . . has developed a managerial doctrine as extraordinary as the space mission itself. Essentially it is a bold extension of the systems-management principle first applied in the Pentagon for weapon development. This approach means that the Pentagon tries to relate design and procurement plans to the weapon system’s maximum potential, to other weapon systems, to cost effectiveness, to foreseeable strategic situations, and to other special considerations. In NASA’s case, the ‘system’ is usually an exotic research objective, like landing a package of instruments on Mars. Such an undertaking, of course, requires management consideration of costs and engineering feasibility, but NASA also tries to relate it to the social, economic, and even political impact the new knowledge may have on some of the most basic mysteries of human life. In one sense, the system becomes an exercise in applied philosophy. To master such massively complex and extensive problems, the agency has mobilized some 20,000 individual firms, more than 400,000 workers, and 200 colleges and universities in a combine of the most advanced resources of American civilization.” (Mecklin, Fortune, 8/67)
The Washington Post commented on NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Exploration of the moon. Giant orbiting space stations, with as many as a dozen men living and working in them for as long as a year. Unmanned landings on Mars. “These are the goals the United States has set for itself in outer space in the 1970s. With a budget request for fiscal 1968 of $5.05 billion, more than $500 million of it for dramatic new programs to carry us beyond a manned landing on the moon, President Johnson has made it clear that the United States is in space to stay, no matter what the Soviet Union does or does not do. ...” (W Post, 1/25/67, A18)
Acting Under Secretary of Commerce Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, in testimony before Senate Commerce Committee and Committee on Public Works’ Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution, recommended against direct Federal support of an electric car “at this time.” He urged instead a program to reward the “best designs of low-pollutant vehicles by basing Government purchase on performance competition. ... If electric vehicles can compete successfully ... a market could be made available on which production facilities and schedules could be based. . . .” (Testimony, 9, 11) Arthur C. Clarke, author and past president of British Interplanetary Society, chided critics of space program expenditures because “ ‘there is so much to do on earth.’ . . . There was plenty to do in Europe when Columbus left—there’s still plenty to do there. But the opening up of the new world did more to revive the stagnant European culture and economy than an internal action could possibly have done. “. . . I welcome the so-called space race, despite the multiplication of cost and human effort that it involves. If we weren’t racing, we wouldn’t be moving quickly enough. . . .” (Text) Mariner spacecraft would be increasingly useful in returning scientific data from the planets, JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering predicted. He noted launch opportunities during 1970’s in which Mariner-type spacecraft could be flown to more than one planet in series of gravity-assist missions and said 1970-6 period offered several favorable opportunities for closeup study of the comets by Mariner-type spacecraft carrying up to 150 lbs of scientific instruments. (Text) GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark, discussing possible first mission configuration for a Galactic Jupiter probe, said an initial flight could probably be launched during a 20-day launch window centered on first week of March 1972. Planetary encounter would occur between 17 and 20 mos after launch. (Text) Sterilization of lander and surface laboratory constituted “the most difficult technological task” of NASA’s Voyager program to explore Mars and Venus with automated spacecraft during 1970’s, Edgar M. Cort-right, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the meeting. The most difficult scientific task vas developing an effective integrated set of biological experiments. (Text) Exploration of the planets would contribute to, not detract from, man’s ability to meet problems on earth, Dr. Charles Sheldon II, Library of Congress, suggested. “Also one has the right to hope that even if elements of past history repeat in new forms, mankind with a shrinking world and shrinking solar system, and with a greater awareness of his place within the scheme of things will divert his restless energies and struggles to overcoming the space frontiers rather than wasting his talents and his treasures in fratricidal war. . . .” (Text) U.S. had achieved world leadership in the technology of space exploration, but that leadership was relative and by no means conclusive, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) asserted. “The challenge is no less great now than it was in 1957 when Sputnik I jolted us out of the narcosis of complacency. To our peril, we cannot allow the transient pressures and strains of American life to vitiate our determination to maintain that leadership. At the same time we cannot ignore or overlook any opportunity to reach a rapport and an understanding with Russia that will be of material assistance in making the exploration of space for peaceful purposes truly a monumental achievement of all mankind.” (Text) March 15: NASA and West Germany’s Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) signed Memorandum of Understanding for study of electric fields in the upper atmosphere. NASA would furnish five Nike-Apache sounding rockets for launch from esro facilities at Kiruna, Sweden, beginning in April. Rockets would release barium clouds, particularly in the auroras, to be observed from the ground, bmwf would provide chemical payloads and ground observation equipment and would conduct launchings in cooperation with esro and Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) . Both NASA and bmwf would bear cost of their respective responsibilities. Results would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 67-57)
oar’s afcrl would launch four 812-ft-long balloon systems from Walker afb in summer 1967 to complete series of five launches conducted by nasa to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program [see May 9], oar Commander m/g Ernest A. Pinson announced. Scheduled for June 27, July 20, Aug. 9 and 24, flights would evaluate performance of different types of parachutes at pressures and velocities equivalent to a descent through the Martian atmosphere. Each balloon would carry, for release at high altitude, a simulated Voyager capsule and a parachute designed to softland the capsule on Mars. Five cameras—two on the capsule and three on the parachute—would be used to evaluate each test. First flight in the series was conducted Aug. 30, 1966.	(oar Release 67-17; AP, NYT, 6/8/67, 3)
Growing confidence that U.S. would accomplish a manned lunar landing by 1970 had plunged space planners into an urgent debate over post-Apollo plans, John Wilford wrote in the New York Times. Should the U.S. concentrate on unmanned and manned exploration of Mars or Venus? An expanded lunar-oriented program? Giant manned laboratories in earth orbit for research and surveillance? Networks of communications and meteorological satellites? Or a series of instrument probes to comets, asteroids, and outer planets? Such questions had opened a searching reexamination into the value of space exploration, and some critics were urging a less ambitious and costly program, with more emphasis “on the problems that confront us here on earth.” While the debate continued, nasa was said to favor concentrating on manned orbiting laboratories that would exploit present technology. Although a broad range of space goals was considered attainable in the next two decades, NASA officials said failure to define post-Apollo objectives soon could cause U.S. to find itself unprepared to achieve any major space goal before the mid-1970s. (Wilford, NYT, 1/22/67, 1)
JPL announced development of double vacuum chamber, designed by jpl’s James B. Stephens, to simulate extreme effects of interplanetary space on spacecraft. Called Molsink (molecular sink of outer space), chamber was expected to determine what happened to paint, components, and even microorganisms on spacecraft. The eight-foot-dia chamber would be capable of capturing 99.97% of all condensable molecules emanating from test item by freezing the molecules to the walls at — 400° F with super-cold helium gas. Conventional vacuum chambers had not been able to pump, or capture, more than half of gas molecules flying off test item. Space scientists believed Molsink chamber would provide reliable tool to measure and counteract problem of spacecraft out-gassing. In testing, long periods would simulate actual flight time of spacecraft to planets—four months to Venus, seven months to Mars, for example. The chamber was expected to be fully operational early in 1968, when testing would be stepped up for nasa’s Mariner Mars 1969 exploration program. ( jpl Release 459) Local sunset for second lunar day occurred on Oct. 23. Spacecraft operating time from turn-on command until second sunset was 232 hrs. Total of 1,043 TV pictures were obtained. By sunset Surveyor V had been configured for hibernating through second lunar night. Estimates were that engineering interrogations and compartment heating would be discontinued Oct. 31. (NASA Proj Off; upi, W Post, 10/16/67, A3; AP, NYT, 10/17/67, 9)
Mariner IV, launched Nov. 28, 1964, survived apparent micrometeoroid shower. Spacecraft’s cosmic dust detector registered 17 hits within 15 min, while Mariner IV traveled between orbits of earth and Mars. Spacecraft was 29.6 million miles from earth and had traveled about 1.4 billion miles in its 1,020 days of flight. Micrometeoroid shower had caused temporary change in spacecraft’s attitude but no loss of power. Scientists concluded, from one-degree temperature drop inside spacecraft, that only the thermal shield was damaged. Within about a week, spacecraft was operating without any apparent effect from incident. Since photographing Mars in July 1965, Mariner IV had been used for engineering experiments and acquisition of scientific data. (O’Toole, W Post, 9/16/67, A7; NASA Proj Off)
Cosmos, Minn.—a community of 560—had given all its streets astronomical names such as Mars, Jupiter, Pegasus, and Comet. (AP, NYT, 5/22/67)
jpl scientists Robert J. Parks and Jack N. James were awarded Franklin Institute’s Stuart Ballantine Medal for 1967 by Institute President Wynn L.	LePage. Parks and James were cited for excellence in systems engineering and extraordinary skill in applying techniques of electromagnetic communications to first successful reconnaissance on Mars by Mariner IV. The Ballantine Medal was awarded for outstanding achievement in the fields of communication and reconnaissance which employed electromagnetic radiation, (jpl Lab-Oratory, 11/67, 3)
A 2,000-mph usaf SR—71 reconnaissance aircraft on routine training flight from Beale afb, Calif., crashed near Lovelock, Nev. Its two crew members ejected safely. Aircraft, built for usaf by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. as successor to the TJ—2, was third SR-71 to crash on routine flight; others had crashed Jan. 25, 1966, and April 13, 1967. (AP, NYT, 10/27/67, 41)	_ JPL scientists were “delighted” with the firing of midcourse guidance engine, and with transmission of pictures of Mars taken by Mariner IV more than two years ago. Scientists reported “a flawless burn . . . [which] proved we can restart engines in space years after we’ve put them there.” Future spacecraft, exploiting this success, could be launched to distant planets where they could take close-up photographs, swing back toward earth, and, on command, transmit pictures. Mariner IV had taken pictures of Mars from an altitude of 5,500 mi; 21 frames had been exposed and recorded on magnetic tape to be telemetered to earth over a 10-day period. As of 8:00 pm edt Oct. 27, Mariner IV was in its 1,062nd day of flight, 35,604,255 mi (57,299,604 km) from earth, and traveling at 3.91 mps (6.29 kps) relative to earth. (NASA Proj Off; O’Toole, W Post, 10/27/67, A3)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
A college which would train 2,000 pilots and technicians annually for the expanding aviation industry was proposed in report by a study group sponsored by the Economic Development Administration. Report recommended that various segments of the aviation industry join to form a nonprofit organization to operate flight training portion of the college. Academic side would be handled by Arizona State Univ. Report estimated college would cost $13-million and could be opened by 1969. (upi, NYT, 8/23/67, 73) Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported that there were about three times as many craters on Mars as preliminary photos transmitted in 1965 by Mariner IV spacecraft indicated. Citing data from two-year study of photos using new computer-enhancement technique, Dr. Leighton said pictures showed 300 clearly defined craters and more than 300 additional possible craters. Original estimate from unprocessed pictures was less than 100. Mars appeared to be about as densely pitted as the moon but its craters were smoother because of more effective erosion processes. Several photos showed a number of linear features similar to lines formed by rifts and faults on the moon. These features were not the “much-discussed” canals of Mars because they were too narrow to be visible from earth. Dr. Leighton said, but they might be related to some of the markings identified earlier as canals, (nasa Release 67—225) Dr. and Mrs. Pierre Connes of Haute Provence Observatory and Meudon Observatory, France, respectively, reported evidence that might indicate Venusian clouds are not formed by water. Observation technique which greatly increased precision with which planets’ spectra could be analyzed showed spectral lines of hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride in the light reflected from Venus. When hydrogen fluoride combines with water it creates hydrochloric acid which absorbs radar waves; yet radar waves are known to penetrate Venutian clouds, returning echoes to the surface of the earth. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/24/67) The “mysterium phenomenon”—peculiar radio emissions from the Milky Way which display almost all the characteristics of artificial interstellar communication—was the subject of a report by Dr. T. K. Menon, National Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., and a later panel discussion. Dr. Menon said most recent observations of the emissions in the nearby part of the galaxy had been made simultaneously from California, Massachusetts, and U.K., using almost the entire width of earth as a baseline for measurement. They had identified sources of emissions which were smaller than the smallest star as seen by the human eye and discovered some of these emissions were fluctuating on time scales measured in hours or even less. Panel raised the possibility that emissions might be from stars in the process of formation. They were being transmitted at four closely spaced wavelengths associated with hydroxyl, a molecule formed of a single oxygen and hydrogen atom, and were being given off when such molecules shed energy. Emissions also appeared to have various properties associated with a maser—man-made device in which a radio or light wave is beamed through certain atoms whose energy has been raised, enormously amplifying original wave and, if wave is confined to a single axis, producing a beam of extreme intensity. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/26/67, 1, 10; 8/28/67, 22) Lunar Committee postponed naming of surface features on moon’s far side pending the results of Lunar Orbiter V mission. A list of 228 names for approximately 500 major features had been submitted by Soviet scientists, but U.S. delegates cited errors in their designations and asked that features be assigned numbers until a more definitive map could be prepared using Lunar Orbiter V photos. Commission agreed to interim number designations and accepted U.S. map temporarily, assigning study group to report on specific names at next assembly. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/25/67, 13; nas-nrc-nae News Report, 10/67, 6-7) IAU president Dr. Pol Swings of Belgium confirmed an observation made by two obscure Irish astronomers in 1882. Astronomers Lohse and Copeland had observed a comet during the day, apparently with a handheld spectroscope, and reported that it glowed strongly with spectral lines of iron as it passed the sun. All earlier observations of light emitted from comets as they neared the sun indicated they were composed of very light materials, and the idea that they were rich in iron was viewed skeptically. However, photos and electric recordings taken of the comet Ikeya-Seki as it passed the sun in 1966 showed unmistakable spectral lines of iron, Dr. Swings said. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/27/67, 51) Dr. Gordon H. Pettengill, mit’s Lincoln Laboratory, said that results from an experiment which studied Martian terrain by bouncing radar signals off the planet indicated: (1) Mars was roughly as mountainous as earth; (2) there were no large bodies of water on Mars; and (3) there was no clear correlation between height of land and presence of dark areas on Mars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15) Dr. Bradford A. Smith, New Mexico State Univ., confirmed report by French astronomer Pierre Guerin that atmosphere of Venus was moving around the planet in a clockwise direction at a remarkable rate of speed. Conclusion was based on photos of Venusian atmosphere taken successively both at night and during the day, which recorded changes in wavelengths of ultraviolet light. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
238,154 airmen certificates—a new annual record and a 32% increase over 1965 total—were issued by faa in 1966. (faa Release 67-18) nuclear rocket—it could be used for continued exploration of the moon after first Apollo landings. “Using a non-nuclear Saturn 5, astronauts are restricted to landing areas in a narrow strip along the moon’s equator. A nuclear upper stage would permit a manned spacecraft to land anywhere on the surface of the moon.” Other possible uses included manned flyby missions to Mars and Venus; unmanned flights of large payloads to Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury, or within a few million miles of sun; and manned orbital flights to Mars and Venus. (Hines, W Star, 3/6/67,1; 3/7/67)
Mass meeting in U.S.S.R.’s Palace of Congresses inside the Kremlin Wall heard l/c Aleksei A. Leonov recall heritage of fellow pioneers; he had been an associate of Col. Komarov who had been killed on Apr. 24 in the first flight of third-generation Soyuz I spacecraft. Cosmonaut Leonov said: “We cannot help recall our friend, test pilot Vladimir Mikhailovic Komarov. Grateful mankind will always preserve the memory of these wonderful people in its heart.” The mass meeting was the highlight of Soviet celebration of the 10th anniversary of Sputnik 7’s launching [see Oct. 4]. In the Soviet press on the same day, scientist Konstantin P. Feoktisov, veteran of three-orbit flight in 1964, listed a manned laboratory in orbit as first among coming space developments, then a moon landing, then a “starting to Venus and Mars.” (upi, AP, NYT, 10/5/67, C20)
U.S. space program was a sound investment which would pay “handsome dividends” to all Americans and to humanity in general, UCLA professor of chemistry Dr. Willard F. Libby told aas meeting in Denver. Winner of the 1960 Nobel Prize in chemistry and discoverer of radio-carbon dating, Dr. Libby suggested that space program opponents “quit grumbling about going-to-the-moon extravagance with taxpayers’ money” and realize that large expenditures were necessary to maintain U.S. world leadership in space.	• “And we can’t stop at the moon. . . . Once we’ve ventured that far, we should establish a base there for manned takeoffs to Mars and Venus. “Now Congress is debating the merits of authorizing space exploration beyond the moon in the early ’70s. They have dpty to debate such a venture, costing more than $2 billion. But what . . . would Congress do with that money if it weren’t spent on future space research?” Space research had already made great contributions to medicine, microelectronics, worldwide communications, and many other fields, he said, and could continue to achieve much mote “for the good of humanity and the expansion of frontiers of human knowledge.” (Lindbergh, Denver Post, 7/16/67)	_
Sixty-day Sealab III experiment would be conducted 430 ft below the Pacific off San Clemente Island in winter 1967 as part of usn’s “Man-in-the-Sea” program. Underwater laboratory would be staffed by five eight-man diving teams rotating on 12-day shifts. Aquanauts would conduct experimental salvage techniques and oceanographic and marine biology research; and undergo series of physiological and human performance tests. Sealab Ill’s long-range goal was to develop capability for rescue and salvage operations under ocean’s surface and to determine how submerged continental shelf could be used militarily. In Sealab I experiment, conducted July 20-30, 1964, four divers were submerged 192 ft beneath the Atlantic; in Sealab II, Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, three teams of 10 divers alternated in spending two-week periods 205 ft beneath the Pacific off La Jolla, Calif, (dod Release 72-67) performing photosynthesis. Sullivan concluded: “Despite the perceptible swing of the pendulum toward the possibility of life on Mars, a wide disparity of views on the nature of the Martian environment was presented at the meeting. It was evident that the information is still insufficient to assess the likelihood of life on Mars or even to design experiments for landings there that would most effectively test for the existence of life. . . .” (Sullivan, NYT, 2/12/67, 12E)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell wrote to the Editor of Aerospace Technology: “In 1973, NASA proposes to conduct the first of the Voyager series of missions to Mars, using the Saturn launch vehicle. We wish to call the attention of the scientific community to the opportunity of proposing experiments for this initial flight_ “. . . Regardless of the level of funding support obtained for Voyager this fiscal year, it is our plan to begin evaluating scientific proposals on Nov. 1, 1967, and to select scientists for participation in the planning and development steps by Feb. 1968....” (Aero Tech, 8/28/67, 8)
Increased appropriations for riot-torn cities should take precedence over NASA’s request for funds to finance unmanned exploration of the planets, Washington Daily News suggested in an editorial. “James E. Webb . . . is concerned over cuts in the agency’s $5 billion budget including reduction in money for unmanned exploration of Venus and Mars. Russia, he says, is about to send up the biggest . . . rocket you ever saw. In the present state of domestic affairs, we’d say let ’em! “From all appearances our scientists already have more and more exact information about conditions on Venus and Mars than our police and war-on-poverty experts have on Los Angeles and Cleveland-----” (W News, 7/28/67, 16)
William C. Schneider, formerly Mission Director for NASA’s Apollo Applications (aa) program, was named Apollo Mission Director and Apollo Program Deputy Director for Missions, omsf. Schneider would be responsible for management, direction, and coordination of mission and flight plans, schedules, and associated activities, (nasa Release 67-206) During July: Editorial comment on proposed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills [see June 28]: Science: “The political atmosphere surrounding the U.S. space program is today murkier and less hospitable than at any time since 1961 when President Kennedy'decided to send men to the moon. This does not necessarily mean that nasa is in any danger of falling off its $5-billion-a-year budgetary plateau . . . [but] it is clear that, where Congress is concerned, the agency has lost much of its innocence and therefore its plans are to be reviewed with caution and skepticism. “Some members of Congress are remarkably frank in indicating that their principal interest in the space program lies in the economic benefits it brings their districts. . . . Indeed, one might be justified in predicting that the major budgetary struggles of the future will be less concerned with how much money nasa gets than with how NASA spends the money it does get.” (Carter, Science, 7/14/67, 170-3) Washington Evening Star: “If continuity and momentum are to be maintained in the space program . . . the [congressional] conferees must act with special wisdom this year. “Two . . . items in the House bill should be embodied in one final version. . . . One would establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and the other would require . . . [nasa] to keep Congress ‘fully and currently informed’ of problem areas in the space effort. “Both proposals were strongly opposed by administration spokesmen on grounds that seem shallow and legalistic. It would be well to embody both in the final 1968 authorization bill, if only to put NASA on firm notice that it is time to shape up.” (W Star, 7/7/67, A16) New York Times: “To read the record of the Congressional debate on NASA’s budget is a melancholy experience. . . . Behind the rhetoric it was easy to see the pressure of the many corporations and communities now sharing in nasa’s largeness and fearful of the impact of any maj or cut in this flow of golden manna. . . . “A rational 1968 space budget would have been substantially lower than either the House or Senate version, and would have cut particularly severely at the Apollo project. ... It would have changed the present emphasis ... to lay greater stress on the exploration of the cosmos with relatively cheap, unmanned rockets. Instead, the enormously expensive manned lunar landing effort is left virtually intact, while the highly promising program for sending unmanned Voyagers to Mars and other planets could be entirely eliminated. “The lobbyists can rejoice, but the nation’s real interests have been dealt a severe setback.” (NYT, 7/3/67,10)
NASA’s Mariner V being weigbt-tested at Cape Kennedy before its successful launch on a four-month mission to perform a close flyby of the planet Venus. Mariner V, fifth in a series of interplanetary probes, had originally been built as a Mars probe to back up Mariner IV but was remodeled to accomplish Venus ’67 mission. Primary mission for the 540-lb spacecraft was to fly by Venus to obtain scientific data which would complement and extend data obtained by Mariner II pertaining to the origin and nature of Venus and its environment. Spacecraft’s secondary mission was to obtain data on interplanetary environment during a period of increased solar activity and provide engineering experience in converting and operating spacecraft designed for flight to Mars into one flown to Venus. Mariner V carried automatic sensing devices to record data for derivation of radiation levels, temperatures, pressures, magnetic fields, and atmospheric density near Venus. First Venus probe, Mariner I, was destroyed during launch July 22, 1962; second, Mariner II, was successfully launched Aug. 27, 1962, and flew within 21,600 mi of Venus Dee. 14, 1962. Mariner III, a Mars probe launched Nov. 4, 1964, failed to achieve desired orbit when shroud remained attached to spacecraft. Mariner IV was successfully launched Nov. 28, 1964, and transmitted first close-up photos of Mars in July 1965. Mariner program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management and responsibility for spacecraft, mission operations, and tracking and data acquisition were assigned to JPL; and Atlas-Agena launch vehicle was managed by Lewis Research Center, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-124)
Jonathan Spivak in Wall Street Journal commented on congressional cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Plans to launch unmanned satellites to Mars or Venus in 1971 and 1973 and conduct extended exploration of the moon by astronauts face probable abandonment because of a lack of funds. There will also be sharp curtailment of proposals for long-duration manned flights in orbit about the earth to enhance the nation’s space technology and exploit practical and scientific applications of space. Thus, say space officials, the present outlook is that only a limited national space program will continue in the 1970s after the lunar landing.” (Spivak, WSJ, 10/11/67, 24)
Soviet failure to launch probe toward Mars during January Mars “window” supported reports that U.S.S.R. space program had “run into budget troubles,” Newsweek reported. (Newsweek, 2/13/67)
NASA successfully conducted fifth test of a rocket-launched parachute as part of an advanced technology effort to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected ringsail parachute at 130,000-ft altitude, where earth atmosphere resembles that of Mars. Parachute descended to earth with 200-lb payload carrying camera and instruments to record deployment of parachute and its characteristics in flight. Test was part of LaRc’s planetary entry parachute program. (NASA Release 67-120)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, defended the Mariner/Mars 1971 mission in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Responding to criticism by Committee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) that information from the mission would arrive too late to contribute to the design of the 1973 Voyager spacecraft, Dr. Newell said: “. . . it is very important to recognize . . . that there are three areas of design involved. One is the hardware design. Two is software design, and three is design of the scientific mission. . . . The Mars 71 probe will be fully in time for us to use in the software design, in other words, setting the profile of the mission to get the spacecraft into the atmosphere and onto the surface, and will be fully involved in continuing design of the scientific experiments and observations. . . .” (Transcript, 433-5)
Second anniversary of Mars flyby by NASA’s Mariner IV, during which spacecraft flew within 6,118 mi of Mars, took 22 close-up photos of the planet, and transmitted scientific data on Martian atmosphere. Launched from etr Nov. 28, 1964, Mariner IV had traveled 1.3 billion mi during its 959 days of flight and had operated continuously for more than 23,000 hrs—exceeding its 6,000-hr design lifetime by more than 400%. nasa announced that satellite, which was expected to continue operating satisfactorily until early 1968, had been assigned a new mission. It would be used in an experiment to conduct simultaneous comparison of solar radiation during August 1967 “solar system line-up” involving Mariner IV, Mariner V (launched June 14), the earth, and the sun. (nasa Release 67—182)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
NASA successfully conducted sixth of 10 planned rocket-launched flight experiments to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected 40-ft cross-type parachute, one of three designs being studied, at 130,000-ft altitude where earth atmosphere resembles that of Mars. Parachute descended to earth carrying 200-lb payload. Test was part of LaRC’s Planetary Entry Parachute Program, (nasa Release 67-162)
JPL issued RFp’s to industry on contracts for preliminary design and definition studies of an unmanned Voyager landing capsule. Two identical Voyager spacecraft would be launched by a single Saturn V booster in 1973 and 1975 to conduct scientific studies of Mars and search for extraterrestrial life. From the industrial proposals, due in March, two to four contractors would be chosen. (NASA Release 67-15) * U.S.S.R. was definitely trying to achieve the first manned lunar landing, concluded a 920-page report on the Soviet space program prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences:	. . materials gathered from Soviet sources on future lunar missions reveal this pattern of complete unanimity: the lunar mission is desirable and necessary; it must be a manned mission; it is certain to succeed. . . Report characterized Soviet space program as “well-planned, orderly, and vigorously pursued with concentration on specific, limited objectives, each achieving a marked advance beyond the one preceding.” There was said to be no evidence “of either Soviet disenchantment with the program or a desire ... to cut it back. On the contrary, space specialists have underscored the durability of the Soviet commitment to space exploration. . . .” Report was entitled: Soviet Space Programs, 1962-65; Goals and Purposes, Achievements, Plans, and International Implications. (Text)
Senate Appropriations Committee ordered favorably reported, with amendments, nasa FY 1968 appropriation bill (H.R. 12474). Action restored $96 million of $516 million cut by House [see Aug. 22]. Two projects— Voyager Mars and nerva ii—were restored by increased funding in Senate move; as approved, bill totaled $4.7 billion. Bill moved to floor of Senate, (nasa lar VI/104; O’Toole, W Post, 10/4/67, A2)
Conclusion in Mar. 24 Science article by Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech and his associates about probable contamination of Mars and Venus by U.S.S.R.’s Zond 11 and Venus III received comment from Dr. Richard W. Porter, member of International Relations Committee of NRc’s Space Science Board, and from Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell. Murray and associates had presented information: tracking data from Jodrell Bank Experimental Station had indicated that Zond II, launched Nov. 30, 1964, had been on collision course with Mars, terminating Aug. 6, 1965; Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had said Zond II would pass within 1,448 km (900 mi) of Mars; Venus III, launched Nov. 12, 1965, may have crashlanded on Venus’ surface Mar. 1, 1966; radio communications had been maintained with Venus III throughout the flight hut were lost as the probe approached Venus; no telemetric data were received in final moments before impact. In a letter to editor of Science, Porter wrote: “Their conclusion with respect to Venus is based largely on what was not said by the Soviets about sterilization of the flyby bus and on the authors’ assumption that the capsule separation and bus deflection maneuvers were not made automatically, even after loss of radio contact.” Porter said authors’ conclusion about Mars was also based on insufficient evidence and noted that in discussions with “highly placed” Soviet scientists during spring 1965, he had received impression that Zond II’s miss distance was likely to be much greater than 900 mi. In his letter to editor of Science regarding Murray and associates’ statements on probable contamination of Mars and Venus, Sir Bernard Lovell noted that Zond II’s signals were so strong that there should have been no difficulty in tracking the probe at Mars encounter; also, miss distance of 1,500 km (932 mi) was within the accuracy of Jodrell Bank calculations. Sir Bernard Lovell would “prefer to accept the statement of the President of the [Soviet] Academy [of Sciences (Keldysh) ] about the miss distance. . . .” (Science, 3/24/67, 1505-11; 8/4/67, 487-8)
Francis J. Sullivan and Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Sullivan, Director of Electronics and Control Div., said that the development of technology for high-resolution, 60- to 120-in space telescopes for optical astronomy, communications, and other potential applications was a major OART effort. “Success in this research will provide the capability to study celestial objects which cannot be viewed from the ground because of atmospheric attenuation and will provide vastly improved resolution over that attainable through the earth’s atmosphere.” Sullivan said because environmental, structural, and control problems of large mirrors in space were almost insurmountable with conventional fabrication and alignment, unique approaches were being studied. One was 24-in-dia, three-segment mirror feasibility model in which distortion sensor, located in front of primary mirror, determined which segments were out of alignment and to what degree. Electronic circuitry then processed and used the alignment data to realign mirror surface segments with actuators located behind each segment. Dr. Kurzweg, Director of Research, said the jpl had developed a new mathematical approach for calculating energy requirements for Mars vehicles which provided, for the first time, a complete day-hy-day listing of the energies necessary for a round trip. Calculations had been completed for launching during the entire 1970-80 decade. “The calculated trajectories went from a circular parking orbit about the Earth to the vicinity of Mars, into a circular parking orbit about Mars for a stay time of 7 days, out of the circular parking orbit about Mars to the vicinity of the Earth, and into a circular parking orbit about the Earth. It was assumed that the one-way flight times for both the departure and return trajectories are the same.” Dr. Kurzweg said information was very important for “fast trade-off calculations for future advanced Mars missions. . . .” (Testimony)
St. Louis Univ. scientists Drs. F. C. Bates and Albert Pallman were studying structure and circulation of the lower Martian atmosphere to aid nasa in deciding whether to use a hard- or soft-landing spacecraft on first Mars mission, (upi, NYT, 8/17/67,24)
Glennan Space Engineering Building in Cleveland at Case Institute of Technology was dedicated, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We need more men like nasa’s first administrator . . . Dr. Keith Glennan . .. men who are willing ... to seek out new facts, new concepts of reality as to the current human situation and [who] have the courage to base new and untried political, professional, industrial and technological ventures on information they test and learn to trust.” Recognizing the value of institutions who provide graduate education, he said: “There is little further room to doubt that a high level of basic research, an intellectual activity that must be closely associated with graduate education, is indispensable to an advancing front of scientific knowledge. . . .” Webb referred to a June 1957 speech of J. S. McDonnell of St. Louis who had made predictions to graduating students at Rolla’s Missouri School of Mines. Prediction No. 1 had a satellite circling earth and moon in 12 years. Webb said accomplishment was completed in three months for earth and in two years for moon. Prediction No. 2 had a satellite circling earth and Mars in 23 years. Webb said this was accomplished in seven years. Prediction No. 3 had manned space flight in earth orbit in 33 years. Webb pointed out this was done in four years. Webb continued: “If we look backward, we can easily see that it took 37 years to conquer the earth’s oceans ... by the Caravelle sailing vessel [and] after that 37 years, the mind of man was never the same again. Control of the earth’s ocean avenues by England through the maintenance of a favorable balance of ocean technology was a predominant force for stability in the affairs of men for over 400 years [but] no clear favorable balance of air technology was held by any one nation long enough to create world stability. It was, in fact, a predominant force in the affairs of men for less than 60 years. Space technology will be a dominant force far longer than was the case for those of ocean and air. Not limited as was the ship to the water or the airplane to the air, or by international boundaries, or to the fuel that its tanks can carry, spacecraft are today unlimited tools to explore and measure the environment within which the earth itself moves and has its being.” (Text)
NASA successfully conducted at WSMR second of five balloon-launched parachute tests to determine effectiveness of parachutes as decelerators in soft-landing unmanned instrumented capsules on Mars. On ground command, 815-ft-long balloon released disc-shaped flight unit containing parachute, eight acceleration rockets, and 500-lb payload at 129,000ft altitude, where earth atmosphere is as thin as that of Mars. Rockets then propelled unit to 140,000-ft altitude; parachute deployed and descended with payload into planned recovery area. Test was part of LaRC’s Planetary Entry Parachute Program to investigate parachute landing systems for Voyager program, (nasa Release 67-170; Roswell Daily Record, 7/28/67; AP, NYT, 7/29/67, 7)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), releasing testimony earlier submitted to Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee, urged that $427 million be cut from NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). “We have to establish our priorities, and when it comes to parceling out money the space program stands far below defense, education and many other vital programs.” Specifically, Proxmire recommended: (1) temporarily delaying initiation of programs that would commit U.S. to a manned Mars mission and other deep-space probes; (2) cutting aa funds; and (3) cutting advanced missions funds. (Text)
Preliminary “pathfinder” flights could delay U.S.S.R.’s first manned lunar and planetary flights, according to Soviet scientist Vasili Parin in Sovetskaya Rossiya. “Experiments with animals,” preceding interplanetary flight, he said, “will take many months and perhaps many years.” (upi, NYT, 5/4/68, 66)
NASA announced it had authorized JPL to proceed with construction of two Mariner spacecraft for 1971 Mars orbit with funds allocated under approved FY 1969 NASA appropriations bill. In combined mission to assist in establishing touchdown sites for 1973 Mars lander mission, spacecraft would be launched by Adas-Centaur boosters into orbit around Mars to examine Mars polar cap, provide high-resolution coverage of selected areas, and permit oblique views of broad areas of Mars’ surface and, possibly, its moons, Phobos and Deimos. Each spacecraft would complete trip from earth to Mars in six months, with May 1971 launch and November 1971 arrival, and would orbit Mars for three months or more, (nasa Release 68—196; B Sun, 11/14/68, A10; W Post, 11/14/68, D16)
In Science Dr. J. C. G. Walker, Yale Univ. geologist and geophysicist, and N. W. Spencer, Chief of GSFc’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Biological Sciences, said thermosphere probe experiments had provided largest body of rocket mass-spectrometer data obtained. Tests had been conducted jointly by scientists at gsfc and Space Physics Research Lab. at Univ. of Michigan to determine temperatures of earth’s upper atmosphere. Since 1962, concentration and temperature of molecular nitrogen in upper atmosphere had been measured in 22 successful flights under varying conditions of solar activity, from launch sites at Fort Churchill, Manitoba, Wallops Island, Va., and Vega Baja, Puerto Rico. Scientists had concluded that upper atmosphere consisted of mixture of gases—electrons, ions, and neutral particles—each of which had distinct temperature. Multiplicity of temperatures could be expected in upper atmosphere of planets, though differences between planetary atmospheres must be more striking than similarities because of differences in atmospheric composition and in distance from sun. It was likely that absence of permanent magnetic field on either Mars or Venus caused further substantial differences between upper atmospheres of these planets and upper atmosphere of earth. (Science, 12/27/68, 1437—'11)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from WSMR carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 108-mi (173.8-km) altitude to measure height profile of nitric oxide and nitrogen and test Mariner Mars UV spectrometer. UV spectrometer measured earth’s day-glow and daylight between 1,100 A and 4,300 A. Inertial ACS successfully maneuvered payload until scat eye took control and caused instrument to scan through 10°. Experiment’s measurements and tests were successful. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented NASA FY 1969 interim operating plan to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Although President Johnson had not yet signed appropriations bill, Bureau of the Budget had indicated nasa’s share of $6 billion .expenditure reduction might amount to $350 million. This meant limitation of use of FY 1969 appropriations to $3.85 billion, Dr. Paine said. “Our actions also have had to be constrained by our current instructions within the Executive Branch to hold expenditures to a minimum in 1970 as well as in 1969, and to be prepared for the eventuality of budgetary limitations in FY 1970 even more restrictive than those in FY 1969. I am personally convinced that the nation’s space program requires an increase in funding in FY 1970 and I am hopeful ... we will succeed in establishing the need for a significant increase. Until this decision is made ... we have no alternative but to proceed with an interim operating plan . . . which, where possible, holds open options we can exercise in FY 1970 if the budget is higher but which does not overcommit us if the FY 1970 budget is lower.” Plan retained $2,025 billion authorized for Apollo program—$14 million below budget request. It reduced authorized $253.2 million for Apollo Applications to $150 million, amount “required to work toward the important but sharply limited and deferred Apollo Applications program we now propose.” This would include cessation of Saturn IB launch vehicle production after completion of 14th (Saturn 214) and discontinuation of Saturn V at completion of first 15 vehicles. Single Saturn I workshop and single Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) would be launched in early 1970s. Authorized $5 million for advanced missions would be cut to $2.5 million, for continued studies related to manned earth-orbital and lunar missions. Authorized $136.9 million would be reduced to $132.1 million for physics and astronomy, with level of effort in supporting research and technology and data analysis approximately 10% lower than in FY 1968. The $92.3 million authorized for lunar and planetary exploration would be cut to $75.8 million, with $6.8 million for lunar and $69 million for planetary—to support Mariner-Mars 1969 mission, reacquisition of telemetry from Mariner V, and Mariner-Mars 1971 mission. Plan also supported in FY 1969, at reduced funding level, capability to conduct Mars mission during 1973 opportunity in keeping with NAS recommendation [see Sept. 19]. Overall scope of mission would be reduced and schedule compressed. Operating plan provided for construction of two 210-ft antennas for Mars and other missions during 1970s. Launch vehicle procurement authorization of $115.7 million would be cut to $100.2 million and bioscience from $33 million to $32,7 million, which was $15 million below budget request and required slip of 6—12 mo in 21-day Biosatellite missions. Space applications authorization of $98.7 million would be retained; program change necessitated by May 18 destruction of Nimbus B would result in launch of replacement, Nimbus B2, in spring 1969. Aeronautics r&d budget would remain at authorized $74.9 million, while FY 1969 effort in nuclear rockets would be limited and nerva development deferred until 1970, when $7.5 million withheld in FY 1969 could be added to allow total of $39.5 million. Interim plan.would provide $178.4 million for basic research, space vehicle systems, electronics systems, human factor systems, space power and electric propulsion systems, and chemical propulsion—at reduction of $21.5 million from NASA’s budget request. Work in long-endurance life-support-equipment technologies would proceed as planned but in other areas research and technical development would be reduced, especially efforts in support of advanced space missions. Tracking and data acquisition budget would be reduced from $289.8 million authorized to $280 million, providing full Apollo schedule support but limiting support for spacecraft aloft and on future missions. Construction of facilities funds had been reduced from $39.6 million authorized to $21.8 million appropriated. Operating plan would increase figure to $35.7 million by transferring funds from R&D appropriation. Facility planning and design funds were reduced from $3 million requested to $1 million. Interim operating plan anticipated transfer of $20.1 million from R&D to administrative operations, bringing total to $623.3 million instead of $603.2 million in authorization and appropriations acts and $648.2 million requested by NASA in budget. Dr. Paine emphasized that administrative operations appropriation did not cover only “administrative” expenses; it covered direct costs of operating NASA laboratories, research centers, development centers, and launch centers. nasa Administrator James E. Webb told Committee: “. . . when you use words such as ‘Congress consistently has supported the Apollo program,’ you must add ‘at a minimum level.’ We have clearly indicated in every budget that the basis on which we were going forward with this support by Congress was one that did not take into account unusual risks and happenings and was, in effect, based on success in all these efforts.” Webb said NASA Apollo funding was related to success on various operations and did not include “a return to test flight on the Saturn IB should we not be able to make the shift to the big rocket after this next flight.” From 1961 to 1969, Webb said, “we have not had the funds to proceed except in a manner that would permit us, within the total budget, to do this lunar landing within this decade and on an all-up systems test basis. So the excruciatingly painful period of all-up testing on the Saturn V is yet ahead of us.” (Testimony; Transcript)
Tenth anniversary of Explorer I [see Jan. 31] was commemorated by JPL and Cal Tech with two-day program including symposium on First and Second Decades of Space Research and JPL open house. JPL Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, leader of first Explorer scientific task force, was chairman. Speakers included Dr. James A. Van Allen of State Univ. of Iowa, who had verified radiation belts bearing his name; l/g Austin W. Betts (usa), Army Chief of Research and Development; Dr. John W. Findlay, NASA Lunar and Planetary Missions Advisory Board Chairman; and Dr. Joseph Kaplan of ucla, U.S. Chairman of igy when Explorer I was launched Jan. 31,1958. In next 10 yr, “as an increasingly important area of scientific and technical research a balanced program in space must certainly be part of the activities of our Nation,” Dr. Kaplan said. “No more noble and useful service can be conceived than one which gives strength to . . . cooperation among the nations of the earth. Space certainly qualifies for such a role.” Dr. Findlay outlined possible missions “of strong scientific interest” to Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in next decade. Gen. Betts voiced concern about attitudes toward exploratory efforts; he was “not convinced that we remember, the lesson” of Sputnik /. “Only some two weeks” after its launch, numerous programs were proposed for U.S. satellite—possible only because “far-sighted technical people had been planning for various applications of space for some time, and even though firm military requirements were not available.” (jpl Releases, 1/22/68, 1/31/68; Texts; Wilford, NYT, 2/2/68, 4; SBD, 1/26/68, 38)
JPL soil sciences group, headed by Dr. Roy E. Cameron, reported tests and cultures of Antarctic soil samples in JPL’s walk-in freezer laboratory to determine what micro-organisms lived in extreme cold and to help determine whether life existed on Mars. Samples had come from high, dry valleys in Victorialand near U.S. base at McMurdo, Antarctica. Scientists discovered bacteria, yeasts, molds, and algae, which began to grow within two weeks when Antarctic soil kept laboratory-frozen for over one year was subjected to temperature 68° F or above. Studies were sponsored by nasa and nsf. (nasa Release 68—73)
NASA announced “interim operating plan” for FY 1969 designed to achieve $3.85-billion budget. Agency would reduce staff by 1,600 and contract employees by 2,000. Purchase or construction of four Saturn boosters had been canceled [see Aug. 2], plans for 1973 instrument payloads on Mars had been substantially reduced, lunar exploration programs had been halted, and development of nerva nuclear rocket engine would be put back until next fiscal year, at least. Apollo Applications program would be reduced $300 million from budget request of $440 million and would include only two spacecraft—Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount—with boosters and backup equipment. “Work toward post-Apollo lunar exploration and toward Saturn V Workshop will be limited to studies.” (nasa Release 68—141)
NASA announced plans to use Titan III—D/Centaur in dual launches of 6,000-lb spacecraft consisting of Surveyor-type soft landers mated to Mariner 1971 class Mars orbiters in mid-1973, in Project Viking, to obtain scientific information on life on Mars. Launched 10 days apart, spacecraft would arrive about seven months later, when orbiter propulsion systems would place orbiters and landers in Mars orbit. After reconnaissance, landers would be detached and softland on Mars. (NASA Release 68—207; Pasadena Independent, 12/6/68)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists John W. Salisbury and Graham R. Hunt reported in Science they had found hypothesis of particle-size control of albedo incompatible with hypothesis of abundant limonite on Mars. Their observations indicated that proposal that polarimetric, spectrometric, color, and albedo measurements of light and dark areas on Mars proved limonite was major soil constituent was irreconcilable with proposal that variations in size of particle could be responsible for albedo difference between light and dark areas. They showed relative albedo was reversed from blue to red for limonite samples with different-sized particles. Observations of Mars revealed no blue-red albedo reversal between areas. Although evidence was insufficient for choice between hypotheses, they believed Mars soil was most likely, for geological reasons, to be composed of silicates stained or coated with ferric oxides. (Science, 7/26/68, 365—6)
JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan, who had devised method using computers to improve spacecraft photos of moon and Mars, planned to link computers with electron microscopes to photograph single atom. Within six months much of connection work should he done, he said, and “with luck, we could be taking pictures of atoms in a year or so.” (Dighton, Glendale News-Press, 7/5/68, 1)
Food, land, and raw material shortages might compel man to establish mining operations on other planets and to grow food in space stations, according to Dr. K. A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. He said farms growing food in chemicals could be established in earth-orbiting stations fertilized by chemicals produced on Mars and other planets. (AP, NYT, 7/15/68, 6)
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy called for prompt DOD action to revive work on quiet electric-drive nuclear submarine halted in May by DOD order when it decided to proceed with new high-speed nuclear submarine [see July 24]. (Transcript; Greene, NY News, 9/20/68, 8) characteristics of outer space near moon. Research mission had been completed and spacecraft was continuing to relay information to space stations. Zond V’s reentry and splashdown in Indian Ocean Sept. 21 was recorded by U.S., U.K., and West German space scientists, but U.S.S.R. made no official announcement until Sept 22. Tass then said Zond V had circled moon, explored space near moon, reentered at 11,000 mi per sec, softlanded by parachute in predetermined area, and was recovered by Soviet recovery ship—becoming first circumlunar spacecraft recovered on earth. “During the flight the station’s systems and aggregates for maneuvering on the trajectory and for returning to the Earth were tested. Flight control systems of the station and the radio-engineering means for measuring the parameters of its trajectory ensured the successful execution of the programme. “The successful flight of the ‘Zond—5’ automatic station over the Earth-Moon-Earth route, and its return to the predetermined area are an outstanding achievement of Soviet science and engineering. Another scientific-engineering problem has been solved, and broad prospects have been opened up for further research of outer space and planets of the solar system by automatic space stations which bring back research data to the Earth.” Tass announcement that atmosphere and pressure “remained within the limits of their present range” supported earlier speculation that Zond V carried prototype passenger cabin with atmosphere of artificial helium mixture which would be used by cosmonauts on future flights. Later Tass report quoted Soviet Prof. Leonid I. Sedov as saying spacecraft had special heat shield and was slowed down during reentry by “air resistance” and, “at a comparatively small height,” by parachute. Zond V was fifth spacecraft in Zond series and first Soviet spacecraft to land in water. Zond I (launched April 2, 1964) had failed in attempt to reach Venus and Zond II (launched Nov. 30, 1964) had suffered communications failure enroute to Mars. Zond III (launched July 18, 1965) had obtained photos of far side of moon; Zond IV (launched March 2, 1968) apparently had reached apogee comparable to lunar altitude and had burned in earth’s atmosphere on reentry, (gsfc SSR, 9/15/68; 9/30/68; W Post, 9/16/68, A17; 9/19/68, A25; 9/23/68, Al; NYT, 9/16/68, 29; 9/21-23/68, 1; Moscow News, 10/5-12/68, 3)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V could be precursor to next step in flying complex unmanned missions to Venus or Mars as well as to carrying men to moon, rand Corp. Scientist Merton E. Davies and Cal Tech scientist Bruce C. Murray wrote in Science. Soviet descriptions of Zond V suggested U.S.S.R. might plan to send pair of spacecraft to Mars in late February or early March. One might land on Mars and cast off satellite to orbit it and relay signals to earth; other might fly by Mars and return to earth with film of Mars surface. Speculations were based on Pravda and Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) articles by Soviet Prof. A. Dmitriyev, which said “information from space” must be delivered “directly to the scientists’ laboratory” free of “encumbrances and distortions of radioed signals.” He said Zond V had successfully completed assignment of developing means and methods for returning space devices. Also, U.S.S.R. had previously sent pair of spacecraft on planetary mission and might repeat mission to take advantage of favorable Mars or Venus positions for flyby or landing attempts. (Science, 10/11/68, 245-6; Cohn, W Post, 10/11/68, A9)
President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget was presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. At $4.37 billion, authorization request was $700 million below FY 1968 request, almost $500 million less than FY 1968 authorization, and $200 million below FY 1968 appropriation. Webb stated: “nasa’s expenditures for FY 1969 will be down $230 million from this year, $850 million below last year, and $1.3 billion less than in FY 1966. The nasa program has been cut. I hope you will decide it has been cut enough and will approve the full amount recommended by the President. “The FY 1969 request does not meet at all our Nation’s needs in aeronautics and space. It is a compromise—one which I fully support— between needed work toward advances in aeronautics and space which we can and should make, and other overriding requirements. . . . During this period when we are reducing our effort by one-third the U.S.S.R. is still increasing its effort. ... In terms of scientific advance and in applications of immediate economic use, such as meteorological and communications systems, our program has contributed more than theirs. But in terms of the use of large launch vehicles and in the rate of which future greater capabilities are being developed they are and will remain ahead, at our 1969 budget level. The hard fact we now face is that just as we have begun to catch up in large-scale booster operations ... we are cutting back our program while they continue to advance.” He listed guidelines within “necessary fiscal constraints,” which determined decisions on FY 1969 program and budget estimates. NASA would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using all-up test concept for Saturn V and Apollo. Complete success in all remaining eight Saturn V flights would be needed for manned lunar landing by “end of 1969.” nasa would reduce numbers of Saturn IB and V and work out with dod future requirements for large launch vehicles under “sharply limited” launch program. Launch of Saturn I Workshop in 1970 would be interim step toward Saturn V Workshop and would be coordinated with later launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. “Practically all” programs had been stretched out, and a number of projects would be phased out. Scope of new starts would be reduced, with nerva i replacing larger nerva n and “less costly Mariner class spacecraft” replacing Voyager mission. Urgent activities would be expanded in aeronautics and in space applications; for example, noise reduction, vtol and stol, aircraft for remote measurement of earth resources, and Nimbus D for charting atmosphere parameters. nasa Centers would be reorganized “to retain . . . after reductions [in work force] are made, a limited but strong and well-balanced team of scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” Webb responded to questions: “There are no signs that the Soviets are cutting back as we are. New test and launch facilities are steadily added . . . and a number of spaceflight systems more advanced than any heretofore used are nearing completion.” Webb forecast Soviet booster with thrust greater than that of Saturn V, resumption of manned space flights, and landing of Soviet instrument packages on Mars in 1969 and 1971. Budget reductions in FY 1968 had compelled revisions, reductions, delays and cancellations in NASA programs. “We can conduct a viable and useful program at these lower levels, hut it will be a sharply reduced one.” Despite reductions allowing almost no flexibility to work around problems, “we still have the possibility of making the lunar landing before 1970.” (CR, 2/7/68, H926-7 ; 2/12/68, E708-9)
Model of wheel-shaped planetary landing craft, sterilized by heat and dropped from 250-ft altitude by Jet Propulsion Laboratory, operated successfully after impacting dry lake in Mojave Desert at 80 mph—major step in demonstrating feasibility of sending lightweight scientific landing capsule to Mars. Craft’s radio transmitter turned on 30 sec after craft struck surface and operated 20 min. Anemometer deployed automatically 3 min after impact, to measure wind velocity. Following mission profile identical to projected Mars surface operations, radio turned on again 22 hr after initial transmission (when earth would again be in view). Signals from three-watt transmitter were received for another 40 min to conclude test. Craft was powered by 12-cell, silver-zinc battery, first known to survive both heat sterilization and high-velocity impact, (nasa Release 68-69; jpl Release 473; jpl pio)
NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Oran W. Nicks described applications of Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter techniques to Mars exploration before aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Two 1971 Mariner Orbiter missions would provide new tools for survey of dynamic Mars, arriving when most striking seasonal changes were evident in Southern Hemisphere. Their combined orbits and life expectancies would allow observations of dynamic changes in clouds and surface features over several months. In 1973, two additional orbit-ers would survey Mars from different orbits during different seasons, with support of landing mission as prime requirement. Also planned for 1973 was survivable landing spacecraft to make local measurements of environment, photograph surface and topography, and analyze soil. “Burning question of immediate concern to you and me will be addressed by use of our new tools,” Nicks said: “Is there life elsewhere? Has life existed on nearby planets and disappeared for any reason? Can nearby planets be made suitable for life?’ Together, orbiters and landers form a powerful team for the study of Mars and for seeking answers to these questions. Together, they will continue to extend our capabilities in what is probably the most challenging, open-ended arena for expansion of science and technology in the decade ahead.” (Text)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, addressed International Meeting of American Nuclear Society in Washington, D.C. In past decade NASA had developed “impressive capability” in “competent and creative people who make up our government-university-industry team.” It was “prepared to accomplish any goal in space exploration which the new administration may establish.” NASA future included “broad, balanced, Planetary Program” emphasizing Mars but examining other planets like Mercury and Jupiter; major lunar exploration program in 1970’s; astronomy program covering optical astronomy, x-ray and gamma ray fields, and low-frequency radio astronomy; and increased emphasis on space applications programs, with maj or efforts toward surveying earth’s resources from space and continuing developments in meteorology and communications. (Text)
May 28: In second Mars lander experiment [see April 23] NASA concluded JPL B&D program demonstrating feasibility of sending lightweight scientific capsules to Mars by successful 250-ft free-fall drop of 63-lb heat-sterilized planetary landing craft from hovering helicopter onto asphalt pavement at Goldstone Tracking Station. Capsule, which struck at 80 mph, or impact of 2,500 g, was powered by 12-cell silver-zinc battery which produced sufficient electricity after impact to extend wind gauge and to operate radio transmitter and timer aboard Mars lander. Battery was believed to be toughest yet developed, (nasa Release 68— 152; W Star, 9/8/68, A17; Pasadena Independent Star-News, 9/8/68; NYT, 10/15/68, 34; jpl Lab-Oratory 7/68, 8)
First recording of pulsar signals at short wavelengths, 2293 me, was made by Drs. Alan MofEet, Ronald D. Ekers, and Richard M. Goldstein of Cal Tech, using 210-ft Mars dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station operated by JPX. for NASA. Signals’ energy indicated origin from natural source such as white dwarf stars or neutron stars. CP—1919, one of three pulsars observed, was weakest source ever recorded. At 2293 me, signal was one-hundredth that of other two, though at longer wavelengths signal was one of two strongest of four known pulsars. (“CP” referred to Cambridge pulsar list; number indicated location.) Dr. Moffet placed pulsars 100 to 10,000 light years from earth, in Milky Way Galaxy. Although signal strengths varied, periods remained constant. (Cal Tech Release; Pasadena Independent, 5/15/68)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, addressing National Capital Area Chapter of American Society for Public Administration, praised U.S. space program for “unequaled competence and unlimited opportunity.” After 10 yr in space, he noted, U.S. had launched 514 spacecraft into earth orbit and 28 to moon and other planets. “The moon has been completely mapped, the composition and texture of its soil analyzed, and sites . . . selected for manned lunar landings. Our scientific knowledge of Mars and Venus . . . has been advanced tremendously by . . . unmanned, instrumented probes. . . . American astronauts, who have a total of almost 2,000 hours in space to their credit in the Mercury and Gemini Projects, will begin the third phase of manned space flight this year with the first manned launches in Project Apollo. These achievements in space, fruits of the advanced science and technology of our times, mark the first decade of the Space Age as one of the finest periods in American history. And they are forerunners of even greater discoveries and widespread applications to come during our second decade in space.” Dr. von Braun credited nasa Administrator James Webb’s direction with adaptation of systems approach to space research without which “we would never be able to go to the moon.” Approach, Dr. von Braun believed, could also be tested on river pollution and satellite communications. (Text; W Post, 3/21/68, H14)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech associate prefessor of planetary science, told Space Science and Applications Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics it would be tragic if U.S. were to “ignore the challenge and the opportunity” of planetary exploration. He urged sustained exploration program competitive with U.S.S.R. “We need not always be first, but we must not always be second.” He saw “real possibility of Soviet Mars lander attempts as early as 1969” and other attempts at planetary firsts, (nasa Auth Hearings; Randal, W Star, 3/7/68, A12)
USAF awarded contracts totaling $28.8 million to Fairchild Hiller Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. for contract definition for ZF—15A advanced air superiority fighter aircraft. (dod Release 1147—68) During December: NASA issued Objectives and Goals in Space Science and Applications—1968. NASA Office of Space Science and Applications had participated in 1968 agency-wide planning to detail program objectives and options from which program could be built. Many tools required for future space program had already been developed and many future ventures would require only modest improvements. Spacecraft pointing accuracies and stability would improve, and their lifetimes would increase. More powerful transmitters would communicate data across ever-widening expanses. Spacecraft weight would increase and man would have increasing capability to work and navigate in space. Advances in chemical propulsion, introduction of nuclear and electric propulsion, and new combinations of existing stages, would permit growth of launch vehicle capability to meet mission demands. FY 1969 support of program recognized need for austerity and provided for continuance of existing programs at economical level and initiation of only “projects of great merit, including those where a unique opportunity might be lost.” Future emphasis would be on applications of space and space technology for benefit of man: surveying earth’s resources, TV broadcast from space, and weather forecasting. Knowledge of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, and other outer planets would be expanded. Introduction of larger, more accurate telescopes would provide man perhaps with “his greatest step in understanding the nature of his universe.” (Text)
nas published report of NASA-sponsored two-year study of planetary astronomy by nas-nrc Space Science Board’s 16-scientist panel headed by Dr. John S. Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Ariz. Planetary Astronomy: An Appraisal of Ground-Based Opportunities recommended assignment of high priority to erection of 60-in optical telescope in mountains of northern Chile, where atmospheric conditions permitted favorable view of Mars, in time to observe planet’s closest approach to earth in almost 50 yr, August 1971. Also recommended were construction of large dish antenna in U.S. for planetary radar astronomy; two large radiotelescope arrays in California and West Virginia, plus third planetary radio facility to pick up signals at short wavelengths; and 120-in infrared telescope in desert region where vapor would be less likely to interfere with infrared radiation. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 9/20/68, 29)
Soviet Prof. Georgy I. Petrov in Izvestia said successful recovery of Zond VI opened way “for creation of spacecraft able to get to the moon, Mars, Venus, and other planets and return to earth.” Such experiments, he said, “will allow us in the near future to create long-lasting orbital stations, moon laboratories manned by scientific personnel. . . . The passenger ships will differ from the present spacecraft, but now we are witnessing their birth.” In another dispatch Tass said basic problem of reentry by spacecraft at “second cosmic speed,” about 25,000 mph, had been solved by Zond VI. (upi, W Star, 11/20/68, Bll)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines said NASA announcement of plans for 1974 Mars landing marked revival “of a project that was sacrificed last year on the altar of the great God Apollo whose manned moon program was gobbling up all the funds at NASA’s disposal. It also marked the first positive action by NASA in two years directed to starting rather than terminating activities.” Its timing, one month after presidential election, seemed “to provide a tantalizing clue to the Nixonian philosophy about space.” Hines said it was likely new administration would heed post-Apollo views of NAS which had recommended more attention to scientific exploration of space with instruments. (W Star, 12/15/68, F4)
Tass reported Moscow scientist had compared “spectrometric analysis” of cactus growing in cold areas with spectrographs of “dark areas” of Mars and concluded areas on Mars were covered with cactus-like vegetation. Other tests on cactus, scientists said, proved it could stand extremes of temperature and other conditions similar to those on Mars. (upi, W Star, 4/28/68, A3)
Iowa State Univ. scientist Dr. James A. Van Allen said that although he was not outright opponent of manned space flight, so far man had done nothing in space but survive—although “that is not unimportant.” He advocated Jupiter exploration using unmanned flyby, which he said could be accomplished in 1972. He felt there was little chance Jupiter could have life forms of any sort, but he wanted this large planet (10 times diameter of earth) “put on an equal footing with Mars and Venus in U.S. exploration.” His opposition to man in space was based on dominance of manned flight in national funding to detriment of unmanned missions that could have returned major scientific benefits. (Miles, LA Times, 2/29/68)
nasa announced it would launch two Mariner spacecraft, F and G, on flyby missions to Mars in 1969. Project responsibility was assigned to JPL; LeRC would be responsible for launch vehicle. Deep Space Network stations would provide tracking and communications during launch period scheduled between mid-February and mid-April. Spacecraft would reach Mars between end of July and mid-August. Arrival dates of two spacecraft would not be less than five days apart. Atlas-Centaur combination would for first time be used as launch vehicle for planetary exploration. Spacecraft would weigh approximately 900 lb. Mariner III (Nov. 5, 1964) weighed 575 lb. (nasa Special Release)
U.S.S.R. successfully launched Zond IV automatic research station, Tass announced. Station was placed in planned flight from parking orbit of artificial satellite and was flying on trajectory close to calculated one to study “outlying regions of near-earth space.” Heinz Kaminski, Director of Institute for Satellite and Space Research at Bochum, West Germany, said mission “must be regarded as a preliminary phase for a planned flight to the moon.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said he had “hunch” Zond IV was not intended to fly around moon. Apparently station made no attempt to orbit moon. One source said that after journey of about Sl/2 days, station reached “apogee . . . comparable to lunar altitude.” Zond I, launched April 2, 1964, failed in attempt to reach Venus, and Zond II, launched Nov. 30, 1964, suffered communications failure on route to Mars. Zond III, launched July 18, 1965, obtained photos of far side of moon. (W Post, 3/3/68, A17; 3/4/68, A14; 3/8/68, A12; AP, W Star, 3/4/68, A3)
President Johnson sent message to Congress on FY 1969 budget. Praising effectiveness of NASA’s cost reduction efforts, he noted that NASA by utilizing idle, excess, and surplus Government property had avoided expenditures of over $22 million for new equipment and facilities and had saved over $16 million by improving procurement practices. However, to meet urgent national needs in other areas, further reductions still had to be made. “New obligational authority requested for [nasa] ... is about $220 million below the 1968 amount. Expenditures will be $230 million below 1968, $850 million below 1967, and over $1.3 billion less than in 1966. This reduction reflects our progress beyond the costly research and development phases of the manned lunar mission, as well as the immediate need to postpone spending for new projects wherever possible. “Based on a careful examination of priorities, the 1969 budget provides increases in some areas to prepare for important advances in future years, while deferring other less urgent, new projects. The production of our large Saturn-class space boosters is continued but at a reduced rate. The development of a nuclear rocket engine to increase the capability of our Saturn V launch vehicle is also continued, but at a smaller size and thrust than originally planned, to reduce development cost.” Planetary exploration would be continued with development of “a new spacecraft for launch in 1973 to orbit and land on Mars. This new Mars mission will cost much less than half the Voyager program included in last year’s budget. Although the scientific result of this new mission will be less than that of the Voyager, it will still provide extremely valuable data and serve as a building block for planetary exploration systems of the future.” Request for dod, increased “to assure that our defense capabilities remain equal to any challenge or threat,” included funds to: (1) maintain strategic deterrent by converting from Minuteman II to Poseidon missiles with multiple warheads and modernizing manned bomber force with additional F—111B aircraft and improved short-range attack missiles; (2) proceed with procurement of Sentinel missile defense system for defense against possible Communist Chinese threat and revamp air defense; (3) augment firepower, mobility, and readiness of general-purpose forces by improving air defenses with new fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters, and weapon systems; (4) improve airlift-sealift capability by purchasing additional C-5A aircraft and procuring fast deployment logistics ship; and (5) continue vigorous R&D effort. (The Budget of the United States Government, FY 1969, 26-9)
President Johnson submitted $186.1-billion FY 1969 budget request to Congress, including $6.76-billion total space budget. Of this sum, NASA would receive $4.37 billion, smallest amount since 1963; dod space efforts, $2,216 billion; AEC space applications, $143 million; and ESSA satellite system, $30.6 million.	: NASA FY 1969 budget, $218 million less than for FY 1968, provided for $3,677 billion to be spent for R&D (down $233 million from FY 1968	and $557 million from FY 1967); $45 million for construction of facilities; and $648 million for administrative operations. Project Apollo would be kept on schedule, development of NERVA I would be continued, and launch plans would be made for two pioneer flights toward Jupiter and one Sunblazer probe. Research on Earth Resources Observation Satellite would continue, but development would be postponed, ogo program would be phased out after OGO—f. NASA’s $2.5-billion Voyager program would be replaced with a $500-million, four-mission Mars orbiter project. Although NASA’s $2.039-billion Apollo budget request accounted for 47% of total NASA budget, amount for Apollo was $517 million less than for FY 1968, reflecting declining expenditures as program neared its completion. Requested $439.6 million for Apollo Applications (aa) program was less than half of amount originally sought and necessitated cancellation of planned 14-day AAP—1A flight. Some $76.9 million—a $10.1-million increase over FY 1968—was allotted for NASA’s aeronautics program, with most of increase attributed to additional supporting research in subsonic aircraft technology. XB—70 and X—15 research programs would be phased out by December 1968. Space science and applications were allotted $538.2 million, with 18 major NASA launches and 13 non-NASA launches scheduled for 1968. Major portions of DOD space budget would be spent on mol—$600 million, compared with $431 million requested for FY 1968., Some $60.4 million was allocated for defense and tactical satellite communications programs, and $10.5 million for Vela nuclear test detection satellite program. AEC space budget—$11 million higher than for FY 1968—included $72 million for Project Rover, with $39 million for nerva system. Most of essa’s funds would be used for development of sensors and satellite system in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for warning services, faa’s request included $351 million for SST development, $251 million increase over FY 1968 and one of largest increases given to any domestic program. It was principal item in dot’s $449-million request for r&d. (Text; dod Budget Summary; W Post, 1/16/68, A5; AP, B Sun, 1/16/68, A3; McNamara Statement; dod Background Briefing; NASA Release, 1/29/68; W Star, 1/29/68, A7; Clark, NYT, 1/30/68, 16; Aero Tech, 2/12/68, 17-35) '
LaRC announced award of $313,620,000 cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for construction of lander portions of two Viking spacecraft scheduled to softland on Mars in summer 1973 and for project integration services. (LaRC Release)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 11 and Mariner VI and VII: “The unprecedented advances in the study both of the moon and of Mars during the past few weeks have produced a stunning crop of surprises about both celestial bodies. On the closest examination yet, these neighbors in space have proved far more complex and strange than previous theories have led men to believe. And the magnificent, lifeless desolation of the lunar and Martian surfaces emphasizes more than ever how wonderful it is and how little science understands why it is that this third planet from the sun is so uniquely green, vibrant and overrunning with life.” (NYT, 9/16/69, 40)
There is a good chance there is some form of life on Mars,” Los Angeles Herald-Examiner quoted Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, as saying in interview. “The planet has a thin atmosphere, the climate is tough but not completely unreasonable.” Changes of colors on Mars eould be vegetation. Mars’ seasons were like earth’s but twice as long. Its days were same length as earth’s. (Smith, LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from Wallops Station. Nike-Tomahawk carried gsfc payload to 141.1-mi (227.0-km) altitude to test neutral-mass spectrometer system with unique sample-flow and test-leak subsystem necessary for making high-pressure neutral-constituent measurements on planned Mars and Venus missions and to demonstrate capability of sterilized-mass-spectrometer electronics in , flight environment for first time. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and complete data were obtained. Nike-Tomahawk carried gsfc and Univ. of Michigan payload to 197.6-mi (318.0-km) altitude to measure nitrogen density and temperature. Secondary objectives were to evaluate Omegatron system designed for San Marco-C satellite, measure density and temperature of nitrogen simultaneously, compare Pitot-static-probe and thermosphere-probe density in 74.6-mi (120.0-km) region, and validate mass spectrometer nitrogen measurement and electrostatic-probe electron temperature data. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and complete data were obtained. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 124.3-mi (200.0-km) altitude to measure neutral atmospheric density by Pitot technique in 18.4- to 74.6-mi (30.0- to 120.0-km) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and all atmospheric measurements made by Pitot probe were excellent, (nasa Rpts SRL)
Plans for launch of first of two Jupiter probes from ksc between Feb. 26 and March 15, 1972, were outlined by Charles F. Hall, manager of Pioneer F and G projects at arc, during meeting of scientists, engineers, and contractors at Mountain View, Calif. Launched by Atlas-Centaur booster, Pioneer F would take 610—770 days to reach Jupiter on voyage through planet’s heavy radiation belt to within 90,000 mi of Jupiter surface. It would carry 60 lbs of instruments and photographic equipment to conduct 13 experiments to measure solar wind and space dust and analyze Jupiter’s radiation and atmosphere. Probe would be first to travel to asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter and eventually would leave solar system. Pioneer G Jupiter probe would be launched in early 1973. (upi, P Bull, 11/5/69)
NASA announced selection of 38 scientists organized into eight teams to assist in design and development of Martian softlander for 1973 Viking missions. Teams would participate in early instrument development, designing softlander, and planning missions. Final selection of investigations and participating scientists for both landers and orbiters making up 1973 Viking missions would be made December 1969, when initial results of Mariner flybys of Mars in summer 1969 would be available. Planetary Programs Directorate would have management responsibility for Viking Mars 1973 mission; LaRC had been assigned overall project management and direct responsibility for managing planetary iander portion; jpl had management responsibility for orbiter spacecraft, (nasa Release 69—31)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, and other top NASA officials testified on future space programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Introducing programs, Dr. Paine said: “The decade of the 1970’s and 1980’s should have a program as bold in concept and as productive as we have had in the decade of the 1960’s. ... we need to have clear objectives to focus our work and a commitment, subject ... to annual review, as to what these achievements will be. Our general goal area should be the continued exploration of the solar system while deriving the maximum scientific and practical benefits here on earth from the space program. There is no question that, at some future time, we will have the capability for manned planetary exploration and we need to face now some of the decisions that will not bear fruition for more than a decade. Although I do not believe that we will see manned exploration of the planets in the 1970’s in the United States ... I do think this could come in the 1980’s. It is by no means clear that for the Soviet Union the decision may not be made to mount a crash program and bring this in before the end of the decade of the 1970’s.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, described possible 1981— 1982, 12-man, 2-ship expedition to Mars [see Aug. 1]. Each spacecraft would weigh 1.6 million lbs at departure from earth orbit and would be 270 ft long, “smaller than what we are flying already to the moon.” nasa was using “concept of reusability” in planning, to improve and reduce cost of operating in space, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Committee. Reusability could be achieved “through the reuse of launch and space vehicles and . . . through the reuse of a mission module such as a space station” put into orbit and used over 10-yr or even 20-yr period. Space shuttles would be designed to run 100 or more flights. Modules and vehicles would be designed for multiple applications in earth, lunar, and synchronous orbits. Space tug would permit travel from space station to other spacecraft and back again—“general purpose . . . equipment.” In earth orbital operations, “it permits us to fly off from the space station over to ... an oao, orbiting astronomical observatory, either to repair or check the oao, or to bring it back to a space station where it can then be loaded on the space shuttle for return to earth and then brought back into orbit after repairs.” (Transcript)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told House: “. . . I do not at this time wish to commit ourselves to a specific time period for setting sail for Mars. I believe that there are many tasks that can be accomplished that will ultimately provide that capability, but will be less costly and will be necessary in meeting short term objectives.” He urged priority attention to intermediate steps and balanced program “that fully exploits the great potential of unmanned spacecraft, while at the same time maintaining a vigorous manned flight program.” He advocated continuation of lunar exploration to obtain “experience of operating a base for science and exploration on another heavenly body”; manned earth-orbital operations leading to long-term space station supported by low-cost shuttle rocket; greater emphasis on applications satellites that “have the greatest potential for economic return in the near term”; larger funding for unmanned planetary exploration, “an area in which the U.S. may soon be overshadowed by the Soviet Union”; continued nerva development because “improved propulsion is a key to space leadership”; and “special emphasis on ers satellites, “which promise to yield so much ... to agriculture and industry.” (Text; CR, 8/11/69, H7251-4)
History of Jet Propulsion Laboratory from 1936, “when the ‘crazy scientists’ under . . . Dr. Theodore von Karman lit off one of their rockets in the dry gulch called the Arroyo Seco,” to current time, when “jpl’s sights are set a little higher—and farther out,” was traced by John Lannan in Washington Sunday Star, jpl controlled NASA Deep Space Network with jurisdiction over space efforts 10,000 mi from earth and beyond, though its Goldstone facility also had participated with gsfc in support of Apollo 11. Its space flight operation facility was “actual directorate” for handling cosmic penetration flights. It was currently gearing for Martian orbiter series in 1971 and for 1973 Viking landers. Future held possibilities of developing and directing missions leading to Grand Tour of planets. JPL was owned by Federal Government and staffed and operated by Cal Tech. (W Star, 8/10/69, G3)
Mars’ reddish color might be attributed to carbon suboxide, Univ. of Massachusetts physicists William T. Plummer and Robert K. Carson reported in Science. They had found reflection spectrum of Mars could be well matched from 0.2 p through 1.6 p and farther by polymers of carbon suboxide. (Science, 11/28/69, 1141—2)
Scientific data provided by two spacecraft included more than 2,000 uv spectra and more than 400 infrared spectra of atmosphere and surface. Infrared radiometer returned more than 800 near-encounter and 100,000 far-encounter surface and atmospheric measurements. TV cameras produced 198 high-quality analog pictures of Martian surface. Tracking data provided measurements of mass and ephemeris of Mars, but degree of success of celestial mechanics experiment was yet to be determined. S-band occultation experiment determined electron and temperature profile of-ionosphere and temperature and pressure profile of lower atmosphere. (NASA Proj Off)
Richmond, Va., News-Leader editorial approved Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s calling for flight to Mars by end of century [see July 16]: “One day, man will go beyond the planets, to other solar systems; right now . . . that is not within our technological reach. But Mars is, and so are the other planets. The moon is in earth’s, and man’s, own crib. Plans and commitments should be made—now—for man to take grown-up strides in the real world of space.” (R News-Leader, 7/18/69)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
Hot firing of twin RL-10 Centaur engines marked first use of LeRC’s new Spacecraft Propulsion Research Facility, B—2 stand, at Plum Brook Station, Ohio [see Oct. 7], and first Centaur tests at Plum Brook since structural tests in mid-1960s. Since then, Centaur, configured with 1st-stage Atlas, had launched seven Surveyor spacecraft to moon, two Mariner spacecraft to Mars, one oao, and one ATS. (LeRC Release 69-76)
In Cape Kennedy interview before Apollo 11 launch, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said, “It is my individual feeling that we should articulate a simple, ambitious, optimistic goal of a manned flight to Mars by the end of this century. Whether we say it or not, someone’s going to do it.” After liftoff, Vice President told NASA launching team, “. . . all the time I was out there I couldn’t help thinking of you, the people in here and all over NASA who have done such a brilliant job in putting together the combined effort behind those three gentlemen who are off on this historic mission. ... I bit the bullet for you today as far as Mars is concerned. But on the other hand ... I may be a voice in the wilderness.” In Washington, D.C., Senate Majority Leader Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) told press, “I think we have a lot of problems here on earth that we must face up to and when we settle those we ought to consider future space ventures.” Senate Majority Whip Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said, “The Apollo program is for landing a man on the moon and exploration and should take another one to two years. I think after that the space program ought to fit into our other national priorities.” (Witkin, NYT, 7/17/69, 1; Transcript, Agnew statement to NASA launch crew; Unna, W Post, 7/17/69, Al)
London Economist editorial: “When Europe drew pride and status from its colonies, the Americans had none: the tables are turned now. While the United States rings July 21st red on its calendar, Europe faces the probability that when the planets are opened up we Europeans will have no part in doing it. The idea, at this late stage, of a European manned space programme is nonsense. The policy that would make more sense would be to approach the United States to see if the Administration will accept some foreign collaboration in the hugely expensive next years of its space programme. If the next American objective is Mars, a sensible Administration may welcome help and participation—especially if this excludes pressure to co-operate with the Russians. . . . There will be no opportunity in this generation that it would cost us more to miss.” {CSM, 8/1/69)
First measurement of Mars uv dayglow, made during Mariner VI Mars flyby July 31, was reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado astrogeophysicists C. A. Barth, C. W. Hord, J. B. Pearce, K. K. Kelly, A. I. Stewart, G. E. Thomas, and G. P. Anderson; Johns Hopkins physicist W. G. Fastie; and JPL’s 0. F. Raper. Emission features from ionized carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide were measured in 1,900 A to 4,300 A spectral region. Lyman alpha 1,216 A line of atomic hydrogen and 1,304 A, 1,356 A, and 2,972 A lines of atomic oxygen were observed. Prime objective of experiment was to search for nitrogen in Martian atmosphere. First analysis had shown no evidence of nitrogen emissions in uv spectrum of upper atmosphere (Science, 9/5/69, 1004-5)
NASA’s Mariner VII Mars probe (launched March 27) obeyed radio command to lock its sensors on star Canopus. Spacecraft would fly past Mars night of Aug. 4. Command was radioed from NASA tracking station in Woomera, Australia. (AP, W Post, 4/2/69; UPl, C Trib, 4/3/69)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, addressed Independence Day celebration at Dearborn, Mich.: “For untold millions of years the human animal was chained to the earth. Sixty years ago he found a way of soaring into its atmosphere. Ten years ago he learned to break the chains of gravity and to soar out into space. This month the first man will set foot on another world. Later this month two spacecraft will reach Mars and send back new information about that Planet. Americans will have no reason to be ashamed of their nation on those days. Is it worth while? Is it worth while to lift the spirits of millions of human beings? If not, what else is worth while?” . Developing lunar landing technology was relatively easy. “The laws of nature which made it possible have been well known for a long time. The engineering skills required . . . were available and were brilliantly organized. Hundreds of thousands of Americans worked together to make this dream come true. They had faith and they had hope. “The problems of our cities and the other social problems which beset us are not all that easy. In this area human beings are not working together but are in conflict. We find that we do not yet know the cause • of these troubles nor do we yet have the mechanisms for curing them. Hence we must study, we must experiment, we must try and we will often fail. . . . And we shall learn from our failures.” (Text; CR, 1/29/69, E6415-7)
NASA’s Mariner VI spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) was 21,731,091 mi from earth and would fly past Mars July 30. Mariner VII (launched March 27) was 19,526,893 mi from earth and would fly past Mars Aug. 4. Both spacecraft were operating normally. (JPL Release 521)
U.S. and Spain exchanged notes in Madrid confirming 10-yr extension— to Jan. 29, 1984—of 1964 agreement establishing NASA space tracking and acquisition facility near Madrid. Since June 1965, facility had supported all Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter flights to moon, four Mariner flights to Mars and Venus, four Pioneer interplanetary probes, and all manned Apollo flights. It would support Apollo 11 and passage of Mariners VI and VII near Mars during summer; 210-ft-dia parabolic antenna for tracking and communication in interplanetary space would be built during next three years. (NASA Release 69—97)
NASA selected Martin Marietta Corp. for $280,000,000 costplusincentivefee/ award-fee contract for Viking lander system and technical integration of project to send two instrumented spacecraft to Mars during summer of 1973. (nasa Release 69—82)
NAS—NRC Space Science Board released Physiology in the Space Environment, Vol. 1, Circulation, prepared at NASA request. Report found systematic program of ground-based and inflight biomedical experimentation was essential for planning of long-duration manned space missions, such as to Mars. Knowledge of circulatory system and effects of space flight must be greatly expanded. It recommended experimentation with animals, man, simulations, laboratory investigations, comprehensive literature studies, and physiological measurement before, after, and during flight to obtain all possible data from ground-based work. Flight experiments should be limited to those requiring weightlessness and other conditions not reproducible on ground. (Text; nas Release)
William Hines said in Washington Evening Star: “It now seems entirely . possible that NASA may sneak into a Mars program without a specific go-ahead of the type given for the moon adventure in 1961. A case can be made that exploration of the planets is but a logical extension of exploration of the moon; that once the space frontier is crossed in 1969 everything else is evolutionary, not revolutionary. This sort of gradualism, which is analogous to a girl’s becoming a little bit pregnant, is just as effective in the long run as the flamboyant setting of spectacular goals, and probably a good bit more feasible in a time when there is already much grumbling about pre-occupation with other worlds when our own is in such a sorry state.” (W Star, 4/27/69, G4)
NASA announced release of The Book of Mars, one-volume digest of facts and theories about Mars by Dr. Samuel Glasstone, illustrated with photos taken during Mariner IV mission 1964—65, when spacecraft flew within 6,000 mi of Mars surface. Book traced history of man’s acquisition of Mars data and compared Mars with other planets. (nasa Special Release)
LaRC issued Rfps for design and financial proposals for planetary lander and project integration portions of NASA’s Viking project. Viking spacecraft—consisting of lander and orbiter—were to be procured for two planned flights to Mars to search for scientific data in 1973. (nasa Release 69-36)
Press in U.S. and around the world underscored Apollo IPs landing on moon and man’s first steps on another planet. St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “There is no doubt that the United States should continue to support a substantial spacefaring program. Anything else would be a denial of the scientific spirit of the century and the qualities that have made America what it is. But its scope should be measured by findings and probabilities—and one other factor. Future spacefaring ought to be a co-operative effort of all nations able to participate, with the benefits to be shared by all.” (St. Louis P—D, 7/20/69) Washington Sunday Star: “A creature that can stand where Armstrong and Aldrin stand tonight—that can, in the future, move among the spheres and literally explore new worlds ... is unlikely to give up on the hard task of perfecting himself and his life in his natural environment on earth. The God who brought him thus far from a blob of squirming protoplasm ... is unlikely ... to let man blow it all now. Here . . . must be the answer to the national debate as to whether we go ahead in space, or whether we tend to our knitting at home. We are bound to do both. . . . The progressive expansion of the physical and spiritual domain of man inevitably will intensify our determination and ability, in concert with other nations, to build a home world where hunger, fear and violence no longer have a place.” (W Star, 7/20/69, Gl) William Hines in Washington Sunday Star: “One cannot question the majesty of conception or magnitude of effort that made Apollo 11 possible.” But one could ask, “Is this trip really necessary?” One saw in Apollo “that fundamental failing called hubris, which got so many protagonists into hot water in the old Greek mythology. Hubris in English is usually taken to mean prideful arrogance; in ancient Greek the word meant simple insolence. The Apollo enthusiast rejects the concept of hubris; he says we go to the moon not because we are arrogant, but because we are driven, and thereby implicitly rejects the concept of free will and substitutes sappiness for sassiness. The majority asks, ‘But if we didn’t go, what?’ and the minority responds, ‘If we didn’t go, so what?’” (W Star, 7/20/69, G2) Humorist Art Buchwald in Washington Post: “Sometimes one gets the feeling that the right hand germs in the Government don’t know what the left hand germs are doing. This was brought home to me . . . when I read about the millions of dollars that were being spent to see that the astronauts did not bring back a single germ from the moon. Unfortunately, across the page from that story was another that the Army was going ahead with open air testing of nerve gases and germ warfare.” (W Post, 7/20/69, B6) Los Angeles Herald-Examiner: “America’s moon program has benefited all mankind. It has brought better color television, water purification at less cost, new paints and plastics, improved weather forecasting, medicine, respirators, walkers for the handicapped, laser surgery, world-wide communications, new transportation systems, earthquake prediction system and solar power. . . . The Mars goal should bring benefits to all mankind even greater than the tremendous contributions of the moon program.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/20/69) Baltimore Sun: “. . . it is still almost incredible that in the afternoon of a Sunday on earth two humans found themselves within a vehicle resting on the surface of the moon. Nothing could quite prepare one’s mind for that, or for the subsequent moment of climax, the actual setting of a human foot on the substance of our barren satellite. One of the mysteries that had engaged the infinitely inquisitive mind of man is now made tangible. Others remain beyond our planet and upon it.” (B Sun, 7/21/69, A16) Chicago Daily News: “These have been moments to savor—moments in which uncounted millions have shared the immediacy of a turning point in history. This time there was no lapse of weeks or months, waiting for the event to be confirmed. We were all there, bound together by the miracle of communication that intertwined all the other miracles of technology that marked man’s first step on a celestial body.” (C Daily News, 7/21/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Superlatives pale before the magnificence of the achievement. . . . but how many years before the astounding performance of Armstrong and Aldrin will seem as primitive as the pioneering work of the Wright brothers?” (MJ, 7/21/69, 14) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Man’s store of scientific knowledge will be vastly enriched by the landing on the moon. In no other single event in history has there been greater opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the universe.” (Plain Dealer, 7/21/69) London Daily Sketch: “America’s moon triumph offers this old world’s bickering and jealous people a parable of hope.” (B Sun, 7/22/69, Al) Montreal Star: “The deepest hope for a world starved for some form of symbolism, of an attempt at harmony in place of selfishness and narrow nationalism, came from the astronauts,” CFOX Radio, Montreal, broadcast. “Eliminate war? Yes! Eliminate poverty? Yes! But the exploration of space will help us, not impede us, in reaching these goals.” (Am Consul, Montreal) Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden (principal organ of Social Democratic Party): “No Soviet politician has ever before used such conciliatory tones toward the U.S.A. as did Foreign Minister Gromyko recently in his speech before the Supreme Soviet. . . . This Russian position seems generally to be based on fears of a confrontation with China. . . . One of the side effects can be increased Russian interest in broader scientific cooperation in space research. Nothing else could be better designed for global cooperation, since nothing else gives us clearer testimony that we live in one world.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong stood to inherit 100,000-franc fortune of Mme. Anna E. Guzman, widow of French industrialist, which had been held in trust by Academy of Science of Institute of France since her 1891 death, according to article Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) inserted in Congressional Record. Legacy—once worth $20,000 but currently decreased in value to $290 exclusive of interest—was to be awarded to first scientist to make personal contact with heavenly body other than Mars. (CR, 8/13/69, E7023)
First pictures of Mars taken by NASA’s Mariner VI, launched Feb. 24 to fly by Mars equator, were received at JPL. Full-disc photos, taken between 771,500 and 450,000 mi from Mars, were flashed on screen every five minutes. They showed Mars as dull, gray, egg-shaped body with crack in surface and bright spot—southern polar cap—with ragged edge. Better pictures were expected as spacecraft traveled closer to Mars. (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69, Al; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/69, A3)
New York Times commented on Soviet decision to participate in February intelsat conference [see Jan. 22] and on Soviet coverage of Apollo 8 which was “treated more generously in the Soviet press than any earlier American space accomplishment.” Editorial said: “These indications of a positive shift in Kremlin thinking seem to enhance hopes that President Nixon will have an opportunity for creative diplomacy and action of the kind he envisaged in his Inaugural Address. Thought might be given, for example, to inviting Moscow to designate a Soviet astronaut to participate in an Apollo flight late this year or early next year. Or Washington might suggest that the United States and the Soviet Union coordinate their programs of planetary exploration with one nation, say, having primary responsibility for studying Venus and the other Mars. With the landing of men on the moon now probably only months away it is certainly not too early for the two nations that have pioneered most actively in space to discuss concrete means for involving the United Nations directly in the future exploration and exploitation of the moon, as well as of the planets when men reach them.” (NYT, 1/24/69, 46)
NASA’s Mariner VII televised two good test pictures before start of its first series of 34 approach shots more than 1 million mi from Mars. (AP, W Star, 8/2/69, A3; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
JPL engineers reported Mariner VII, en route to Mars, had suffered sudden change in velocity—possibly because of gas leak from pressure can in infrared spectrometer—that could throw off its approach to Mars. Also, 20 of 92 telemetry channels, including one that aimed TV camera platform toward Mars, had not operated properly after controllers lost contact with spacecraft July 30. When engineers turned on TV cameras, however, they began taking pictures that appeared to be of Mars. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/2/69, A4; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
jpl radar readings which showed 8.3-mi altitude variation in Mars’ north equatorial zone and included corrected figures for Mars’ ephem-eris, or orbital path, were expected to ensure accuracy of TV cameras aboard Mariners VI and VII, NASA said. Experimenters hoped to obtain photos identifying objects 900 ft across at close approach and pictures were expected to be 500 times better than those taken to date by earth-based telescope cameras. Readings were obtained at NASA’s Goldstone Tracking Station in California by team directed by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein during planet’s closest approach to earth (Mars had been within 45 million mi of earth June 9). They would be of great interest to astronomers because they showed that areas which appeared light to telescopes might be either high or low in elevation. Optically dark areas appeared to be of medium elevation to radar-scanners. (nasa Release 69—111; jpl Release 530)
Classical astronomical data on figures of moon and terrestrial planets were being supplemented by new information from Lunar Orbiter program. Comparable future planetary probes would provide fundamental . data from simple experiments, Cornell Univ. radiophysicists Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Dr. Malcolm J. Campbell, and Dr. Carl Sagan said in Science. Lunar Orbiter results had revealed lunar mascons’ nonuniform surface distribution that could explain lunar dynamical asymmetries “and perhaps similar asymmetries for Mars and Mercury.” {Science, 8/15/69, 651—7)
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
New direct value for sun’s thermal radiation of 125.7 w per sq ft, obtained from Mariner VI and VII en route to Mars, was nearly twice as accurate as old value of 129.5 w per sq ft, NASA announced. JPL Mariner project engineer Joseph A. Plamondon said change in probable error in new measurement was one-half that of old figure. Results of inflight measurements obtained with temperature-control flux monitors (tcfm) monitoring solar radiation since Mariners’ launch Feb. 24 and March 27 would be compared with preflight predictions of solar radiation and spacecraft temperature variations in flight, to establish new standard for temperature-control design and testing. Data from TCFM agreed with data obtained by NASA from high-altitude experiments on Convair 990. research aircraft and X-15. (NASA Release 69—69; jpl Release 518)
Washington Post published results of July 26—28 Gallup survey, which found public lukewarm about Government funding of manned Mars landing. While majority of young adults favored idea, majority of those 30 or over opposed it. Generally, 39% of those polled favored attempt to land man on Mars, 53% opposed, and 8% had no opinion. Blacks opposed by 3-to-l ratio. (W Post, 8/7/69, F4)
In interview released by United Press International Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said he knew of nothing which could feasibly send man to the stars in the predictable future, nerva prototype, only working model of new-generation engine in U.S., was too bulky for flight. Refined version, scheduled for test flight in mid-1970s, was expected to land man on Mars. Beyond that all was conjecture. “There is no design concept and even the basic idea of a controlled thermonuclear reaction has not been demonstrated.” It was not known what thrust could be generated by fusion engine. U.S.S.R. had announced development of plasma-jet or ion-thrust engine which, as designed, would not be useful in deep space or close to earth. U.S. scientists had been working on plasma-jet theory and electric propulsion machine. Science fiction concept of space distortion or warp through which spacecraft could travel in “null space” where distances were shorter and speeds faster had some basis according to Einstein’s theory of relativity. In Univ. of Maryland experiments “presence of gravitational radiation has been tentatively discovered . . . [and] can be interpreted as the interaction of such a warp with the sensor used in the experiment.” Despite this, “there does not appear to be any possibility of utilizing such interactions as a space propulsion system.” (W Star, 12/1/69, A5)
nasa selected General Electric Co. to receive three-year, $4-million, costplus-award-fee contract with two-year option to provide engineering and mission-related support to LaRC for Viking Project—series of planetary probes which would begin softlanding on Mars in 1973. (nasa Release 69—128)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 14 briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget at which Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, said $3,878-billion budget approved by President Johnson had been developed “to maintain an austere but balanced NASA aeronautics and space program aimed at major program goals of high national priority.” Goals were continuing advances in space applications, including initiation of experimental earth resources technology satellites and slightly decelerated research on space environment; achieving manned lunar landing and additional Apollo moon missions, with limited provision for studies—not for development—of equipment to achieve longer lunar stay-times and mobility for future exploration; proceeding with Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount; proceeding with Viking Project to land instruments on Mars in 1973; initiating in FY 1970 Mariner flyby in 1973 of Venus and Mercury; producing family of small planetary Explorers for orbiting Mars and Venus; making preliminary observations of Jupiter with previously approved Pioneer spacecraft; continuing work on unmanned orbiting astronomical observatories; continuing advanced aerospace technology work at about current levels; emphasizing noise reduction, with construction of special noise research laboratory; developing full potential of civil and military aeronautics; and undertaking NERVA project for development of flight-weight nuclear engine. Dr. Paine noted FY 1970 budget, as approved by President Johnson, “would halt a four-year downward trend in NASA budget.” It was “austere and does not make full use of the aerospace capabilities that the nation has developed. . . .” But it permitted “a balanced program of useful work in critical areas.” Budget left “the major new program decisions, especially in the manned flight area, for the next Administration,” and was “ ‘holding budget’ that provides for progress, but defers critical program and funding decisions to the new Administration.” (Transcript)
At LeRC technical conference on plasmas and magnetic fields, LeRC Electromagnetic Propulsion Div. Chief Wolfgang E. Moeckel said, “Man has reached the Moon and there is now some talk about going to the stars, but we are not yet ready with propulsion systems that are suitable for exploring our own solar system.” Manned flights to distant planets would become reasonable only with advanced nuclear propulsion systems. Thermonuclear fusion rocket, if feasible, could reduce manned Mars mission to four to five months and journey to Jupiter or Saturn to under three years. Solar electric rockets looked promising for unmanned probes to planets as remote as Jupiter. (LeRC Release 69-58; LeRC pao)
NASA Associate Administrator, Dr. Homer E. Newell, and Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop presented paper “Planning Space Technology for the 1970’s” to National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C. Technology readiness for manned missions beyond the moon depended “very heavily upon (1) carrying the technology through proof-of-concept or prototype phase in order to assure long-life, reliable flight equipment and operations, and (2) precursor missions, particularly an Earth orbiting laboratory and lunar exploration that provide an opportunity to obtain the needed technology.” Technology needed for manned Mars exploration “represents capabilities that are very useful in many space missions and for some non-space applications as well, particularly with regard to long-life equipment and man’s performance under stress.” (Text)
NASA’s Mariner VII, launched from ETR March 27, successfully executed midcourse maneuver in response to radio commands from Woo-mera, Australia, tracking station. Spacecraft, more than 2.5-million mi from earth, would fly within 2,000 mi of Mars Aug. 5. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/9/69, A5; Reuters, W Post, 4/9/69, A7)
jpl engineers sent signals to Mariner VI to turn on TV camera and scientific experiments that would measure Mars surface characteristics and atmosphere. Spacecraft (launched Feb. 24) began tracking Mars and would begin taking first of 33 far-encounter pictures 771,500 mi from Mars early July 29. Full-disc photos would be received at jpl July 29. (AP, B Sun, 7/29/69, A5)
There was no question that manned Mars mission could be “organized, equipped and flown, possibly by 1985 or 1986,” William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. “But the cost of such a flight would be tremendous.” Apollo had cost $25 billion over eight years. Project Mars “would cost four times as much over a period twice as long.” Taxpayers and legislators “should listen to the professional pitchmen of space with a dubious ear, demanding facts instead of the sort of rhetoric Dr. George E. Mueller delivered on Apollo 11 splashdown day.” (W Star, 8/3/69, C4) across in Martian summer and increased to 3,500 mi across in winter. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/5/69, Al)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star criticized NASA’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory and plans to protect U.S. from lunar contamination: “. . . there is ample doubt that (1) the quarantine will really be air-tight and (2) it will make very much difference if the contamination shield leaks a little.” He also commented that, earlier, “great lip service was paid to the necessity for avoiding contamination of the moon and other celestial bodies by lifeforms from Earth. The rationale was pragmatic, not moral, and purely anthropocentric: If we contaminate the surface we won’t be able to say with certainty whether the lifeforms we eventually find are native or imported. This line is still being hewed to—after a fashion—in the case of Mars, but for the moon the game has proved too costly to be played with strict attention to rules.” (W Star, 6/8/69, C4)
In NASA-funded project U.S. Bureau of Mines was seeking way to get water and air from lunar rocks, build underground lunar shelters like mines, weld and melt lunar materials, and mine planets like Mars and Venus which might bear substances more valuable than those on moon, Associated Press said. First lunar mining would occur during Apollo 13 mission in March. Astronaut would bore 10-ft hole in lunar crust to determine what lay beneath and to test drill designed for NASA by Martin Corp. Scientists at U.S. Bureau of Mines research center in Bruceton, Pa., and at six other locations had been studying since 1965 possible use of lunar materials to build and support manned lunar station. Project Director Thomas C. H. Hutchinson had said, “Even if we found pure platinum on the moon, it would cost too much to bring it back.” Goal was to establish manufacturing processes on moon to speed exploration of planets. (AP, W Post, 11/20/69, A78)
New York Times editorial: “On that eventful day when the first men walk on the surface of Mars, they will find much ‘magnificent desolation’ akin to that seen by Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin when they strolled on the moon last month. That virtual certainty emerges from the brilliantly successful exploration of the red planet just completed by Mariners 6 and 7. Their expedition lacked the human drama of Apollo 11, but the scientific information they returned may well qualify the two Mariners as the most scientifically productive enterprise men have yet carried out in space.” (NYT, 8/11/69)
Los Angeles Times editorial observed space industry employment drop from 400,000 in mid-1960s to current 200,000—at which rate it would sink to 50,000 by 1972. “. . . the pool of scientific and technical expertise which has been brought together in the manned space program is disintegrating. If the President wants to save what is really an invaluable national resource, he and Congress cannot wait much longer to assign new projects to the space agency. . . . “A sound space program deserves a high place on the scale of priorities. And, both economic and military considerations dictate that the emphasis should be heavily on activities in the space near earth rather than on esoteric exploration of such deep planets as Mars and Venus. The proposal for construction in earth orbit of a large, permanent scientific laboratory . . . seems to deserve serious consideration as the major space project of the 1970s.” (LA Times, 3/14/69)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 11 lunar landing and Mariner VI Mars mission: “Future generations may well regard the last two weeks of July 1969 as the most revolutionary and significant fortnight of the entire twentieth century. Not for 300 years has any comparable quantum leap in man’s knowledge of the cosmos taken place in so brief a time.” (NYT, 8/2/69, 10)	,
Paul G. Dembling, NASA General Counsel since January 1967, became NASA Deputy Associate Administrator. Dembling, who had joined naca in 1945, had been principal drafter of bill which became National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and had received NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1968 for contributions to development of legal framework of U.S. aeronautical and space activities. (NASA Release 69-131) Study of lunar samples was “bringing to light as many mysteries as it unravels,” New York Times editorial said. Theorists were cautious, with evidence from one small area, Tranquility Base. “It is likely that the picture will become still more complex when a representative collection of samples becomes available from ten, twenty or thirty areas spread over the entire lunar surface. But even the limitations of the present data suggest strongly that the moon is very different from earth, and therefore has much to teach human science about the origin and evolution of the solar system. The case for intensive scientific study of the moon—conducted in part by geologists and other scientists sent there for on-the-spot investigation-—is strong.” (NYT, 9/10/69, 40) September 11: Press conference on results of Mariner VI (launched Feb. 24) and Mariner VII (launched March 27) was held at NASA Hq. Some 200 TV pictures of Mars were taken by two Mariners, including 57 high- and medium-resolution views of selected Martian surface areas from altitude of only few hundred miles. Spacecraft measured Martian atmospheric temperature, pressure, and chemical constituency and measured surface temperatures in effort to correlate thermal characteristics with features observed in TV pictures. Data indicated Mars was heavily cratered, bleak, cold, dry, nearly airless, and generally hostile to any earth-style life forms. Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech said: “We got nine times the number of far encounter pictures that were originally proposed [few years ago], 20 per cent more near encounter pictures than were proposed, and 1,100 digital pictures which were entirely impossible according to schemes at the time of the proposal. . . . After Mariner 4 Mars seemed to be like the moon. At last Mariners 6 and 7 have shown Mars to be like Mars and have brought out Mars’ own characteristic features, some of them unknown and unrecognized elsewhere in the solar system.” Dr. Robert P. Sharp of Cal Tech said Martian terrain could be divided into three types—crater, featureless, and. chaotic. Cratered terrain was widespread and common on Mars and resembled moon. Featureless terrain was represented by Hellas area, which appeared to be upland area, 150-mi-wide zone that gently sloped into flat featureless floor. Chaotic terrain had series of “short ridges, little valleys, and irregular, jumbled topography.” Chaotic and featureless terrain appeared to be distinctly Martian, suggesting “that on Mars we have either a difference in processes that are operating on the surface or within the crust or we have a difference of material from one place to another on Mars and different than on the moon, or, more likely, a combination of both. ... We also have good reason for believing that the evolutionary history has been somewhat different. Again, there are scars on the face of Mars that we do not see on the face of the moon. And there have perhaps been episodic events in Martian history that are unique to the planet Mars. We end up with the conclusion that Mars is its own planet.” Dr. George C. Pimentel of Univ. of California at Berkeley said reevaluation of initial data from infrared spectrometer had shown infrared spectral features earlier ascribed to methane and ammonia were actually due to previously undiscovered absorptions of solid carbon dioxide. Reflection peak recorded three times in atmosphere off Mars’ bright limb showed presence of solid carbon dioxide at high altitudes and at latitudes north of polar cap. Broad absorption near 9 p. recorded on bright limb was ascribed to solid silica or silicate material and broad absorptions near 12 p. recorded near dark limb were tentatively ascribed in part to solid carbon dioxide above ground. Further experimental work was in progress to refine thermal map. Initial results of uv spectrometer experiment were detection of ionized carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, atomic hydrogen, and oxygen. Nitrogen and nitric oxide were not detected and no evidence was found of clouds, blue haze, or any appreciable atmospheric absorption of uv radiation. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado said important point “is that the atmosphere of Mars is different than the atmosphere of the earth. If I showed you a spectrum taken the same way from the upper atmosphere of the earth, we would see a plentiful number of nitrogen bands. We could see emissions from nitric oxide. We could see emissions from atomic nitrogen. None of those features is present in the atmosphere of Mars. . . .” Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of jpl presented biological implications of Mariner 1969 results. “There is nothing in the new data that encourages the belief that Mars is a body of life. But the results don’t exclude this possibility. . . . The Mariner 6 and 7 data strengthen the previous conclusion that the scarcity of water on Mars is the most serious limiting factor for life. . . . Mars is a cold desert by terrestrial standards. If there is life on Mars, it must be a form of life that can utilize water in the form of water vapor or ice.” (Transcript; NASA News Release)
Press conference on Mariner VI preliminary results was held at JPL. Scientists reported experiments had revealed that recurring white blob seen in previous Mars pictures was 300-mi wide crater with peak in center; linear features known as canals were actually large, irregular, low-contrast splotches without specific detail; temperature in equatorial area ranged from 75°F to —100°F; atmosphere was almost nonexistent; Mars had no sharply defined borders separating light and dark areas; and Martian surface was more heavily cratered than previously believed. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado said any life on Mars would be very different from life on earth, perhaps form that used carbon dioxide. He said uv spectrometer had found atomic carbon and carbon monoxide, but no traces of nitrogen—essential to life on earth. Dr. George C. Pimentel of Univ. of California at Berkeley said infrared spectrometer had detected presence of unknown compound related to methane, building block of life on earth. He also reported detection of super-thin layer of water ice hanging in atmosphere above Mars equator. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/3/69, A3; Lannan, W Star, 8/3/69, A5)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator-designate, discussed possibility of integrated European space program alongside that of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in Thomas A. Edison Memorial Lecture at Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. “The space-age challenge to Europe in my view is to find new ways of organizing and managing the great wealth of that continent to overtake, if you like, major American and Soviet space and other programs. This is the space-age challenge to Europe: not the ‘technology gap’ but the ‘management gap.’ ” Dr. Paine also said, if 1969, 1971, and 1973 space probes should find “very exciting things about Mars, it is possible that we or the Russians might want to move a manned interplanetary expedition to a higher order of national priority. At the present time, the best guess is that this would not take place until the mid 1980’s but new priorities might lengthen or shorten this period.” In reply to question on man-in-space justification, he said: “For almost any simple specific experiment ... an automated probe can be developed to do it at lower cost. The basic question here is the difference between short-range research projects to achieve simple specific objectives, and complex research aimed at developing general exploratory capability and broad technological positions which will let you do things in the future which you can’t yet fully foresee. For the latter you will need men.” Dr. Paine expected U.S.S.R. “very likely” would put space station into orbit before U.S. In lunar exploration, he expected U.S. to stay ahead a while. In planetary probes, he expected U.S.S.R. to stay ahead. In earth applications, he expected U.S. to stay ahead. (Text)
Dissatisfaction with substandard performance in other parts of society was “something worthwhile that the Space Program is contributing to the United States,” NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, said in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C. “I hope we have spurred our society and our people to . . . demand higher performance, to set bolder goals, and then to have the gumption to stand up before the whole world and demonstrate whether or not the goals are achieved.” Space program had also taught “need for broadly enlisting not only American capability, but the best people from around the world willing to throw their competence and a portion of their careers into challenging endeavors.” It had “unleashed in the 1960’s the talents and energies of a technological generation.” U.S. must continue “to put together bold programs that will release the creative energies of our people in productive channels.” Dr. Paine thought history would record as “the great contribution of our generation” astronauts’ blazing of “trail for all future generations of men who want to . . . conquer new worlds. . . . Through man’s brains, energy and resources life can—and life will—extend itself through the solar system. . . . The 1980’s are very clearly the decade in which both we and the Soviet Union, with reasonable-sized space programs in the 1970’s, will develop a technological capability for landing on Mars.” In response to questions, Dr. Paine said: “It seems clear to me that there are increasing opportunities for all nations to work together in space exploration and application. Certainly we and the Russians can and should cooperate more closely in space science so our two programs can produce greater results than the simple sum of their outputs.” (Transcript)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Associate and Deputy Administrator, delivered 1969 Minta Martin Lecture at MIT as 1968—69 Jerome Hunsaker Professor of Aeronau-• tical Engineering. Describing origins and development of U.S. space program as well as decision-making and implementation in commitment to manned lunar landing, paper would be presented also at Univ. of Maryland March 20 and at LeRC April 24. Citing need for set of national goals, Dr. Seamans defined national agenda for allocation of R&D that might be acceptable to man in street: understanding, forecasting, and controlling environment; supplying basic resources of food, fuel, minerals, and water; improving quality of life; improving transportation; improving communications; encouraging economic growth; and assisting international development and providing national security. Space program contributed to all categories. Studies of sun’s transmissions, of Mars and Venus atmospheres, of moon’s origin, and of earth itself contributed to understanding of environment for practical use of man. Space R&D might aid search for alternative basic resources; it could establish facilities for detecting available resources and speed communications to meet problems. Biological and medical investigations in space program held greatest promise in study of reactions of biological specimens, animals, and man. Impact on education had been cited by some as greatest value of space exploration. Program had required in-depth investigation of waste management, fire prevention, materials development, and microminiaturization. Space technology influenced new vehicles being tested for transportation—hydrofoil ships, surface-effect and air-cushion vehicles, high-speed trains, electric cars, vtol and v/stol aircraft, jumbo subsonic aircraft, and supersonic aircraft. Communications satellites, already in commercial use, ultimately could broadcast directly to home receivers. In international cooperation, NASA was working with 64 nations in space activity. Returns from NASA’s scientific satellites and communications satellites, development of manned space flight capability, and tracking facilities contributed to national defense. (Text)
In letter advocating postponement of decision on manned Mars landing [see Aug. 20] former Secretary of State Dean Rusk had “gone to the heart of what is bound to become a critical national decision,” Richard Wilson said in Washington Evening Star. “Now that we know we can and will do this thing does it make any difference in the eons of time yet to come when we do it? Fifty years from now might we not have developed far cheaper and more efficient' ways to do it? Mars will still be there. . . . The space men have shown us not only the moon, but what a beautiful planet we have in what may otherwise be a wholly desolate solar system—a beautiful planet that needs loving care to preserve it.” (W Star, 8/22/69, A15)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
jpl press conference reported new information on Mars from the Mariner VI flyby. The far-encounter photo above, taken 463f2S0 miles from Mars July 29, showed Meridiani Sinus and Sabacus Sinus as a dark feature near the equator. The bright area at the top was Cydonia. The south polar cap showed at the bottom of the planet. i UVS'. NARROW-ANGIE TV use compatible with airport locations, and to analyze feasibility of compatible land development in high-noise areas, (dot Release 18369) ■ Apollo 8 commemorative medallions containing metal carried on mission were being distributed to NASA employees “as a token of appreciation for each individual’s efforts in making the United States lunar program possible,” NASA Hq. Weekly Bulletin said, (NASA Hq WB, 8/4/69, 1) August 4—5: NASA’s Mariner VII transmitted first closeup photos of Mars south pole as it flew within 2,100 mi of planet. Dr. Robert P, Sharp, geologist at Cal Tech, said 31 photos might look like “baby pictures of Earth. This is what the Earth might have looked like some four billion years ago before it developed an atmosphere and oceans to weather its surface and nurture life.” Photos taken on pass Aug. 4 were transmitted to JPL Aug. 5. Polar cap, which had appeared gleaming white in more distant photos, looked dull gray in closeups. Pictures showed south polar cap with snow-like substance-—possibly frozen carbon dioxide—piled up in vast dunes; pocked with deep, steeply walled craters; and much darker than desert to north. Floor of bright circular Hellas desert area, believed to be shallow crater or collapsed area, was strangely free of meteorite impact craters. Mariner VII (launched March 27) with Mariner VI (launched Feb. 24) had provided most detailed information to date on Mars, including 198 photos covering 20% of planet and detailed scientific data from onboard experiments. Data indicated: thin Martian atmosphere had no detectable nitrogen; south polar cap, which appeared white and smoothly circular in telescope pictures, was ragged with dark splotch in center; surface temperatures ranged from 75°F to —100°F; some of narrower thin dark lines called canals might be segments of rubbled rims of craters up to 300 mi across; and Martian surface, though heavily pocked, was not as rugged as lunar surface. (AP, B Sun, 8/6/69, Al; AP, W Star, 8/6/69, A7; Auerbach, W Post, 8/6/69, A3)
At White House dinner for West German Chancellor Kurt G. Kiesinger, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, told press putting man on Mars by 1982 posed less risk than putting man on moon because most technical problems had been solved. In time space travel would become commonplace, with spacecraft carrying passengers. On Martian surface man could move from home to car or office in completely controlled environment. (Shelton, W Post, 8/8/69, D2)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole traced NASA plans for planetary exploration from May 1971 launch of two Mariner spacecraft for Mars to Grand Tours of planets beginning in 1977 and 1979. “What comes after the two Grand Tours? Nobody really knows, but the space agency’s dreamers about unmanned missions have a plot already written and it reads a little better than most science fiction does.” Spacecraft would circulate through asteroid belt for year, making asteroid counts and photographing larger asteroids. Beyond that, scientists would like to rendezvous with a comet and investigate Saturn’s rings. (W Post, 11/2/69, B3)
U.S. newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 12 landing on moon: Washington Post: “The sheer joy of these two astronauts . . . shines out over everything else. They are obviously moon-struck. Conrad sounded like the most eager and happiest young geology student in the universe as he hummed and laughed his way from rock to rock, grabbing one after the other and complaining that he couldn’t get enough. And who would have thought that one of these highly skilled men would resort, as Bean did, to bonking the television camera with a hammer in an effort to make it work? Unfortunately, the failure of the camera did deprive us of seeing this frolic. . . . There was much to be learned from it about the moon and about the men who combine such cool technical competence with such zest for a serious and dangerous job.” (W Post, 11/20/69) Detroit News: “To travel 230,000 miles and hit the target on the button is almost unbelievable except that NASA, its crews and its machines are making believers of us all. But there’s a lesson to be taken to heart in the camera’s freak failure. Conrad and Bean tried to remedy the defect. . . . But they had to drop that to get on with more essential scientific exploratory experiments. Conrad’s oxygen limit was four hours. He hadn’t time to spare. . . . that should be warning to those euphoric advocates of setting a target date for a trip to Mars. An astronaut limited to four hours work on the moon is a reminder of the vast project ahead in confounding the elements in this untapped lunar mystery. Prophecies of colonizing the moon should be set against that four-hour limit, even though we no doubt will improve on it.” (D News, 11/20/69) Atlanta Constitution: “This second landing, more than 900 miles from where the pioneers of Apollo 11 put down last July, notably extends our knowledge. New landing techniques, a longer lunar stay, nuclear-powered experiments—they all serve to push back a fantastic frontier which only a few short years ago was regarded as a most implausible province of man.” (Atlanta Constitution, 11/20/69) Houstin Chronicle: “Our admiration for the coolness and the skill of astronauts Conrad, Bean and Richard F. Gordon, Jr.—the latter still in lonely orbit around the Moon—is boundless. The astronauts continue to perform, one mission after the other, in story-book perfection. We marvel, too, at the ability of the technicians on the ground to quickly respond to unexpected eventualities, like the electrical difficulty just after the launch, and to enable the mission to proceed unimpaired. These achievements inspire all men. They lift our sights for the future.” (.H Chron, 11/20/69, 2 Sec, 5) Birmingham, News: “The flight has been so predictably on schedule that its very success is certain to help push moon travel back into the ho-hum recesses of blase mankind’s mind, as each success in the Mercury and Gemini and early Apollo series made earth orbital spaceflight seem routine.” (B News, 11/20/69)
New determination of abundance of water in Mars atmosphere was reported in Science by Illinois Institute of Technology astronomers Tobias Owen and Harold P. Mason. New spectrograms of planet had been obtained in region of water-vapor band at 8,200 A during February and March 1969. Amount of precipitable water was found to be about 15 /x. Abundance reaffirmed that some water was present at current epoch but otherwise had little bearing on evolution of Martian atmosphere. Water vapor did not imply liquid water existed on Martian surface. (Science, 8/29/69, 893—5)
Results of preliminary qualitative study of Mariner VI photos were summarized in Science by Dr. Robert B. Leighton, Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, Dr. Bruce C. Murray, and Dr. Robert P. Sharp of Cal Tech; Alan G. Herriman and Dr. Andrew T. Young of JPL; Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ.; Merton E. Davies of rand Corp.; and Conway B. Leovy of Univ. of Washington: Surface of Mars “appears similar to that of the Moon, but there are significant differences; some features seen from Earth are characterized; the ‘blue haze’ hypothesis is disproved; and new phenomena associated with the polar cap aTe discovered.” Mars resembled moon in abundance, form, arrangement, and size of craters, but there appeared to be break in size-distribution curve of craters in some parts of Mars not characteristic of moon—apparently because Mars had more effective weathering and transportation process than moon. Similarities between Martian and lunar surfaces included craters with slump blocks, terrace, and radial dry-debris avalanche chutes on steep inner surfaces; central peaks, polygonal outlines, blocky ejecta rims, and irregular ejecta; and irregularly sinuous ridges. Differences included more subdued relief of many Martian craters, flatter floors, fewer central peaks, more subdued debris blankets, absence of obvious secondary craters and rays, and greater abundance of “ghost” craters. Photos showed no sinuous rifles and no distinctive earth-like phenomena such as mountain ranges, tectonic basins, stream-cut topographs, dune fields, playa flats, or other arid-region features. (Science, 8/15/69, 685—90)
Washington Daily Neivs editorial commented on Condon Report on UFOs: “Dedicated disciples of the little green men from Mars school no doubt will find the Condon report represents another diabolical plot to suppress truth. But most Americans will find the report something less than a surprise. Apart from wasting time, continuing study would waste taxpayer money.” (W News, 1/18/69)
In U.S.’s Annual Review of National and Co-Operative International Space Activities, Soviet Government report said Soviet scientists had paid “great attention” to developing methods of detecting signs of life on other planets. “With the development of space research, the problem of detecting life on the celestial bodies closest to the earth by means of space craft is becoming a priority matter. The considerable difference between conditions on the surface of the moon, Venus and Mars and those in which terrestrial life exists makes it necessary for us to extend our knowledge of the limits within which terrestrial life and life in general can exist. In this connexion Soviet scientists are investigating the possible limits of the existence of life. The absence of systematic processes for the movement of matter on the moon obviously makes active life on its surface impossible. On Mars, where free liquid water is probably absent, life is possible using matter transfer by frost, ice in the soil, water vapour and the wind. Examination of the temperature limits for the existence of life gives rise to a number of considerations which allow us not to exclude the possibility of the existence of life, in for example, the polar regions of Venus.” (Text)
Selection of investigators and investigation areas for .1973 Viking mission to Mars was announced by NASA. LaRC would manage overall project and be responsible for lander portion of spacecraft. jpl would manage orbiter portion and be responsible for tracking and data acquisition. Viking, follow-on to 1964—1965, 1969, and 1971 Mariner Mars flights, would consist of two instrumented spacecraft in Mars orbit, each of which would detach landing capsule for softlanding on Mars. Mission objectives included detection of life if it existed. (nasa Release 69—166)
Results of four radio occultation measurements of Mars’ atmosphere, ionosphere, and surface configuration by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by jpl’s Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore, Dr. Gunnar Fjeldbo, and Boris L. Seidel and Goddard Institute for Space Studies’ Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool. Measurements had provided refractivity data in Mars atmosphere at four points above its surface. For atmosphere consisting predominantly of carbon dioxide, surface pressures between 6 and 7 millibars at three points of measurement and 3.8 at fourth, indicated elevation of 3.1—3.7 mi (5—6 km). Temperature profile measured by Mariner VI near equator in daytime indicated temperatures in stratosphere about 100°K warmer than those predicted by theory. Measurements by Mariner VI taken at 79°N at beginning of polar night indicated conditions were favorable for condensation of carbon dioxide at almost all altitudes. Mariner VII measurements taken at 58°S in daytime and 38°N at night also showed carbon dioxide condensation was possible at altitudes above about 15.5 mi (25 km). Measurements of electron density in ionosphere showed upper atmosphere was substantially warmer than in 1965, possibly because of increased solar activity and proximity to sun. (Science, 12/12/69, 1393—7)
Man’s knowledge of Venus, Mars, and moon had been enormously enhanced by unmanned Mariner missions, New York Times editorial said. They were relatively inexpensive and did not risk human lives. “Nevertheless, American political leadership has been so obsessed with sending a man to the moon that unmanned probes of the planets became the stepchildren of the national space program. There were times when even the continued existence of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—the center for these unmanned flights—seemed in doubt. Now, in the new phase of American space exploration begun in the wake of Apollo IPs historic achievement, the major cost-benefit advantages of Mariner type unmanned flights need to he more fully appreciated by Washington policy makers, and even more intensively exploited than in the past, even as the manned exploration of the moon continues.” (NYT, 7/31/69, 32) During July: NASA-appointed Astronomy Missions Board recommended long-range program in space astronomy to NASA. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director, had been appointed in 1967 to propose programs for 1970s. NASA published Board’s report in November [see Nov. 9]. (Text; NASA Release 69—149; NASA ossa)
LaRC and JPL announced formation of management teams to direct Viking Mars 1973 program to send two instrumented lander-and-orbiter spacecraft to Mars in 1973. LaRC had responsibility for overall project management and for lander portion of spacecraft. JPL would manage orbiter portion and tracking and data acquisition. James S. Martin, Jr., was LaRC project manager, with Henry W. Norris named Viking orbiter manager at jpl. (nasa Release 69-54; jpl Release 512)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified in FY 1970 authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that he believed “the greatest significance” of President Nixon’s decision to include in budget amendment amounts for continued lunar exploration after first Apollo landings and for continued Saturn V production was “that it recognizes the fundamental fact that the United States should not and does not plan to stop its further development and use of manned space flight.” Early manned lunar landing would allow additional savings of perhaps as much as $39 million in amended Apollo budget. Budget included funds for improved scientific equipment for more advanced missions to moon and for limited Apollo Applications program. Fund cuts would mean some program reorientation as well as delay in Workshop, previously scheduled for mid-1971. Amended budget supported continuation of plans for 1971 and 1973 Mars missions and first mission to Mercury in 1973, with Venus swing-by. In space applications, “where we are placing special emphasis,” Earth Resources Technology Satellite program would enable NASA, with other agencies, to test practical use of space to gather information on water levels, crops, forests, and other resources. “Despite the sizable overall reduction ... we have not reduced the earth resources project.” Budget included funds to proceed with nerva development and continued to give “high priority to our work in aeronautics.” New construction would include Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory at LaRC, “unique national facility for studying the fundamentals of noise generation and reduction.” U.S.S.R. was continuing vigorous program in both aeronautics and space. “The Soviet commitment represents . . . the application of resources at about the same rate as that we have averaged in recent years,” with “significantly higher percentage of the gross national product.” Soviets were “proceeding in manned space flight programs directed both at sending men to the moon and at substantially enlarged and extended manned operations in earth orbit. . . . Automatic rendezvous and docking flights with Cosmos 186—188 and 212—213 and the manned Soyuz 4—5 mission in January, with manned docking and crew transfer, demonstrated the increasing Soviet capability. . . . They appear to be pointed to a future capability for assembly in earth orbit of large space stations and of manned spacecraft to send to the moon and beyond.” U.S.S.R. had “made attempts to launch one or more spacecraft to the planets at almost every opportunity—three or four times the number of attempts we have been able to make.” (Testimony)
President Nixon arrived in Belgium at start of eight-day goodwill visit to heads of state in Brussels, London, Bonn, West Berlin, Rome, Paris, and the Vatican. In welcoming speech at Brussels National Airport, King Baudouin said: “During this year, which will perhaps be that of man’s first landing on the moon, we are more than ever conscious of the gulf between the wonderful possibilities open to us and the obligations which burden the world because of war, want, injustice, and inequality. May your journey and your interviews provide an opportunity for friendly nations better to combine their efforts to solve their problems on which the very future of mankind depends.” (PD, 3/3/69, 310) Primary mission objective was equatorial flyby mission for exploratory investigations of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary objective spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 840-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mission offered first opportunity to make scientific measurements on night side of Mars. Two onboard TV cameras would take pictures of Mars disc during approach with 15-mi optimum resolution and of surface during flyby with 900-ft optimum resolution. Infrared spectrometer and uv spectrometer would probe Mars atmosphere, and oc-cultation experiment would obtain data on atmospheric pressures and densities. Infrared radiometer would measure surface temperatures on both light and dark sides of Mars; celestial mechanics experiment would use tracking information to refine astronomical data. Sharp increase in data returns would be achieved over 1964 Mariner missions. Mariner VI TV pictures would contain 3.9-million bits of information; Mariner IV contained 240,000 bits in 1965. Mariner VI would transmit science data at basic rate of 270 bps and high rate of 16,200 bps before flyby; Mariner IV transmitted at 8 % bps. Mariner VI was follow-on to 1964 Mariner/Mars missions and precursor to 1971 orbital and 1973 landing missions. First Mars probe, Mariner III (launched Nov. 4, 1964), had failed to achieve desired orbit when shroud remained attached to spacecraft. Mariner IV (launched Nov. 28, 1964) had transmitted first close-up photos of Mars in July 1965. Mariner VII (Mariner G) would be launched
In speech before Chicago Executive Club in Chicago, 111., Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said operation of military systems in space “to enhance the national defense” must be one objective of U.S. future space program to ensure “there will be no hlind reliance on good faith.” Vice President Agnew was also Chairman of nasc and of President’s Space Task Group. Two questions dominated speculation over national space policy, he said: Why space? And Why Mars? “Mars holds the greatest promise of a capability to sustain human life. It is a potential resource and reserve. More important for the present is the fact that the mind of America functions better when it focuses upon a clear target. Manned exploration of the Solar System is too nebulous to capture the public’s attention. A manned landing on Mars is as understandable a challenge to the citizen as it is to the scientist. It is a test that can be put in a time frame and its anticipation can be appreciated by all.” (Text)
Since “any contamination of the earth from the moon would affect all men and all nations,” said New York Times, protective arrangements “should be approved by an international group, preferably by a formal United Nations committee. In the future men will go to Mars and other parts of the solar system where the prospects of finding living organisms are much greater than they are on the moon. If Americans now monopolize the key decisions regarding protection of the earth’s environment, they will have no grounds for objecting later on if Russians, Chinese, Germans, Japanese, Brazilians or others monopolize similar decisions affecting human beings returning from more distant celestial bodies.” (NYT, 6/7/69, 32)
Astronautics & Aeronautics magazine published special issue containing “1973 Viking Voyage to Mars” by NASA Viking project management. Two orbiters would release two softlanders to search for life, map Martian surface from orbit, monitor Martian weather, study atmosphere, and take three-dimensional color photos from ground. Flight directors on earth would probably choose landing site from orbiter reconnaissance photos taken at arrival. A science satellite in its own right, the orbiter would also relay a record volume of interplanetary data from the lander to earth. Nuclear-powered instrument platform based on Surveyor would push evolution of automation step further during mission. (A&A, 11/69, 30—59)
Washington Post editorial: “There was a certain logic in playing down the purely scientific aspects of the Apollo program in the past since the effort was to land men on the moon before the Russians did. But that day is past. The scientists of space, as contrasted with its engineers and technicians, have been forced into the back seat of the manned space program. It is time now to make them the navigators. The choice of missions—for future flights to the moon and for future operations that will lead some day to a trip to Mars and eventually other planets— should be largely in their hands. They, far better than the men who created the hardware and the knowledge necessary to make space travel possible, know the areas most appropriate for exploration in terms of gaining knowledge.” (W Post, 8/8/69) Pac (Package Attitude Control) system, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 340-mi (547.1-km) apogee, 300mi (482.7-km) perigee, 94.2-min period, and 32.9° inclination. Primary objective was to flight-test long-life, low-power, three-axis Pac earth-stabilized control system for Delta 2nd stage and to demonstrate feasibility of using stage as experimental platform. Oso VI was spin-stabilized, weighed 640 lbs, carried seven experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. It was similar to previous osos but had unique capability which enabled two sun-pointing telescopes to study in detail uv and x-ray spectra at any point on solar disc and would provide greater knowledge of solar atmosphere (chromosphere) as well as outermost layer (corona) visible only through special instruments or during total solar eclipse. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by Harvard College Observatory, Naval Research Laboratory, Rutgers Univ., Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories, Univ. of New Mexico, Univ. of Bologna, and University College (London). Both tape recorders were operating at liftoff and were still operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft stabilized and acquired sun as scheduled shortly after entering orbit. By Aug. 15 all experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Two minor anomalies— higher than planned use of current by motor that provided fine elevation pointing and lower than expected spacecraft operating temperature —were not expected to affect spacecraft operation adversely. Oso VI was seventh in series of eight oso spacecraft designed to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and together provided more than 8,600 hrs of scientific information, oso—c (launched Aug. 25, 1965) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily. Oso V (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit, oso program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Releases 69—112, 69—112A, 69—123; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
International team of scientists might man first U.S. permanent space laboratory, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at London news conference. Work on project would begin about 1975 and additional sections would be added each year for decade, eventually producing laboratory for about 50 scientists. Dr. Paine, on his way to Paris Air Show, said it was too early to say if there would be permanent U.S. lunar space station or to predict if man would land on Mars. He had no information to support rumors of imminent Soviet moon landing. (Reuters, W Post, 6/5/69, E5)
Proximity of probable date of lunar landing to date of arrival of Mariner VI and VII cameras near Mars surface would provide U.S. TV viewers with “double space feature,” NASA said. Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, credited feat to advances in electronics through which streams of signals could be returned from moon and from Mars into tracking centers and switching points on earth, thence via comsats into TV networks throughout globe. Apollo 11 mission would include eight color telecasts from spacecraft. Lunar telecasts would be black and white since lm would lack power for color TV. Mars telecasts from Mariner VI would produce 50 photos; Mariner VII would deliver 91. Best resolution from closeup would be 900 ft; it had been 2 mi in 1965 Mariner IV photos and was 100 mi by best optical means from earth, (nasa Release 69-831)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said: “. . . man’s flight to the moon and beyond could be the only means he has left of renewing his dwindling spirits. . . . The voyage of Apollo 8 around the moon last Christmas did more than any other single event last year to restore man’s faith in himself-—and that flight will pale beside an actual moon landing when it comes. ... It could just be that when man walks the moon for the first time it will be felt round the world as such a triumph of the human heart that its beat shall go on for a million years.” (W Post, 3/26/69, A27) March 27—April 8: NASA’s Mariner VII (Mariner G) spacecraft was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-19) booster on four-month, 193-million-mi, direct-ascent trajectory toward Mars—NASA’s second mission to fly past Mars during 1969 launch window. Launch vehicle performance was nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its four solar panels, and locked its sensors on sun and star Vega. Because of several minor spacecraft anomalies during launch, spacecraft was kept in sun-Vega cruise while performance was evaluated. Star-lock override command was transmitted to spacecraft April 1; Canopus was acquired as planned initially and Mariner VII entered stable cruise mode. Midcourse maneuver was conducted April 8 to ensure that spacecraft would fly within 1,900 mi (3,057.7 km) of Mars Aug- 5. Primary mission objective was to fly by southern hemisphere and polar regions of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary mission spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 900-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mariner March 27-April 8: has* latmcked Mariner VII on an Atlas-Centaur booster as the second of two spacecraft in the Mariner Mars 1969 mission to take photograpks and collect data about [he surface and atmosphere of Mars. Mariner IV (oris launched Feb. 24. An April 8 maneuver ensured that Mariner VII would pass Mars Aug. 5. VII mission, except for flyby area, was almost identical to mission of Mariner VI launched Feb. 24 for investigation of equatorial region and scheduled to arrive at Mars July 31. (NASA Proi Off; NASA Releases 69-26, 69-12)
Apollo 11 astronauts discussed possible manned Mars landing by 1982 on CBS TV program “Face the Nation.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said, “I am quite certain that goals of the Mars variety are within our range, should we choose . . . that investment of our national resources.” First exploratory flights could be combined with earthorbiting spacecraft to develop long-term capability with same kind of spacecraft. It was “well within our capability” to be prepared for Mars launch in 1981. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said he was “not so sure . . . this is the time that we can accurately set a date like 1981.” Setting goal was worthwhile but as intermediate goals were reached “I believe we will be able to better define exactly what our longer term goals are in terms of ten years from now.” Astronaut Michael Collins said, “I don’t think 1981 is too soon. I think it is well within our capabality to do so.” Long-duration trip “requires careful design and testing of the equipment, which could easily be done in Earth orbit with a number of ancillary benefits.” He defended Bible reading in space and announced he would not fly in space again, because he found it increasingly difficult “to keep up year after year” with rigorous training required. (SBD, 8/19/69, 159; W Post, 8/18/69, A2; NYT, 8/18/69, 33)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
National Assn, of Government Employees President Kenneth T. Lyons told House Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee landing on moon would soon be safer than landing at most U.S. airports. “Do we have to have NASA take over from the FAA in order to get a little sense into our airport and aircraft traffic management jumble?” (Bentley, B Sun, 7/29/69, A5)	, As spacecraft neared and swung around Mars it took 24 close-up pictures from about 2,000 mi at closest point. Pictures were so sharply defined and detailed that they were shown live on TV instead of being refined and released later in photographic prints as originally planned. Pictures—enhanced by computers at JPL to clear out static, highlight images, adjust contrast and brightness, and exaggerate features—were spectacular. They showed that Mars was heavily cratered and looked very much like moon. One photo showed 11-mi-dia crater closely resembling moon’s Copernicus crater and diagonal ditch resembling lunar rifle. During closest approach, onboard TV cameras took 12 high-resolution and 12 medium-resolution pictures, stored some on board for later playback, and transmitted some immediately to ground stations for conversion to images at JPL. Three of four onboard experiments—TV to take pictures, uv spectrometer to identify and measure gases in upper atmosphere, and infrared radiometer to measure planet’s temperature—functioned satisfactorily. Only anomaly was failure in cooling of one channel on infrared spectrometer, designed to identify gases in lower Martian atmosphere, which prevented proper acquisition of data. JPL controllers temporarily lost contact with second Mariner, Mariner VII, en route to Mars, at 6:00 pm EDT July 30. Engineers speculated that spacecraft had been thrown out of alignment when struck by micrometeoroid traveling at 40 mps and had locked on planet Jupiter or another bright object. Contact with Mariner VII was regained seven hours later by switching from one antenna to another and proper attitude was restored by rolling spacecraft around until it locked on star Canopus. Although some of data being transmitted appeared to be abnormal, flyby mission was still expected to succeed. Mariner VI would continue taking pictures and play back recorded near-encounter data during final phase of mission. Data would be compared with data from Mariner VII (launched March 27), which would fly past Mars polar region Aug. 4. (nasa Release 69—26A; Sullivan, NYT, 8/1/69, 1; Auerbach, W Post, 8/1/69, Al; Lannan, W Star, 7/31/69, A5; NASA News Release, 9/11/69)
In American Aviation, Eric Bramley called 1969 year of “cautious optimism” for air transport industry. Deliveries of new aircraft to U.S. carriers would drop from 478 in 1968 to 309. Trunk traffic was expected to grow at same 14% rate as 1968, with available seat-mile increase of 17%. CAB-approved fare increases would add $194 million to revenues with profit level and rate of return expected to improve. (Amer Av, 5/12/69, 40-1) nas—nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1968. “Although the principal concern of the space science program in the United States continues to be with the Earth, its environment, the Sun, interactions of solar and terrestrial phenomena, the Moon and planets, and the biological effects of weightlessness and radiation, there is a trend toward increasing emphasis on the use of space vehicles for stellar and galactic astronomy, especially in areas of the electromagnetic spectrum for which the atmosphere is essentially opaque. The successful operation of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory satellite and the rapid development of improved instruments and techniques for ultraviolet and x-ray astronomy . . . are examples of this trend.” In interview with press, nas-nrc Space Science Board member Dr. Richard W. Porter said U.S. would probably have to review its expensive prophylactic measures in planned Mars landings if U.S.S.R. landed there first with same techniques and precautions used in Venus shots. Outgoing contamination of planets might well be bigger problem than contamination of incoming spacecraft. There was little likelihood of spacecraft landing on Mars and Venus and returning for at least 10 yrs, Dr. Porter said, and risk from lunar bacteriological contamination was infinitesimal. But contamination of planets was serious problem because it could spoil man’s first chances to make a pure investigation of biological evolution elsewhere in the solar system. (Text; W Post, 5/23/69, A15)
Space Task Group presented report The Post-Apollo Space Program: Directions for the Future to President Nixon at White House. It recommended basic goal of balanced manned and unmanned space program conducted for all mankind, with emphasis on increased utilization of space capabilities for services to man through expanded space applications program; enhancement of U.S. defense posture for world peace and security through exploitation of space techniques for military missions; continuing strong program of lunar and planetary exploration, astronomy, physics, and earth and life sciences; development of new systems and technology for space operations, emphasizing commonality, reusability, and economy through development of new space transportation capability and space station modules; and promotion of world community through program of broad international participation and cooperation. As focus for development of new capability, Task Group recommended U.S. accept long-range goal of manned planetary exploration with manned Mars mission before end of century. Activities leading to goal should include initial concentration on exploiting existing capability and developing new one while maintaining program balance within available resources; operational phase using new systems and capabilities in earth-moon space, with men living and working in that environment for extended periods; and manned exploration missions out of earth-moon space, using experience of earlier two phases. Schedule and budgetary implications of phases were subject to Presidential choice, with detailed program to be determined in normal annual budget and program review. Report outlined three possible NASA programs for manned Mars landing before century’s end. Option I would launch manned mission in mid-1980s and would establish orbiting lunar station, 50-man earthorbiting space base, and lunar surface base. Funding would rise from current $4-billion level to $8- to $10-billion level in 1980. Decision to proceed with development of space station, earth-to-orbit shuttle, and space tug would be required in FY 1971. Option II would include Mars mission launch in 1986, allowing for evaluation of unmanned Mars mission results before final designation of landing date and require about $8-billion maximum annual expenditure in early 1980s. Option III would include initial development of space station and reusable shuttles, as in Options I and II, but would defer decision on manned Mars landing date while maintaining goal of after 1980 but before close of century. Concurrent development of space transportation system and modular space stations would require rise in 1976 annual expenditures to $5.7 billion, while their development in series would entail $4- to $5-billion funding level. Recommended DOD options were: (A) program of full military space capability in case of overt threat to national security, (B) development of efforts to counter known and accepted projections of security threat and increase in development activities if threat increased, and (C) program of lower level system deployment with technology and support effort necessary for contingency planning on assumption that lessening of world tensions would reduce emphasis on national defense. At White House briefing following presentation, press secretary Ronald L. Ziegler said President Nixon had concurred in Task Group’s rejection of two other, extreme space programs, one to land men on Mars as soon as possible, regardless of cost, and one to eliminate manned flight program after completion of Apollo. He did not know when President would make decision on course to follow, but budgetary considerations would be major factor. (Text; PD, 9/22/69, 1291; NYT, 9/16/69, 1)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: “During the entire spectrum of our second and third decades in space, manned space flight has not merely been emphasized, but has literally cannibalized any hope for major scientific planetary, interplanetary, communications, meteorological, oceanographic (in cooperation with satellites), earth resources satellite programs, etc.! I must conclude . . . that the only valid justification for early development of the [space] shuttle is to supply the newborn 50—100 crew manned space stations and the manned exploration of Mars.” From 1958 to 1969 U.S. had launched approximately 750 spacecraft, Karth said: usaf, 380; NASA, 241; usn, 91; and joint usaf—USN, 37. (Text)
Washington Post editorial: “It is not often that the public has a chance to share in the day to day unraveling of scientific mysteries. The men and women who engage in basic research prefer to work quietly in laboratories and eventually announce their findings in the atmosphere of scholarly meetings or academic publications. But at Houston and Pasadena [msc and JPl] these days, the public has become a silent observer of the plodding work that goes into basic research. Regardless of the drama that is involved, the study of the rocks brought back by Apollo 11 from the moon and of the pictures being transmitted back by Mariners 6 and 7 as they fly past Mars is simply basic research. Although results are trickling out each day, the dimensions of each discovery are hard to measure and an understanding of their cumulative impact is likely to be long in coming.” (W Post, 8/2/69, A12)
Scientists at JPL presented conflicting opinions to newsmen on preliminary data from Mariner VI and Mariner VII flybys of Mars. Dr. George C. Pimentel and Dr. Kenneth C. Herr of Univ. of California at Berkeley said data from infrared spectrometer indicated presence of gaseous ammonia and methane in Martian atmosphere. “We are confident that we have detected solid carbon dioxide that is not on the surface; that is, it is suspended as a cloud above the polar cap. Our data are consistent with and suggest that the polar cap is composed of water ice and probably not solid carbon dioxide near the polar cap edge.” If life did exist on Mars, they said, it could be in region near edge of polar icecap where “polar ice provides a reservoir of water” and solid carbon dioxide cloud “provides protection from ultraviolet radiation.” Dr. Gerry Neugebauer of Cal Tech said temperature of Mars was “strong circumstantial evidence that the polar caps are in fact predominantly made of carbon dioxide.” Infrared radiometer experiment, which measured temperatures on Martian surface, indicated that temperature of south polar cap was close to —253 °F, temperature at which carbon dioxide would solidify in thin Martian atmosphere. uv spectrometer experiment had found large amount of uv radiation reflected from south polar icecap, indicating that uv light from sun was penetrating thin Martian atmosphere and reaching surface. Dr. Charles W. Hord of Univ. of Colorado said strong uv radiation reaching surface “would destroy many of the important molecular bonds of organic compounds.” If life did exist on Mars, he said, it “must be pretty strong stuff,” or it must have some means of protection against uv rays. Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech said one of most striking results of Mariner photos was indication of dynamic process occurring on Martian surface. Unlike rest of Martian surface, which was heavily cratered and closely resembled moon, Hellas area appeared to be smooth and free of craters. “Hellas is the first non-lunar-like feature” discovered by Mariner VII, he said. Apparently there was “activity in that region . . . obliterating craters as fast as they are being formed.” (Bishop, WSJ, 8/8/69; Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/69, 1; Lannan, W Star, 8/8/69, A4)
jpl astronomer Dr. Ronald Schorn announced “definite and conclusive” evidence of water on Mars had been found in five-year study with Stephen Little of Univ. of Texas and jpl scientist Dr. C. B. Farmer at McDonald Observatory in Ft. Davis, Tex. Noting Mars generally should be compared with driest deserts of earth, he said: “If you took all the water we found and laid it out over the whole planet, it would be only 1,000th of an inch thick. Mars may still not be a great place to live, but there’s a chance of life there.” Photos to be taken by Mariner VI and Mariner VII spacecraft, Dr. Schorn said, would help solve question of whether enough water existed to sustain life on Mars. New spectra, superior to any previously available, were made possible by NASA-supported improvements in McDonald 82-in Struve reflecting telescope and its large spectrograph. Observations of Mars were beginning with more powerful, 107-in reflecting telescope at McDonald, constructed with funds from NASA, nsf, and Univ. of Texas, (nasa Release 69—48; AP, W Post, 3/25/69, A5)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.—in Lucerne, Switzerland, on European goodwill tour—visited Swiss Transport Museum and Longines Planetarium. They were shown representation of view of earth from Mars. (nasa Hist Off)
Christian Science Monitorsditorial said nasa had postponed manned Mars mission because of budget cutback but “it is keeping its space shuttle program pretty much on schedule.” Reusable space vehicle was “guarantee that space progress won’t be wholly shunted aside by budget stringencies.” It would “help to keep alive the interest of the big rocket and airframe contractors, and the enthusiasm of the thousands of researchers and scientists who have hoped to make space exploration their life work.” (CSM, 2/12/70)
Use of range and Doppler tracking data to determine earth-moon mass ratio and mass of Mars was described in Science by jpl astronomers John D. Anderson, Leonard Efron, and S. Kuen Wong. Accurate navigation of Mariner VI and VII to Mars had required use of twoway, phase-coherent range and Doppler tracking data from nasa-jPLDeep Space Network. Coverage of both Mariners from launch to encounter with Mars, closest approach to Mars, and beyond had provided new information on ratio of mass of earth to that of moon; Mars gravity field, particularly planet’s mass; and ephemerides of Mars and earth. Data complemented Doppler data from Mariner IV with exception of inconsistency of about 0.0004% in values for mass of moon determined from lunar trajectories. Determinations of mass of Mars by Mariner IV and V/ were in agreement. (Science, 1/16/70, 277-9)
In Space/Aeronautics Frank Leary commented on NASA plans for manned Mars mission: “A commitment to placing human footprints on the red planet will spark an arduous and enormously expensive effort. And it will rankle those critics who want the money spent on earthly ills. Technologically and politically, the manned Mars mission is no piece of cake. But, like Apollo, it is virtually inevitable.” (S/A, 2/70, 28-38)
VictorC. Clarke, Jr., jplengineer, received 1970 award from Gravity Research Foundation of New Boston, N.H., for essay “The Application and Principle of Gravity-Assist Trajectories for Space Flight.” Clarke, mission analysis and engineering manager for 1973 Mariner Venus-Mercury project, had first demonstrated possibility of bouncing spacecraft from planet to planet in 1961. He had received 1969 NASA Exceptional Service Medal for contribution to Mariner Mars 1969 mission design. (NASA Release 70-112; jplpio) June 2-19: U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IX, carrying Cosmonauts Andrian G. Ni-kolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, was launched from Baykonurat 12:09 am Baykonur time into orbit with 249-km (154.7-mi) apogee, 236-km (146.6-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass said cosmonauts would conduct extensive program of scientific and technical research in “solitary orbital flight,” including medical and biological research on effects of space flight on man, studies of earth’s geography and atmosphere, research into “physical processes in near-earth space,” and checkout of spacecraft systems. Launch and pictures of crew in spacecraft were televised in Moscow about one hour after liftoff. Five hours after liftoff Tass reported cosmonauts were “coping well with conditions of weightlessness and carrying out the flight program.” Only anomaly had been dirtying of windows from engine fired for midcourse maneuver after fifth orbit, Tass said. Systems were functioning normally and Nikolayev had begun “experiments linked with the investigation of human peculiarities as an element of the control system in different dynamic operations.” Tass issued daily bulletins that described routine of space flight chores and experiments: “While one cosmonaut runs a vacuum cleaner, the other brews coffee or shaves.” Cosmonauts performed strenuous physical exercises each day in special “load suits,” practiced manual maneuvers of spacecraft, and photographed earth and sun. By June 8 Soyuz IX had completed 100 orbits and 147 hrs of flight—record for man-hours in space in Soviet space program— with all systems functioning satisfactorily and with crew demonstrating it could “withstand well the complex impact of the factors of space flight and retain high efficiency.” Insomnia, only problem reported by crew, had been overcome. On June 19 Tass announced Soyuz IX had softlanded 76 km (47 mi) west of Karaganda, Kazakhstan, after orbiting in space for 17 days 16 hrs 59 min and setting new world record for manned space flight endurance. Tass said that crew had “fully fulfilled its programs of research” and that preliminary medical examination showed cosmonauts “had withstood the prolonged space flight well.” Most important part of program, Tass said, was medical-biological experiments on effects of prolonged flight on man. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/2/70, 152; Mills, B Sun, 6/2/70, Al; 6/20/70, A1;AP, NYT, 6/3/70, 18; UPI.W Star, 6/7-8/70; 6/12/70)
Quincy (Mass.) Patriot Ledger editorial noted President’s space goal message had not included Mars mission as major goal at this point. “More important is the consolidation and mastery of the space environment closer to earth, as well as greater application of space research to human problems. Fortunately, this is the emphasis of Mr. Nixon’s new program.” (Q Patriot Ledger, 3/10/70)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, addressed American Newspaper Publishers Assn, in New York: “Our mental concepts and life habits are Earth-oriented. The ability to go the Moon or Mars is regarded as something less than important, and this is only natural. But I am firmly convinced that the space program will prove to be one of the most important, creative, and beneficial to mankind ever undertaken by the United States. ... I think we must clearly establish in this new decade our goals and objectives as an agency first, and then define the hardware needed only after we know exactly where we are headed.” Hardware “on hand or that would be fine to develop” should not “tell us where we’re going.” (Text) U.S. detection in 1950s of Soviet radar three times size of football field was described before Association by Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering: “It was so big that when we first found out about it we were hesitant even to identify it as a radar. Much later we learned that it was far too powerful for most of the applications we could imagine. Assuming it was a radar, many argued that it made sense only as part of a detection, tracking and control network for satellites. The non-radar proponents even tried to make it into such things as a space communications system. The location of the first such radar argued that. . .this equipment probably would form part of an abm system.” (Text)
Milton Klein, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “During the past year, the aec program to provide technology for space nuclear power has furnished operational systems for an earth satellite and the surface of the Moon, and in the near future will provide nuclear power for a new navigational satellite and probes of Jupiter and Mars. Moreover, nuclear power will be imperative for the deep space unmanned planetary missions, the space station/space base and a variety of other missions planned for the new decade and beyond.” Basic technology program had demonstrated “nuclear rocket technology is ready to fulfill this vital role in space and forms the basis for the development of the flight rated nerva.” (Testimony)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said at NASA Hq. news conference on future plans he was directing portions of space program to bring operations in line with FY 1971 budget. “We recognize the many important needs and urgent problems we face here on earth. America’s space achievements in the 1960’s have rightly raised hopes that this country and all mankind can do more to overcome pressing problems of society. The space program should inspire bolder solutions and suggest new approaches. It has already provided many direct and indirect benefits and is creating new wealth and capabilities.” Strong space program continued as one of Nation’s major priorities. “However, we recognize that under current fiscal restraints NASA must find new ways to stretch out current programs and reduce our present operational base.” NASA would “press forward in 1971 at a reduced level, but in the right direction with the basic ingredients we need for major achievements in the 1970s and beyond. .. .we will not dissipate the strong teams that sent men to explore the moon and automated spacecraft to observe the planets.” NASA would suspend Saturn V production indefinitely after Saturn V 515 completion, stretch Apollo lunar missions to six-month launch intervals, defer lunar expeditions during aap space station flights in 1972, and postpone Viking/Mars 1973 unmanned lander launch to next Mars opportunity in 1975. Number of employees in nasa program was expected to decline from 190 000 at end of FY 1970 to 140 000 at close of FY 1971. Positive aspects of space program for 1970s included Apollo missions through Apollo 19, use of one Saturn V to launch first experimental aap space station into earth orbit in 1972, Mars orbit by two unmanned spacecraft in 1971, launch of first Jupiter probe in 1972, launch of spacecraft past Venus to Mercury in 1973, and continuation of scientific satellite launches. Design of reusable space shuttle would be started and first experimental space station would be launched, as planned, in 1972. FY 1971 budget would permit proceeding with design of advanced space station as permanent base in earth orbit, continued work on nasa-aec nerva project, practical earth applications of space technology, and advances in applications of space technology in fields such as meteorology and communications. Although “austere,” space program for 1971 was “forward looking” and contained “basic ingredients needed for an effective space program in the 1970s.” It would “extend our space capabilities, expand our scientific knowledge, and make available new applications of benefit to people here on earth.” In response to question, Dr. Paine said he foresaw no shutdown of ksc and had no plans for closing other centers. Intended actions “represent a decision to proceed through the year 1971 and see what our studies turn up. I think it is important to realize these are very advanced, perhaps, and we have a lot to learn about the technological feasibility, the cost, schedules—and I wouldn’t want to say we now have a complete free road into the future. We don’t.” Asked if he thought NASA was close to point where “team started falling to pieces,” Dr. Paine said that “you can carry out space programs for the United States at a large number of different levels. I think the level we have now is a level we can take great pride in and I think the country in the 1970’s will be very proud of the achievements NASA will turn in.” (Transcript)
Analysis of photo of Phobos, largest of two Martian moons, taken 138 000 km (86 000 mi) from Mars by Mariner VII was discussed in Science by New Mexico State Univ. astronomer and Mariner project scientist Bradford A. Smith, jpl photo-enhancement techniques had indicated Phobos was nonspherical and was larger and had darker surface than previously thought. Satellite’s limb profile measured 18 by 22 km (11.2 by 13.7 mi) and was elongated along orbital plane. Phobos had average visual geometric albedo of 0.065, lower than that known for any other body in solar system. It seemed probable Phobos had not formed by accretion around primordial Mars, but was captured at some later time. (Science, 5/15/70, 828-30; NASA Release 70-66)
The Wartime Journals of Charles A. Lindbergh were reviewed by Eric F.	Goldman in New York Times Book Review: Journals covered 1937-1945, “when the celebrated flyer was in Europe surveying military aviation; the battle between President Franklin Roosevelt and the isolationists, during which Lindbergh stumped the United States as the star speaker of the anti-interventionists. . .; war years when, denied an Air Corps commission, he served as a civilian aeronautical expert in private industry and in the Pacific, also managing to work in 50 combat missions; and the weeks just after the Nazi surrender, which found him again in Europe, attached to a Naval Mission studying wartime developments in plane design and missiles.” Journals snowed Lindbergh as “a first-rate mind who was widely informed yet retained certain key areas of na'ivet6, an instinctive tinkerer with a passion for science as an idea and a gifted scientist who worried over the ‘narrow-mindedness’ of the pursuit, a man who read Plato the night before inspecting aviation factories and Dostoevsky in between speeches before roaring crowds, a hard-hitting bombadier screeching down over Japanese installations while he contemplated the beauty of God’s nature and the dignity of man.” (NYT Book Review, 9/20/70,1,42) Owen S. Merrill of JPL Nuclear Power Sources Group outlined progress of radioisotopic thermoelectric generator (rtg)being developed by aec for NASA and jpl. RTG was only known source considered capable of producing 500 w of power over 9- to 12-yr period required for NASA Grand Tour missions to outer planets. Melvin Swerdling, jpl spacecraft power systems specialist, described improved nickel-cadmium batteries with increased discharge-charge cycle capability, designed by jpl for nasa Mariner Mars 1971 spacecraft, (jpl Release 563)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
Soviet press and radio underlined importance of Luna XVI mission. Tass carried interview with unidentified deputy chief designer of spacecraft, who demonstrated prototype of drill used to obtain lunar samples and said similar device “will bring one day rock samples from Venus, Mars, and other planets of our solar system to earth. Man will go to other planets sometime in the future, but before this is possible, these planets will have to be explored for a long time by automatic stations. At present, an apparatus of a radically new type has been designed in principle. In the long run it will be modified to suit specific tasks. .. .A flight to Mars will require somewhat different technical solutions than a flight to the moon. But the main complex elements of Luna 16—its ability to take off in the directon of a desired celestial body, make a soft-landing on the surface of the planet, operate on it and then start off in the direction of the earth or the planet from which it started—will remain unshakable.” In Izvestia Georgy I. Petrov, head of Soviet Institute for Space Research, said man would still play a role in lunar research, but only in limited way. He said short visits by man appeared useful but he proposed manned orbiting moon stations equipped with automatic spacecraft capable of descending to moon, moving over surface, conducting scientific research, and returning to orbiting station. (Gwertzman, NYT, 9/23/70, 11)
At NASA Hq. news conference on future NASA plans Julian Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, announced that 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite recovered Jan. 9 near Lost City, Okla., had come from orbit which took it outside Mars’ orbit at planet’s farthest point from sun. (Transcript)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1971 budget to Congress said: “Man has ventured to the moon and returned—an awesome achievement. In determining the proper pace for future space activities, we must carefully weigh the potential benefits of: scientific research by unmanned spacecraft; continued exploration of the solar system, including manned exploration of the planets; and the application of space and aeronautics technology to the direct benefit of mankind. “I have reviewed many exciting alternatives for the future. Consistent with other national priorities, we shall seek to extend our capabilities in space—both manned and unmanned. I intend to do this within total space outlays 12% smaller than in 1970. In our current efforts, we will continue to stress additional uses of space technology. Our actions will make it possible to begin plans for a manned expedition to Mars.” President said national budget, first for which he bore full responsibility, fulfilled pledge to submit balanced FY 1971 budget. “This anti-inflationary budget begins the necessary process of reordering our national priorities. For the first time in two full decades, the Federal Government will spend more money on human resource programs than on national defense.” About 41% of estimated outlays would be devoted to spending for education and manpower, health, income security, and veterans benefits and services. Pollution control, crime reduction, transportation, and housing programs were “planned to grow substantially in the years ahead.” {PD, 2/9/ 70, 106-19)
NASA Hq. briefing on FY 1971 budget, held Jan. 31, was released. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had said: “We are putting into motion with this budget a program which does not advance toward a single climactic event. It follows the recommendations of the Space Task Group Report’s Option II, although at a reduced pace. The budget to implement the recommendations, however, is austere and, as a result, does not take full advantage of our total capability. But the new program has the flexibility to accommodate this reduced budget in FY 1971.” Lowest NASA budget since FY 1962 “means substantial cutbacks and deferrals in a number of programs. Our best current estimate is that the total nationwide employment on NASA work—which was once 420,000 people—will decline from current level by another 45,000, to about 144,000 people by the end of fiscal year 1971. The impact will be felt in many sections of the country. This is regrettable, but the Administration has faced the hard fact that these steps must be taken to achieve a fiscally responsible balanced budget in this time of inflation. .. .this budget level, which we hope will be NASA’s lowest level, is strongly oriented to the future. The necessary reductions.. .have not been made ‘across the board.’ We have made careful selections and decisions.” NASA would preserve strong future capability centered on development of economical, reusable space transportation system including shuttle, space station, and reusable nuclear rocket; continue efforts on practical applications of space technology for early practical benefits on earth; continue lunar exploration with Apollo vehicles and Apollo Applications earth orbital workshop flights with hardware previously under procurement; continue, “but with stretchouts and deferrals,” balanced program of planetary exploration and scientific investigations in space focused on potentially exciting discoveries; continue increasing emphasis on aeronautics; and maintain “essential cadre of NASA’s technical, operational, and management capabilities on which the continuing and future position of the United States in space depends.” [See Jan. 13.] Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly during briefing had replied to question that planned fund request for space station and shuttle had been for $250 million to $260 million— supporting Task Group’s Option II, to provide operational systems in 1977—but request had been cut to final $110 million. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said program should give CY 1978 operational date. Dates for Mars mission were not yet planned. Michoud Assembly Facility and Mississippi Test Facility were among NASA installations to be affected by budgetary action, Lilly had said. Plans on Michoud would be to “complete the last of 15 Saturn 5’s in 1970; then we will be carrying on activities for the storage, repairing and refurbishing of the 1-B and the Saturn 5 stages, providing the engineering and support necessary for the flights through 1974, and maintaining the capability to restart or reinitiate the production of Saturn 5’s; maintaining the capability to accept new work.. .and. . .attempting to find other, users of that facility in New Orleans.” At mtf, Saturn V static test firings would be completed. “Then, the plans in our budget are to mothball the facilities. Personnel will be phased down.. .to essentially a mothball or caretaker mode.” NASA was working with other agencies to seek other uses for that location. (Transcript)
Models of Viking Mars lander had been tested at speeds from mach 0.6 to mach 0.3 in Propulsion Wind Tunnel at AFSC’s Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn., AFSC announced. Atmosphere on Mars had been simulated in tunnels for tests conducted for nasa and Martin Marietta Corp. on aeroshetl and base cover that would protect lander during entry through Martian atmosphere. (AFSC Release 67.70)
Lightweight double-wall meteoroid shield developed for enlarged propulsion system of Mariner Mars 1971 was described in Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets by jpl scientist John R. Howard. Outer sheet of Teflon-impregnated glass fabric and multilayer thermal insulation was more effective than aluminum sheet of same weight because of impact phenomena modification by heterogeneous first sheet and impact energy absorption by thermal insulation. Series of tests over range of impact velocities with projectiles of glass, nylon, and syntactic paste had been conducted. Linear extrapolation had shown that composite outer sheet was sufficient for specified meteoroid threat. (JSR, 1/70,69-72)
Lowell Observatory astronomer Dr. Peter Boyce had reported “blue smog” of Mars was caused by physical changes on planet’s surface rather than by looking at Mars through earth’s atmosphere, Philadelphia Inquirer said. Dr. Boyce had used special area-scanning photometer attached to Lowell Observatory’s 610-mm (24-in) reflector at Cerro Tololo in Chilean Andes to obtain accurate photometric measurements of Mars. (P Inq, 3/25/70)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Luna XVII: “It is a time for congratulations to the Soviet effort this time. . .and perhaps time to take a lesson. For future probable explorations to lethal Mars, Venus and other planets almost certainly cannot employ manned landings. All the same, there is no reason to abandon plans NASA has made to land men and a wheeled Rover vehicle they can drive on the moon. There is always the possibility that the man on the scene can pick up more than back-seat drivers 240,000 miles [386 000 km] away.” (PInq, 11/19/70)
Scientists at Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Laboratory said studies of 10-kg (22-lb) meteorite that fell near Lost City, Okla., Jan. 9 had provided firmest evidence to date of intensity of cosmic rays beyond sun. Data obtained had raised possibility that manned spacecraft venturing to planets beyond Mars might have to be armored against swarms of high-energy “space bullets.” Meteorite was estimated to have weighed 227 kg (500 lbs) originally and was assumed to be fragment of explosive collision between two huge objects 6 million yrs ago. (AP, B Sun, 4/24/70, A3; Smithsonian PAO)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), for himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.), Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and Sen. Jacob K.	Javits (R-N.Y.), submitted amendment to H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill which would reduce NASA R&D appropriation by $110 million—amount requested by NASA for design and definition of space shuttle and station. Sen. Mondale said: “This project represents NASA’s next major effort in manned space flight. The $110 million.. .is only the beginning of the story. NASA’s preliminary cost estimates for development of the space shuttle/station total almost $14 billion, and the ultimate cost may run much higher. Furthermore, the shuttle and station are the first essential steps toward a manned Mars landing.. .which could cost anywhere between $50 to $100 billion. I have seen no persuasive justification for embarking upon a project of such staggering costs at a time when many of our citizens are malnourished, when our rivers and lakes are polluted, and when our cities and rural areas are decaying.” (CR, 6/29/70, S10057-8)
NASA announced 1971 flight schedule, highlighted by two manned Apollo lunar landing missions—Apollo 14 Jan. 31 and Apollo 15 July 25—and by two unmanned Mariner Mars launches in May. Other launches tentatively scheduled for 1971 included threfc Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp. nato-b comsat for NATO, imp-1 Interplanetary Monitoring Platform, solrad scientific satellite for USN, ISIS-B cooperative U.S.-Canada scientific satellite, PAET Planetary Atmosphere Experiments Test, OSO-H Orbiting Solar Observatory, SSS-A Small Scientific Satellite, UK-4 cooperative U.S.-U.K. scientific satellite, afcrl-a magnetic storm satellite for afcrl, OAO-C Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, and CAS-A cooperative U.S.-France meteorological satellite. NASA aeronautical program would include extensive testing of supercritical wing, (nasa Release 70-222)
NASA launched 1384.4-kg (3052-lb) sped (Supersonic Planetary Entry Decelerator) experiment from Wallops Station at 1:57 pm EDT, by one-stage Castor booster with two Recruit rockets strapped on. Payload separated from booster at 72.4-km (45-mi) altitude and coasted to 91,7-km (57-mi) altitude before descending. At 70,8-km (44-mi) altitude the conical aeroshell, 4.6-m (15-ft) in diameter, popped open like a parasol to simulate Mars entry spacecraft speeding through thin atmosphere. Aeroshell splashed down in Atlantic and was recovered by USNS Range Recoverer. Onboard cameras and test equipment parachuted toward earth 112.7 km (70 mi) from Wallops and were recovered in midair by helicopter. (NASA Release 70-171)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat for dod, Nato I military comsat for NATO, and Oscar V radio propagation satellite for U.S. and Australian amateur radio operators. Italian crew, trained by NASA, launched NASA’s Uhuru on NASA launch vehicle. U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was reached on procedure for joint efforts to design compatible rendezvous and docking systems for manned spacecraft. Since European Space Conference had indicated that major participation in U.S. space transportation program would probably mean end to Europa III launcher program funding, esc was assured U.S. would continue to make reimbursable launch services available for European payloads for peaceful purposes. Such participation was understood to mean at least 10% of developmental costs of space transportation system, or about $1 billion. During year NASA held briefings for U.N. Outer Space Committee and invited u.n. and specialized agencies to participate in International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey System in 1971. Discussions were held with Brazil, Canada, and Mexico on agreements to extend cooperation in earth resources area; experimenters from 28 countries signified intention to submit proposals to analyze data acquired by erts. Joint working group meetings were held in India and U.S. on satellite instructional TV experiment for ats-f. nasa and aid began 18-mo experimental project with Korea in application of aerospace technology to Korean economic problems. NASA and Canadian government signed agreement to study application of augmentor-wing concept to v/stol aircraft. Agreement was concluded with U.K. to test-fly NASA’s XH-51 rigid-rotor helicopter in U.K. and to share data. Agreements for new projects were reached with Netherlands, U.K., and Italy. Netherlands agreement called for cooperative development ana launch in 1974 of small astronomical satellite (ans) with one U.S. and two Dutch experiments to investigate stellar uv and x-ray radiation. U.K. agreement was for 1973 launch of uk-R x-ray satellite, fifth in Ariel series. Italian agreement established principles for nasa launch on reimbursable basis of Italian Sirio satellite to study wave propagation and electron flows in magnetosphere. nasa accented experiment from French National Laboratory for Space Astronomy to study stellar uv emissions from Skylab and accepted instrument developed by French National Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics for investigating solar chromosphere structure from osO-i, scheduled for 1973 launch. Assistance was accepted from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Observatory in planning activities of radio science team for 1975 Project Viking Mars probe. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, India, Spain, and Sweden, and negotiations were held with France for cooperative upper-atmosphere sounding rocket launchings at Kour-ou in French Guiana. Lunar material returned by Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 was studied by 54 foreign principal investigators in 16 countries in addition to U.S. scientists. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71)
During May: In Astronautics and Aeronautics, jpl scientists William G.	Breckenridge and Thomas C. Duxbury discussed applications of spacecraft- based navigation data for outer-planet missions and described processing of spacecraft-based science and engineering data from 1969 Mariner Mars missions. They concluded: “Stringent navigation requirements for proposed outer-planet missions make even the projected ability of a solely Earthbased system marginal, and so have emphasized the need for an onboard system.” (A&A, 5/70,44-9)
Experiment to determine if ozone was trapped in solid carbon dioxide polar cap of Mars was described in Science by Univ. of Colorado and York Univ. of Toronto, Canada, scientists. Experiment showed that solid carbon dioxide was effective trap for ozone at temperatures as high as 156 K (-179°F). “Ultraviolet reflection-absorption spectra of ozone in solid carbon dioxide at 127°K [-231°F] indicate that the ozone observed over the polar cap of Mars may be trapped in solid carbon dioxide.” (Broida, Lundell, etai., Science, 12/25/70, 1402) Dr. Edward H. Teller, physicist and atomic scientist of Univ. of California, advocated abolition of secrecy surrounding U.S. scientific research “so we can clearly understand what we are talking about ” in growing debate over impact of science and technology on society. “Secrecy in science should be abolished so that the democratic process can be better able to work in making the decisions on how science is applied.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/28/70,1) Dr. Bentley Glass, retiring aaas president and Academic Vice President of Univ. of New York at Stoney Brook, said number of scientists and technologists in U.S. had doubled in decade to form 20% of professional labor force. Growth rate was much faster than that of population and could not surpass limit of about 25% of professional force. Dr. Glass believed that the greater the volume of research, the less likely any one project would produce truly original results. “It is in fact becoming more and more difficult, as scientific knowledge grows, to make a totally new and unexpected discovery or to break through the dogmas of established scientific views.” SHOT session on Perspectives of Apollo History, chaired by Dr. James Lee Cate of Univ. of Chicago with Dr. John M. Logsdon of George Washington Univ. as commentator, presented sample narratives: “Space Science and Automatic Spacecraft Behind Apollo” by R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian; “The Saturn Family of Rockets” by Dr. John S. Beltz of Univ. of Alabama at Huntsville; and “The Apollo Command Spaceship” by Dr. Loyd S. Swenson, Jr., of Univ. of Houston. Narratives directed attention to problems of contemporary scholarship and to basic elements of Apollo. (Program; NASA Hist Off) Jeffrey V. Odom, manager of National Bureau of Standards metric study, told aaas seminar that report on metrication would be submitted to Congress in August 1971. Report was expected to include recommendations for gradual conversion to metric system in U.S., possibly over 10 yrs. New York Times, noting metric system proponents, emphasized that 90% of nations in world already used system and that U.K. expected to be almost completely converted by 1975, said NASA was first U.S. Government agency to convert to system in its scientific and technical publications. (Wilford, NYT, 12/29/70, 17) Stewart L. Udall, former Secretary of the Interior, in aaas speech accused science establishment, particularly nas, of failing to exert moral and political leadership on issues of technology impact on man. He proposed that consumer advocate Ralph Nader organize team of young scientists to make “dispassionate and intensive study of the National Academy and the whole scientific enterprise in this country.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/31/70, 3:6) Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman and aaas President-elect, left aaas meeting before radical young scientists assumed podium to accuse him of “crime of science against the people.” (Auerbach, W Post, 12/31/70, A4)
Challenge and objectives of space science and applications program for next decade were outlined by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: “In the allocation of its scarce resources NASA is emphasizing those projects which help solve immediate problems and deferring to a later year those major new starts whose objectives are primarily to gain the new knowledge. Obviously, we cannot continue to defer such promising scientific projects indefinitely without mortgaging the economic health, the technical progress, and the security of this Nation. “In the immediate future these postponements are tolerable because of our active ongoing program. Future Aeronomy and Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) Explorer missions will be directed at the earth’s environment: improved oso’s will study the sun and provide data for correlation with ecology studies; the Small Astronomy Satellites (sas) will start giving us continued data on galactic x-rays and gamma-rays; and future missions of the OAO will continue the successful observation program begun with oao-2. Before the middle of the decade, we will visit two additional planets, Jupiter and Mercury. We will orbit Mars in 1971 and land in 1976. Under our supporting programs, we are analyzing space data, developing theories to explain the findings; we are conducting relatively less expensive but very productive investigations with sounding rockets and airplanes; and are developing concepts and investigations for future missions.” Establishing scientific priorities, allocating proper resources to research, and deciding between various expensive scientific projects would continue to be “a most difficult problem.” NASA would work with in-house scientists, advisory groups, and nas and nae “to be sure that the scientific projects we are undertaking are sound and worthy of support.” (Testimony) Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified on continuation of Mars program before Committee: “The results of the Mariner 6 and 7 missions have affected very little the probability that life, in some form, may exist and they have not dampened the enthusiasm of the biologist to search for life on Mars. The apparent low nitrogen content in the atmosphere can be tolerated by many organisms. In fact, biota can be readily conceived which do not directly utilize gaseous nitrogen at all. The results have increased the geological interest in Mars primarily due to the discovery of the chaotic and featureless terrains. An understanding of these geological differences could shed new light on the origin and evolution of Mars and, thereby, on the origin and evolution of the solar system as a whole. We are, therefore, continuing the Mars program. . . . However because of the need to minimize expenditures. . .it has been necessary to delay the Viking missions from 1973 to 1975.” (Testimony) R. B. Marsten, Director of Communications Programs, OSSA, testified on broadcast service of NASA advanced flight experimentation in satellite communications: “Broadcast services come in three classes—the distribution class, which, through a relatively small satellite, would broadcast program material to large receivers, perhaps co-located with local broadcast transmitters for rebroadcast in the conventional mode; a somewhat larger satellite in the community mode, which would broadcast to moderate size receivers located in village squares, or in remote areas and connected to a cable distribution system for redistribution of the program material to viewing sets; and. . .direct broadcast mode, in which multi-kilowatt power level satellites broadcast directly to the user, who may have a conventional TV receiver. This application has the potential of providing instant national service where there is no ground infrastructure, and is much talked about now for educational purposes.” (Testimony) Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs, OSSA, said in submitted statement that research with instrumented aircraft was integral part of NASA program. “This research helps to bridge the gap between groundbased experiments and those that require the more expensive rockets and space vehicles. We have conducted auroral and airglow research observations of the solar corona during total eclipses and infrared observations. The ability to investigate interstellar dust and other celestial objects by observing their infrared emissions is opening up a promising line of research. A small jet aircraft has been used to take a 12-inch [305-mm] infrared telescope to 50 000 feet [15 200 m] above the earth. At this altitude, much of the infrared radiation from the universe is observable; in contrast, at the surface of the earth it is obscured by water vapor. Investigators from the University of Arizona have used a Lear jet from ARC for observations of planets, stars, and galaxies at wavelengths from 30 to 300 microns.” They had discovered centers of galaxies were bright in infrared. Because of importance of this area of astronomy, “36-inch [914-mm] telescope is presently being constructed to be placed in a C-141 jet airplane. This plane and the larger telescope will constitute a unique and effective airborne astronomical observatory.” (Testimony) Joseph B. Mahon, Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, submitted statement on NASA plans for use of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur booster configuration. Titan IIIC would be used to launch ATS-Fand ATS-G into synchronous orbit. Introduction of Titan-Centaur configuration in time scale to support Viking mission would represent "vital portion of the effort associated with the Centaur Program in Calendar Years 1971,1972, and 1973.” NASA and USAF had concluded basic management agreements for operation of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur systems, usaf would act as Titan IIIC launch vehicle systems manager, responsible to NASA mission direction. NASA would be Titan-Centaur launch vehicle systems manager but would use selected elements of existing usaf contractor organizations. Titan III complex at etr would be modified to provide single launch pad capability for supporting planetary opportunities with two launches from the same pad. Plans for Titan Ill-Centaur included engineering proof flight of all-up Viking configuration late in 1973. First operational use was planned for 1974 to support He-lios-A solar probe, subject to discussions with West Germany. During FY 1970, preliminary design and program definition effort for Titan Ill-Centaur would be completed and final design and qualification effort initiated, as well as action for procurement of proof-flight vehicle and supporting hardware. (Testimony)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., told news conference at Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.: “In the past it has taken a war to force technology to advance at an abnormal rate. The space program did it in peacetime, and to me this makes much more sense.” Swigert defended proposals for Mars exploration: “If we can learn more about our solar system and have those benefits accrue to the economy, I would say it is worthwhile.” (AP, W Post, 9/10/70)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Implications of failure of Mariner VI and VII uv experiments to detect emissions associated with nitrogen in Martian atmosphere were discussed in Science by Harvard College Observatory and SAO astronomer A. Dalgarno and M. B. McEIroy of Kitt Peak National Observatory. Examination of physical and chemical processes causing nitrogen emission in Martian airglow had shown that if atmosphere was uniformly mixed, mixing ratio of nitrogen to carbon dioxide of 5% was consistent with observational data on uv dayglow of Mars. If magnitude of the eddy coefficient in atmosphere was similar to that for earth, this limit was reduced to less than 0.5%. (Science, 10/9/70,167-8)
Supersonic Planetary Entry Decelerator (sped) experiment, launched from Wallops Station, simulated Mars reentry spacecraft speeding through thin atmosphere. A June photograph shows the parasol for sped deployed in systems check-out before mating to a single-stage Castor rochet motor. The flight experiment aided study of deployment characteristics required fora parachute to land instruments on Mars.
Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said in Memphis, Tenn., that U.S. could probably explore Mars or other planets in 13 to 15 yrs but “it will be terribly expensive.” Following speech at annual Navy League convention, he told press: “I don’t believe we will ever see one nation do it. I look for a multiple-nation group..,. Some have as good or better technology and such a combination would not impose abnormal costs on any one.” (AP, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 5/22/70)
NASA's HL-JO lifting body ('above right.) reached a lifting-body speed record of tnach 1.S6 and an altitude of 1980(1 meters (65 000 feet) during powered night after air launch from a B-52 aircraft. Experimental vehicles in the joint nasa-usaf Lifting Body Flight Research Program to develop the design of future space shuttle craft also included the X-24A (above left), which made its first supersonic flight Oct. 14, and the M2-F3 (center), which made its first glide flight June 2. research was still too flimsy to risk two-year manned Mars flight. (Krimsky, Long Beach [Calif] Independent, 2/19/70)
Mariner-Mars missions in 1971 were described by team of jpl scientists headed by Dan Schneiderman in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The first of these voyages of exploration begins. . .when, between May 6 and June 3, two Mariner-type spacecraft will rise from launch pads at Cape Kennedy on the way to Mars to become the first spacecraft to orbit that planet.” To obtain maximum scientific information, two identical spacecraft would perform separate missions, A and B. Each spacecraft would orbit Mars for 90 days in differing inclinations and periods. “Together they will cover 70% of the surface, permitting the study of seasonal effects. The information gained will help in selecting suitable landing zones for the unmanned Viking project which will land an instrument package on Mars.” Missions would carry six science experiments including TV experiment. TV pictures would enlarge understanding of dynamic characteristics, history, environment, and surface physiography of Mars and improve maps of surface. They were not expected to provide direct evidence of possibility of life, but to furnish indirect evidence of Mars’ suitability as habitat for life. (A&A, 8/70, 64-77)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Institute for Space Studies, discussed eventual colonization of outer planets in New York Times Magazine: While most Homo sapiens would remain on earth in world of future, small percentage—“restless, inquisitive, innovative, continually seeking out challenges and testing the limits of the environment”—would “move out to become a small, hardy population on Mars. Within a few decades of the year 2000, a pioneering band of men—and women—will be living on Mars. ... Children will be born on Mars. Later, the spacefarers will go beyond Mars and beyond the solar system. Some day they will find the earth and its debilitating gravitational pull as difficult a place in which to survive as today’s land-adapted men find the water out of which the ancestral fishes emerged 300 million years ago. Eventually they will constitute a new species, evolved out of Homo sapiens, but linked to the ancestral planet only by sentiment.” (NYT Magazine, 5/10/70, 30)	.
An 85-g (3-oz) palladium generator-separator developed for use in space could be used for air-pollution detection on earth, jpl announced. Unit was heart of gas cnromatograph system developed by NASA and jpl for use by Viking Molecular Analysis Science Team in analyzing Martian soil and atmosphere in mid-1970s. It was particularly sensitive to major U.S. air pollutants like sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen, (jpl Release 558)
Results of study of infrared spectra recorded by Mariner VI and VII were reported in Science by Univ. of California at Berkeley chemists Kenneth C. Herr and Dr. George C. Pimentel. Reflections at 4.3/x suggested presence of solid carbon dioxide in upper atmosphere of Mars. (Science, 1/2/70,47-9)
Achievement described as “first artificial synthesis of a living cell” was reported by State Univ. of New York at Buffalo in letter to press signed by Dr. Raymond H. Ewell, Vice President for Research, and Dr. James F. Danielli, Director of Center for Theoretical Biology, who had led experimenters. Amoebas had been partly dismembered and then reassembled, using components from other amoebas. Reconstituted amoebas had reproduced themselves and were indistinguishable from normal amoebas. Work opened “new era for artificial life synthesis, now being explored” and helped clear way for “synthesis of new micro-organisms, new egg cells and an organism capable of living on Mars.” New York Times said officials at NASA, which was supporting the work, had described experiment as “exciting” and “a big step.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/13/70, 1)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, during U.S.S.R. visit, told Soviet Academy of Sciences that he favored increased space cooperation and that development of space stations and shuttles was “most important” method of practical space usage. “I have found in my discussions with my Soviet cosmonaut colleagues that their objectives in space are very much the same as ours.” Armstrong said he would be glad to be member of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space crew. He felt Soyuz IX experiments in earth measurements would be useful to U.S. space program. In answer to question, Armstrong said he would ask “if I could take my family along” in volunteering for three-year Martian mission. (Clarity, NYT,, 6/4/70, 27)
Text of Dr. Wemher von Braun interview by West German magazine Der Spiegel was released to U.S. press, nasa Associate Administrator for Planning was convinced that in 20 yrs “we shall have reached the point where space travel will earn more than it is costing.” Earnings from “bread and butter programs”—comsats, weather-monitoring spacecraft, and ers satellites—could pay for permanent lunar bases and manned exploration of Mars. “Most important product of the seventies” would be application of “all that the space program has taught us.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/21/71, 75)
Mariner 9, en route to Mars on orbiting mission, successfully completed first midcourse maneuver with 5.11-sec burn that produced 6.7-m-per-sec (15.1-mph) velocity change. Maneuver placed Mariner 9 on trajectory that would approach to within 1600 km (1000 mi) of Mars; second maneuver would be conducted Oct. 24 if necessary to correct trajectory further. Spacecraft had traveled 21 779 000 km (13 533 000 mi) since launch May 30 and was 2 076 000 km (1 290 000 mi) from earth, traveling at 10 985 km per hr (6826 mph). It was scheduled to reach Mars vicinity Nov. 13. (nasa Releases 71—96, 71-100)
Countdown for launch of nasa’s Mariner-I spacecraft toward Mars orbit was interrupted by hold at 4:59 pm edt 72 min from launch. Hold was caused by difficulty in interpreting data from Centaur stage guidance package. Difficulty was not resolved by 6 pm and launch was postponed to next day. (NASA Proj Off)
Mars orbit of Mariner 9 was changed by 17-sec engine firing to compensate for effects of dust storm on mission objectives. Periapsis was raised from 1388 km (862 mi) to 1650 km (1025 mi) to expand area covered in mapping photos and to provide required overlapping of pictures. Mapping would be completed in three 20-day cycles with fourth cycle available to fill in open areas where photos did not overlap. Period was increased by 1 min 19 sec to place periapsis in middle of Goldstone viewing period for maximum data return, (nasa Release 71—252; Pasadena Star-News, 12/31/71)
Flight path of Mariner 9, en route to Mars, was reported sufficiently precise for orbital insertion without scheduled second midcourse correction. Next critical event for Mariner 9 would be Mars orbit insertion Nov. 13, when spacecraft would begin to collect atmospheric and surface data and map 70% of Martian surface during 90 days in orbit. At 9:00 am edt, after 142.4 days in flight, Mariner 9 was 88 847 850 km (55 207 500 mi) from earth. Spacecraft was traveling at 59 220 km per hr (36 800 mph) relative to earth and had traveled total distance of more than 349 452 100 km (217 139 500 mi) since May 30 launch. (nasa Proj Off)
AP quoted NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly as saying NASA was not releasing some information on Soviet space program received through official channels. Clampdown was being made at U.S.S.R’s request and through “bilateral agreement.” AP said Donnelly had forbidden NASA engineers who had returned from NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meeting on compatible docking system Nov. 29—Dec. 7 in Moscow to talk to press. Text of message telexed by Soviet scientists to nasa at JPL during exchange of Mars 2 and 3 and Mariner 9 information would be withheld at Soviet request. Soviet scientists had sent three such messages. (NYT, 12/16/71, 27)
Mariner 9 photographed Martian plateau from 6500-km (4000-mi) altitude. Photo, released by jpl Dec. 29, showed area 120 km (75 mi) square in Phoenicis Lacus region, covered with fault lines and resembling wrinkled elephant hide. Faults and scarcity of craters suggested region was volcanic and relatively young geologically. (AP, B Sun, 12/30/71, A5; Miles, LA Times, 12/30/71)
nasa held Mariner 9 pre-encounter news briefing at nasa Hq. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Robert H. Steinbacher, Mariner Project scientist at jpl, described mysterious yellow dust storm—greatest observed since 1956—that had developed on Mars Sept. 23 and 24 and was first detected through telescopes Sept. 26. Steinbacher said, “The question as Mariner goes into orbit ... is, will we be doing mapping or covering some dynamic atmospheric phenomenon. . . .” It would be fortuitous “if, with the cameras and other instruments of Mariner 9, we catch the most dramatic event on Mars.” (nasa Release, 10/20/71; Haughland, W Post, 10/30/71, A3; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/30/71, A3)
National Urban Coalition released Counterbudget—A Blueprint for Changing National Priorities, 1971-1976. Report noted diminishing public support for science and technology and recommended 4% increase in r&d funding to prevent deterioration of Government’s role in science and technology in national affairs. Space program should be kept at funding level just over $3 billion, rather than $5.9-billion level reached in 1966. Space shuttle and station programs should be continued but on stretched schedule. Mars mission should be undertaken only when it could be done internationally. Value of space program as whole lay in its scientific yield, practical results, and national leadership. (CR, 5/21/71, E4836-98; nuc pio)
Marine* 9, launched, from the Eastern Test Range on a 398-million-fdlometer (247-million-mile) direct-ascent trajectory, headed toward the planet Mars. Encountering Mars Nov. 13, the spacecraft would be the first to orbit a planet other than earth. Mariner 9—weighing 1000 kilograms (2200 pounds) and spanning almost 7 meters {22% feet) with its solar panels extended—would orbit Mars 90 days to study the atmosphere and surface in detail and map 70 percent of the surface. during 1971 opportunity; Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) launch attempt May 8 had failed because of malfunction in Centaur stage of booster. Scheduled for arrival at Mars on Nov. 14, Mariner 9 would make detailed study of Martian surface and atmosphere and map 7G^o of surface during planned 90-day orbit of planet. Launch vehicle performance and spacecraft injection were nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed four solar panels at 6:40 pm, and locked sensors on sun at 7:16 pm, soon after leaving earth’s shadow. About four hours into flight Canopus sensor was energized and spacecraft rolled 55° and locked onto star Achernar. Canopus acquisition was achieved at 10:26 pm and spacecraft would remain in sun-Canopus orientation for mission except during maneuvers. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. Mariner 9 weighed 1000 kg (2200 lb) at launch and carried six scientific experiments: infrared radiometer to measure surface temperature; uv spectrometer to investigate composition and structure of atmosphere; infrared interferometer spectrometer to measure surface and atmospheric radiation; S-band occultation experiment to study pressure and structure of atmosphere; TV cameras to transmit low-and high-resolution photographs of surface; and experiment to investigate Martian gravity field. Orbit of spacecraft was designed to guarantee it would not hit Mars for at least 17 yrs, to avoid contamination of planet before studies on surface were made by landing spacecraft. ossa assigned project responsibility to Jpl, including mission operations and tracking and data acquisition. Launch vehicle was responsibility of Lenc, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Division, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 71—75) May 30-June 6: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa during visit to France attended Paris Air Show; inspected aerospace facilities at Bretigny, Toulouse, and Salon-de-Provence, and attended reception by Mayor of Dijon, (nasa Release 71-84; msc pio)
Mariner 9, en route to Mars, was 7 900 000 km (4 909 000 mi) from earth at 9:00 am edt after traveling 82 500 000 km (51 263 000 mi) and receiving over 500 commands since launch May 30. Spacecraft was expected to accomplish its basic 90-day scientific mission objectives, but was using more nitrogen gas than predicted for maintaining attitude stabilization. Current predictions indicated nitrogen gas supply would be depleted in early August 1972, nine months after spacecraft went into orbit around Mars. Increased rate of consumption was due to circuit design error in attitude-control-system electronics. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 71-120)
Bemaining “puzzles” of solar system pattern were discussed by Walter Sullivan in New York Times article: General assumption was that sun, planets, and moons had been formed from “swirling, flattened cloud of material.” But: “Why does Mars have two tiny moons, each only a few miles in diameter, yet our moon is a quarter the diameter of the earth? Why do some of the outer moons of Jupiter go the ‘wrong way’—counter clockwise—around that huge planet? Why is the earth’s moon formed of a different mix of elements from that constituting the earth?” Recent information had “illuminated these questions though it had not resolved them.” Earth’s moon was giving off “far more heat than had been predicted on the basis of assumptions of how it was formed.” Mariner 9 photos of the two Mars moons had shown both to be irregular chunks “rather than systematically spherical bodies in the manner normally attributed to moons and planets.” George Washington Univ. scientist J. Martyn Bailey had proposed that all seven of Jupiter’s outer moons were asteroids captured by that planet’s powerful gravity and that Jupiter’s clockwise moons had been captured when planet was farthest from sun, while counter-clockwise moons had been captured when Jupiter was nearest sun. Lunar Science Institute scientists had agreed there had been sufficient sorting and layering on earth’s moon to produce radioactive crust that could account for heat flow. Information on two Martian moons had indicated that Phobos and Deimos looked much like asteroidal fragments but that did not prove that they were captured asteroids. They could have been formed as spherical moons from material left when Mars was being created and later “battered into their irregular shapes.” (NYT, 12/5/71, 4:8)
Launching of eight Soviet Cosmos satellites, Mars 2, and Mariner 9 had raised number of man-made objects in space to 2378, Reuters reported. Of total, little more them one fifth were satellites or payloads; remainder was space junk. Spokesman for usaf Air Defense Command had said usaf had recorded 2840 objects, 760 payloads, and 2080 bits of debris that had decayed since launch of Sputnik 1 Oct. 4, 1957. (LA Times, 6/17/71)
Findings on atmosphere of Mars from UV spectrometer observations made during NASA’s 1969 Mariner flyby missions were reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado scientists Dr. Charles A. Barth and Dr. Charles W. Hord: “Mars . . . reflects sunlight in the ultraviolet, but it is the atmosphere, not the surface, that is responsible for the reflected light. Even though there are atmospheric scatterers in addition to the molecular scatterers, it is possible to relate the intensity of the scattered radiation with the atmospheric pressure. The variation of the pressure over the planet reveals the topography to vary over 7 kilometers [4Yz miles] in height and to be correlated with visible features. The carbon dioxide polar cap, in addition to being a cold trap for volatile gases in the atmosphere, may also be a very efficient absorption trap for nonvolatiles. This last property may make the cap a repository for gases produced by geological or biological activity.” (Science, 7/16/71, 197-201)
U.S. Patent No. 3 631 294 was awarded to Steven R. Hofstein, President of Princeton Electronics, Inc., for Lithicon, first electronic storage tube to record on silicon and silicon dioxide. Tube, with target area consisting of more than 10 million silicon storage elements, had been used by JPL to record Mariner 9 Mars photos, by airlines and Federal agencies to inspect parcels that might contain bombs; by hospitals for brief x-ray and sonar exposures, and by libraries to retrieve microfilmed publications. (Jones, NYT, 1/1/72, 25)
Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 race to Mars was “exciting race for knowledge and the fame of exploration, exemplifying the kind of peaceful competition the world needs,” Washington Evening Star editorial commented. “If Mariner 9 reveals half of what it was sent out to find, it will be worth much more than the $150 million it is costing.” (W Star, 11/24/71)
Pioneer-F, 250-kg (550-lb) spacecraft, was expected to be ready for launch from ETR in late February or early March 1972 and would fly by Jupiter in December 1973, nasa scientists announced at jpl press conference. Pioneer-G was to be launched in 1973 and fly past Jupiter in 1974. nasa Director of Planetary Programs Robert S. Kraemer said Pioneer flights would be “vital precursor” to future Grand Tour flights to outer planets. Pioneer spacecraft would be first to penetrate vast asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter and first to study planet’s intense radiation belts. (Wilford, NYT, 11/17/71, 26)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 (launched May 19) and Mars 3 (launched May 28) were continuing to operate satisfactorily en route to Mars, Tass announced. By 6:00 am Moscow time (11:00 pm edt July 26) Mars 2 had completed 43 communications sessions and was 17 580 000 km (10 924 000 mi) from earth; Mars 3 had completed 38 sessions and was 16 400 000 km (10 190 000 mi) from earth. Data from Mars 2 and Mars 3 measurements of corpuscular beams of solar and galactic cosmic radiation had confirmed data from same measurements conducted by Lunokhod 1 lunar rover on moon. (Tass, fbis-Sov-144-3, 7/27/71, LI)
The Russian Space Bluff by Leonid Vladimirov, Soviet engineer-journalist who had defected in 1966, had been published in U.K., AP reported. Book said Soviet space program had begun as series of publicity stunts to persuade West that U.S.S.R. had reached level of advanced technology equal to that of U.S. Vladimirov had said that U.S.S.R. knew “she could not beat America to the moon because she cannot build a moon rocket. Even today the Soviet Union cannot produce any significantly big jet nozzles.” Mid-1960 flights in Voskhod series had been short because spacecraft were overloaded earlier Vostok type with some equipment removed. Last-minute modifications had been engineering disgrace. (AP, W Star, 11/25/71, H7) On Nov. 27 Mariner 9 failed in attempt at closeup photograph of Martian moon Phobos. JPL ground controllers said spacecraft’s camera wasn’t pointed correctly when attempt was made. Orbit of Phobos was not known precisely enough to ensure getting photo. Successful photo of Phobos would have shown greater detail than recent picture of Deimos, Mars’ other moon, since Phobos was twice as large as Deimos and spacecraft passed 1600 km (100 mi) closer. Mariner 9 had photographed Phobos Nov. 13 from 150 000 km (93 000 mi) out. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/27/71, A4; W Star, 11/28/71, A6)
NASA held Mariner 9 press conference at JPL. Discussion centered on dust storm that had covered planet since mission began and on origin of Martian craters. Dr. Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ. said storm had begun 10 wks earlier, had reached peak of intensity in 5th wk, and was gradually but continuously clearing. Project scientists disagreed, however, how long dust would obscure Mars; predictions ranged from a few weeks to months. If storm continued throughout mission, primary objective might have to be changed. Dr. Smith explained prime objective “was to map 70 percent of the planet in high resolution. If the storm does not clear up immediately, it will not be possible to do that within the nominal mission. An alternative might be to focus on the phenomenon that we have on our hands; that is, the dust storm. And instead of studying it in bits and pieces and waiting for the planet to clear up ... to rearrange our sequences to make an all out study of this atmospheric phenomenon.” Failure to complete mapping as planned would not significantly affect Viking Mars landing mission because, with only slight degradation, Viking zone could be mapped in last half or last third of Mariner 9 mission. “Also Viking has the capability to keep its landers in orbit for as long as two months while it does the mapping . . . [and] the capability to do some photographic site selection even if there were no usable pictures returned from ’71.” Dr. Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey described four high points on Mars, all with large summit craters, suggesting that they might be volcanic calderas. Great alignment of relatively young topographic highs with summit craters suggested that Mars was geochemically active—that in not too distant past there had been extensive volcanic activity. Similar features might be found at lower elevations; they would be of interest because they had been, and still might be, hot. Such volcanic sources had, according to most opinions, produced terrestrial atmosphere; that is, carbon dioxide and water had come from such volcanic vents. Dr. Masursky emphasized that volcanic theory was not agreed on; project scientists’ views ranged from “agreement, to skepticism, to outright disbelief.” Data on Mars moons Deimos and Phobos were described by Dr. James B. Pollack of ARC. Deimos was 12 by 13km (7% by 8% mi) and Phobos was 21 by 26 km (13 by 16 mi). Moons were “among the darkest objects in the solar system,” reflecting only about 5% of sunlight that fell on them. Moons’ darkness could be attributed to basalts or carbonaceous chondrites in soil. If scientists could determine reason for darkness, they would soon be able to determine whether moons were captured asteroids or remnants of material from which Mars was formed. (Transcript)
NASA conducted second successful test of Viking Mars lander free-flight, development parachute system at dot Joint Parachute Test Facility at El Centro, Calif. First test had been conducted Sept. 3. (frc pio)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3, approaching Mars, had detected possible evidence of earth’s magnetic tail farther out in space than previously reported, Pravda article said. Both Mars 2 and Mars 3 had passed through area 19 million km (12 million mi) from earth, where they had detected magnetic field. When Mars 3 passed through area it recorded streams of charged particles whose velocities differed from those observed in solar wind. Soviet scientists speculated that particles of solar wind were mixed with those of earth’s magnetic tail. (NYT, 12/5/71, 9)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Administration’s New Technologies Opportunities Program [see Oct. 31]: Much was worthwhile, “especially the attempt to mount a genuine program of conversion from defense and space-related to socially useful technological emphasis.” But “purely economic objectives of the program are murkier, at least at present. Granted that this nation may be on its way, in a number of industrial fields, to losing the technological lead that for so long has been a mainstay of our economic strength. Does it follow that the answer, in high-technology fields like electronics and commercial aviation, is what one Presidential adviser has called ‘an unaccustomed set’ of supports and subsidies to industry?” Question contained “all the elements of explosive controversy, and the administration will be hard-pressed to make a convincing case.” (W Star, 12/6/71, A10) Scientist Steve Korn of TRW Inc. Viking biological instrument team described instruments being developed for $11-million experiments to be conducted by two Viking landers scheduled for 1976 Mars landing. Sophisticated units for four experiments to search for microscopic life on Mars would be among most complex systems ever flown aboard unmanned spacecraft. Experiments included heat release experiment to analyze Martian soil for photosynthetic life similar to plant life on earth; experiment that would add nutrient to solid sample and measure metabolic conversion; gas exchange experiment to monitor environment surrounding sample for changes in gaseous makeup that would indicate presence of living organisms; and light-scattering experiment to provide nutrient to soil sample and detect any increases in scattering attributable to growth of microorganisms. Also, three-legged probes would snap photos; study Martian atmosphere; return meteorological data, pressures, temperatures, wind, and humidity; report on Mars’ magnetic and physical properties; and check seismic events. Probes would be lowered by parachute and retrorocket after landers had obtained orbit in procedure designed to land them accurately in areas deemed most likely to be habitats for life. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/10/71, 29; Miles, latns, W Post, 12/19/71, A41)
Role of radioelectronics in space was described in Pravda by Soviet Academician V. Andreyanov: “Radioelectronics might be called the nervous system of cosmonautics. It links our planet by living threads with the spacecraft and apparatuses when they fly to Mars, work on the moon, or study the earth and circumterrestrial space, like the Salyut station. In less than 15 years, research into space and the nearest planets has not only stimulated the development of many fields of science and technology but has also been accompanied by the emergence of new fields of knowledge and technical methods. A ‘spacifica-tion’ of the sciences had been noted. Concepts which were earlier unusual have also appeared in radioelectronics: space radio communications, space telemetry and television, space radionavigation, and radio methods for studying celestial bodies and interplanetary space.” (fbis-Sov-7 1-123, 6/23/71, L5)
Tass announced that French equipment on Mars 3 (launched May 28) for investigating solar radio emission in one-meter-waveband experiment was functioning successfully. French instrumentation was manufactured by French specialists under French-Soviet cooperative program. (fbis-Sov-71-228-3, 11/26/71, Ll)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft were functioning normally en route to Mars, Tass announced. At 6:00 am Moscow time June 8 (11:00 pm edt June 7) Mars 2, launched May 19, had completed 14 communications sessions and was 4 897 000 km (3 042 900 mi) from earth. Mars 3, launched May 28, had completed 19 communications sessions and was 2 880 000 km (1789 000 mi) from earth. (Sov Rpt, 6/25/71, 7)
National Geographic Society was quoted in Chicago Tribune as saying, Phobos, Martian satellite, was darkest body yet observed in solar system, “possibly because meteoroids had scoured it clean of reflecting dust.” (C Trib, 11/5/71)
Mars 3 probe was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur at 8:26 pm local time (11:26 am EDT) into parking orbit from which it was injected into heliocentric trajectory toward Mars. Payload would supplement that of Mars 2, launched May 19. All instruments functioned normally. By 10 pm Moscow time (3 pm edt), Mars 2 was 2 495 000 km (1 550 000 mi) from earth and Mars 3 was 44 000 km (27 000 mi), Tass reported. Each satellite weighed 4650 kg (10 250 lbs) and had as prime mission objective complex research of Mars and its atmosphere. Tass said that Mars 3 carried instrumentation for exploration of Mars and neighboring space, for investigating solar radio emission in one-meter wave band in experiment developed and manufactured by French specialists in French-Soviet cooperative program, and for measuring characteristics of solar plasma and cosmic rays, (fbis—Sov— 71-104, 6/1/71, LI; SBD, 6/2/71, 69; Shabad, NYT, 5/29/71, 1)
First complete details on Mars 2 and 3 instruments were telexed by Soviet scientists to NASA scientists at JPL over direct line installed for exchange of Mariner 9 and Mars 2 and 3 data. Message said Soviet Mars spacecraft each had two radiometers, four photometers, one magnetometer, one ion trap, one spectrometer, and device to measure cosmic radiation. Analysis of data from Mars probes had been delayed while Soviet scientists investigated interruption of TV transmission from capsule dropped on Mars by Mars 3 Dec. 2. Message did not state cause of interruption or whether transmission had resumed. JPL officials later said Soviet message had given location of Mars 2 spacecraft but Soviet scientists had asked that information not be publicized. (AP, Long Beach, Calif, Independent-Press Telegram, 12/22/71) *	Flight version of multiple docking adapter (mda) for Skylab was transported from Denver to St. Louis, Mo., aboard Super Guppy aircraft for mating with airlock module (am) being manufactured by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. After mating, all systems would be tested and mated modules would be placed in large altitude chamber where manned and unmanned simulated missions would be conducted, (msfc Release 71—241)
Production of formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, and glycolic acid in uv tests under simulated Martian conditions indicated organic material was probably being produced by sunlight on Mars’ surface, jpl scientists Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, Dr. Jerry S. Hubbard, and Dr. James P. Hardy reported in Proceedings of National Academy of Science of USA. Same organic compounds were believed to have been precursors to biological molecules on primitive earth. Dr. Horowitz said findings, obtained from irradiation of fine soil and powdered glass samples by high-pressure xenon lamp and low-pressure mercury lamp, provided “most favorable indication for a possible Martian biological evolution that we have had in the last five years.” There were “still many uncertainties, however, which won’t be resolved until we land on the planet.” (Proceedings of NAS, 3/71, 574-8)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched NATO’s Natosat 2 military comsat for usaf and NATO, Eole Cooperative Applications Satellite for France, Isis 2 cooperative U.S.-Canada ionospheric satellite, and Ariel 4 ionospheric satellite for U.K. Italian crew trained by NASA launched NASA’s Explorer 45 Small Scientific Satellite and Italy’s San Marco 3 from Italian platform off coast of Kenya. Joint NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings on compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system progressed to discussion of possible joint test missions. Data obtained by NASA’s Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 probes were exchanged under agreement that covered broad range of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space science and applications. Agreement on future exchanges of medical and biological manned space flight data called for meetings between U.S. and Soviet experts at least annually. U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged Apollo 11 and 12 and Soviet Luna 16 lunar samples and Soviet scientists were among 750 experts attending Second Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute in Houston. First U.S.-U.S.S.R. Conference on Communications with Extraterrestrial Intelligence was held in Soviet Armenia. Joint meeting of NASA and European Space Conference (esc) identified candidate areas for possible European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space programs, including design and development of space shuttle subsystems. International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey at Univ. of Michigan was cosponsored by NASA, Dept, of State, usn, and aid to inform representatives of 51 countries and international organizations of latest techniques for interpreting earth resources data acquired by aircraft and satellite remote sensing systems. nasa’s C-130 aircraft equipped with remote-sensing devices participated in U.S. survey of Jamaica’s natural resources undertaken at request of U.N. and Jamaican government. NASA signed agreement with West Germany for series of barium-ion-cloud (bic) probe launches, and new sounding rocket agreement was signed with France. Under sounding rocket agreement, 20 French Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets would be launched from Kourou Center, French Guiana, in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project. By end of year NASA had entered into cooperative agreements with 39 countries, including agreements on lunar samples, tracking and data acquisition, and geodetic satellite program. Scientists of 87 countries besides U.S. were participating in cooperative ground-based programs and personnel exchanges and 62 countries were exchanging scientific and technical information. Since the beginning of 1962, NASA had launched 21 satellites under international agreements, in addition to flying 21 international experiments on NASA satellites. Since the beginning of the sounding rocket program, 683 cooperative rockets had been launched for research, (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Int Aff; “Selected Statistics on Int’l Affairs,” 2/17/72; A&A, 1971)
New mission plan had been adopted for Mariner-I (Mariner 9) Mars probe scheduled for launch no earlier than May 29, NASA announced. New plan—which would provide high-quality data return for all of original experiments but less data than planned for original two-spacecraft mission—assigned 65° inclination, 12-hr period, and 1200-km (750-mi) periapsis (low point in orbit around Mars) to Mariner-I, with Nov. 14, 1971, arrival date. New inclination would yield map covering almost 70% of Mars and period would ensure two-tape-load-per-day data return. (NASA Release 71-94)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of gsfc Institute for Space Studies, was quoted as saying in London that people often forgot intelligence factor in debate over manned versus unmanned space missions. Dr. Jastrow had pointed out that by time unmanned space exploration technology reached level of achievement already exhibited in manned exploration, lunar exploration—or even Martian exploration—might have advanced to stage of extended expeditions or space station. Then human performance would again have jumped ahead of machines. (Cowen, CSM, 2/11/71)
Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) Mars probe, launched by nasa from etr, Launch Complex 36, Pad A, at 9:11 pm edt, failed to enter orbit when Centaur stage of Atlas-Centaur booster malfunctioned after normal countdown and liftoff. Anomalies began to appear with Centaur main engine start. Centaur stage oscillated in pitch in diverging manner and subsequently tumbled out of control, engines shut down from starvation caused by tumbling, and Centaur and spacecraft separated and reentered earth’s atmosphere approximately 1500 km (900 mi) down range and 400 km (250 mi) north of Puerto Rico. Failure investigation team composed of LeRC, General Dynamics Convair Div., ksc, and jpl personnel had been established to determine cause of failure and recommend corrective action required before launching Mariner-I. (nasa Proj Off)
Detailed Tass description of Mars 2 and 3 missions with diagrams of spacecraft and landing procedures appeared in Soviet newspapers. Enroute to Mars, spacecraft had measured solar wind particle streams, measured parameters of interplanetary magnetic fields, determined electron concentrations in interplanetary medium, studied solar radio emissions with Soviet-French Stereo-1 experiment, and studied spacial structure, directivity, and mechanism of radiation processes. In Mars orbit spacecraft had investigated Mars solar wind flow and its interaction with Mars ionosphere, recorded spectrum of charged particles and variations in magnetic field, and measured refraction of radiowaves. Mars 3 descent package had transmitted pictures only briefly after landing on Mars surface Dec. 2, Tass said: “At the computed time, the transmission of video pictures was begun and continued for about 20 sec. During that period a small part of a panorama was transmitted in which no discernible details were detected because of [the lack of] contrast. Now, it is still difficult to say what caused the termination of the transmission. It is possible that it was associated with the local peculiarities in the landing area, which are completely unknown, or with the dust storm raging at the time. Apparently the dust storm acted as a ‘veil’ covering the surface details during the panoramic exposure. The sudden cessation of signals made it impossible to obtain information from the scientific equipment.” Orbiting vehicle carried infrared radiometer, two TV cameras, photometer, and instruments to measure CO2 and determine water vapor content, surface radio-brightness temperature, and atmospheric density. (Sov Rpt, 12/31/71, 1-14)
NASA announced it had issued Management Study of NASA Acquisition Processes, report of team established in September 1970 to review NASA project and program planning for R&D and activities and procedures for acquiring goods and services from definition of requirements through contract award. Report covered processes used for acquisitions leading to use of formal source evaluation boards for agency-level and field center-level source selections. Study group had concluded that basic framework of NASA acquisition process was sound, but it recommended some improvements in project planning, source solicitation, and source selection, (nasa Release 71—118; Text) jpl astronomer Dr. Donald G. Rea said Jupiter was biggest enigma and challenge to most space scientists. It “emits about three times as much energy as it receives from the Sun. It has a magnetic field 20 times that of Earth, intense radiation belts, and apparently rotates at three different speeds. An important characteristic for flight projects is its gravity which will allow us to send a spacecraft to study Jupiter and then continue on” to investigate outermost planets of solar system. JPL scientist James E. Long recommended spacecraft be launched in 1981 for insertion into Jupiter orbit early in 1984 after 750-day trip from earth. “Depending on Jupiter’s radiation hazard, the spacecraft will have an active life in orbit of six months to a year.” It was “imperative that we get direct measurements well into Jupiter’s atmosphere over long periods . . . to determine the dynamic processes involved.” Technology for Thermoelectric Outer Planet Spacecraft (tops), sustained by self-repairing computers and capable of 10-yr scientific missions to outer planets, was described by jpl engineers Carl C. Wertz, Paul 0. Chelson, and Richard A. Easton, JPL computers being developed and tested were star (self-testing and repairing) and CATS (computer-aided telemetry system). Both had built-in redundancy, with backup parts for each unit that might fail. Easton said star computer was spacecraft’s brain and cats computer its nervous system. Selfrepairing computers were needed for outer planetary mission because “potentially hazardous environments, such as the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, or radiation from Jupiter itself, require that Grand Tour spacecraft subsystems be self-adaptive to either transient or permanent failures. Another consideration is the eight-hour roundtrip communications delay from Neptune or Pluto.” Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, received Lloyd V. Berkner Award, presented annually by aas to persons making significant contributions to commercial space utilization. aas Flight Achievement Award was presented to Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., for Apollo 13 crew. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright received aas 1970 Space Flight Award “in recognition of his contribution to space flight through early planning for the organization of NASA, his direction of the Lunar and Planetary Program, his influence while Deputy Associate Administrator of the Oflice of Space Science and Applications, and later the Office of Manned Space Flight and his current position as Director of nasa Langley Research Center.” In speech on technology crisis Cortright said: “It is ironic that after 10 years of ‘delivering the goods’ in an unparalleled manner, culminating in manned exploration of the Moon, the space program is fighting for its life with a host of other priority programs. Already the national team of Government, industry, and university scientists, engineers, and technicians has been reduced to about Yi of its peak of over 400 000. If we are not to see the progress of a decade of dedicated national effort squandered away, we had better make our case for space loud and clear. I think we have a compelling case—even in these days of relevancy.” (jpl Releases 577, 578, 579; NASA Activities, 7/15/71, 117; 8/15/71, 129-34; Langley Researcher, 7/19/71, 1; Boeing Release S-0826)
NASA telexed thanks to Soviet scientist Dr. I. A. Zhulin for “very informative transmission” of Mars 2 and 3 data that included description of instruments [see Dec. 21] and forwarded Mariner 9 UV spectrometer results. Message, signed by Mariner 9 Program Manager Dan Schneiderman, continued exchange between JPL and Moscow of information from U.S. and Soviet Mars probes. NASA requested more information on Soviet experiments and spacecraft on “detailed level . . . described in our icarus publication previously transmitted to you,” and said Mariner 9 photo of Mars 3 lander site area was being dispatched by diplomatic pouch. New value for direction of Mars polar axis based on dynamic considerations was included in NASA message to Moscow, nasa noted, “Although this will probably cause a revision of the Mars coordinate system at a later date, we will continue to observe the existing convention in describing the positions of visible surface features.” (NASA Release 71-254)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on quantity of new scientific data to be expected from U.S. Mariner 9 and U.S.S.R. Mars 2 and 3 probes of Mars—data “certain to be gathered later if not now.” Whatever was learned, “the store of mystery held by the skies and even their nearest objects will remain enormous. . . . The admiration for man’s persistence in pitting his intelligence, skill, courage and inventiveness against the solar system’s magnificent teases is equaled by the folly of supposing we shall ever read any but a few of their overpowering riddles.” (B Sun, 11/17/71)
NASA released Jan. 28 briefing on FY 1972 budget request, in which Dr. George M. Low, NASA Acting Administrator, said: “For the past several years we have reported ... a further decrease in budget authority. This year we can report a clear halt in this trend: the budget authority for FY 1972 is at the same level as the funds appropriated for FY 1971. The exact figure for FY 1972 is $3,271 billion. NASA would complete Apollo program with four previously planned missions but would delay Apollo 17 five months to ensure that mission carried experiments originally scheduled for canceled Apollo 18 and 19. Skylab missions would be delayed about four months, to follow as soon as practical after last Apollo flight. Plans for unmanned planetary exploration included two Mars orbiters in 1971, Jupiter flybys in 1972 and 1973, launch in 1973 for Venus-Mercury flyby in 1974, and two Viking launches in 1975 to land on Mars in 1976. Dr. Low said NASA had asked for $190 million for space shuttle in FY 1972. “We have included in our budget $100 million. This reduction means essentially that we will move out with the engine development exactly as we had planned; that we are still in a position to make a decision after we have completed the studies on the air frame development, whether to continue with additional design or whether to proceed with the development of the air frames.” Near-earth science programs included Orbiting Solar Observatories in 1971, 1973, 1974, and 1975 and last orbiting Astronomical Observatory in 1972. Space applications program would progress as planned, including two erts, two Nimbus experimental weather satellites, two Synchronous Weather Satellites, and two advanced communications experiments with ATS—F and ATS—G. New FY 1972 projects would include start of work on High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and program for exploration of outer planets. “To do this we will develop a versatile new spacecraft, and we will plan Grand Tour missions to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto in 1976-1977; and to Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune, in 1979.” NASA also would study mission to orbit Jupiter as alternative to first Grand Tour. Major new initiative in aeronautics in FY 1972 would be development of experimental stol aircraft. Downward trend in aerospace industry employment on NASA programs would be halted during FY 1972. “Although aerospace jobs will continue to decline in FY 1971, we expect employment to start increasing by the middle of FY 1972, with the end-of-year level being about equal to that at the beginning of the year.” NASA would reduce civil service work force by 1500 positions by end of FY 1972, bringing total decrease to 6800 since July 1967. Work on NERVA nuclear rocket engine would be limited to “essentially long-lead time items,” preserving ability “to move forward . . . when the need arises,” without large expenditures in FY 1972. Program included “no plans at this time for a manned Mars landing mission.” (Transcript)
nasa published Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Report (nasa SP—190). In foreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus), apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had achieved secondary objective, “to gain engineering experience by converting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been 10% less than anticipated. (Text) During 1971: U.S. orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches—including Apollo 14 and 15 csms Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with lms Antares and Falcon and their S—IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1; France, 1; Italy, 2 (1 for U.S. on U.S. booster); and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for USAF on behalf of NATO, 1 for France, and 1 for U.K. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launches of Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equipment transporter, used for first time on Apollo 14 to carry equipment and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astronauts traveled 28 km (17.4 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled, battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover and collected 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about 4 billion yrs old. Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began transmitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehicle malfunctioned at launch. Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory—rescued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command—made first x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had “polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included lntelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F—3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as secondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Oso 7. All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year. In joint NASA—usaf lifting-body program, M2—F3 and X—24A lifting bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3. X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing program and beginning modification for new flight program as X—24B. In aeronautics NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing - made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully demonstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA CH—54B helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798 ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New v/stol Wind Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine successfully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) transport U.S.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957-1971 Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond aircraft, sst program ended, with Congress voting to terminate program. In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astronomical observations in x-ray, uv, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum. DOD’s 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs-2) military comsats, 2 ov—i scientific satellites, and Cannonball 2 and Mmketball. U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights. The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya II, and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew, Summary of Soviet and United States Space Payloads by Mission Category Soviet Union						United States 1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total		1967	1968	1969	1970	1957-1971 1971 total Earth orbital science			 5	10	3	9	7	59	12	16	14	4	11	137 Earth orbital engineering								6	1	5	1	10	50 Communications				...... 4	4	2	5	3	23	19	11	6	6	6	83 Navigation/ferret			6	6	16	27	84	3	1		1 .		25 1	1	1	1 .		17 Military observation: Low orbit recoverable			 22	29	32	29	28	202	19	16	12	9	7	198 Low orbit nonrecover 		..... 8	10	12	12	12	67	7	7	11	4	6	77 4 .						10 Synchronous or higher 								2	1	3	5	1	18 Q	2	1	2	1	17 . 9	5	2	4	8	25 . Earth orbit man-related 			 3	4		i	2	20	1 .		1 .			11 Earth orbit manned			1	5	i	3	19 .						14 Lunar man-related			3	1	2 .		8	1	2 ,		1	3	13 Moon-unmanned programs			1	3	3	2	25	8	1 ,				21 Venus 		...... 2 .		2	2 .		17	1 .					2 5	10 .			2 .		1	5 Subtotal 				77	71	91	102	602	87	64	66	39	53	764 Orbital launch platforms			 6	8	6	10	7	59 . From Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Staff Report, Soviet Space Programs, 1971, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., April 1972, p. 5. ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971	During 1971 successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth reentry because of improperly sealed hatch. Mars 2 and Mars 3 dropped instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar night. Japan launched two satellites—Tansei and Shinsei. China launched Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and Italy launched San Marco 3. (nasa Release 71—245; NASA Lifting Body Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon, United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72) • NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-developed inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration—in environmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agriculture. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space missions. And balanced program of space and ^aeronautics, despite low funding level, continued to raise U.S. prestige as aerospace pioneer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, however, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in U.S. and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about double U.S. peak expenditure of l°/o of GNP when combined nasa-dod space program was at highest level and four times present level. Dr. James C. Fletcher was nominated new nasa Administrator by President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s third Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970, to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim. Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, nasa in 1971 continued phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14 and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 17 to complete program later in year. Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, delaying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle, nerva nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bioscience funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as in NASA’s. During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared completion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design contracts were extended so that nasa could examine alternative configurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle development. In erts program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitoring of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation, and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned 1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manufacturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation. To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for additional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society. Among NASA projects were nsf contract to investigate use of solar cells to electrify homes and buildings and hud contract to study application of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint nasa-dot study resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&d policy (card). Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of amino acids—building blocks of life—in second meteorite. Discovery strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe. NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion was $27 million more than requested $3,271 billion and $29 million above FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion—halting downward trend but far below 1965 peak of $5,250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72, Al; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70, Senate Doc 92-51)
Bochum Observatory in West Germany said it had received what appeared to be on and off switching signals from Soviet Mars probes, Mars 2 and 3. (AP, W Post, 11/19/71, A3)
Comments on U.S. Mariner 9 and U.S.S.R. Mars 2 and 3 missions were made in New York Times editorial: Three spacecraft—“one American and two Soviet—now speeding toward Mars represent the best type of international competition. Their rivalry centers about the pursuit of knowledge, with the honors going to that nation whose instruments send back the most important data on the red planet that is one of the earth’s nearest space neighbors.” U.S. led Mars race to date, “because of the brilliant feats by Mariners 4, 6, and 7. In the 1960’s the pictures and other data acquired by these pioneering vehicles completely revolutionized scientists’ views of the Martian terrain and environment.” (NYT, 6/1/71)
New York Times editorials commented on recent astronomical events— Nov. 26 Mariner 9 photographing of Martian satellite Deimos and Oct. 7 report by astronomer Dr. Hannes O. Alfven of discovery of asteroid Toro. Deimos’ photo was “only the latest of Mariner 9’s unique accomplishments. This is the first man-made artificial satellite of another major planet in the solar system and it has already journeyed more than a million miles around Mars.” Barring Mariner 9 malfunction, “lifting of the dust storm in the days ahead should permit even greater revelations of the nature of this planet that has been a mystery to man throughout the ages.” Evidence suggested asteroid Toro might crash into earth after 200 yrs, Times said. “Any such collision could do great damage. It may not be too early for space scientists to begin thinking about ways of nudging Toro out of a collision course with earth when, as and if the need arises. If men can send space ships across hundreds of millions of miles to Venus and Mars, it should be no great feat to visit Toro— a mere nine million miles [14 million kilometers] away at present closest approach—by way of performing whatever celestial engineering is required to prevent a mammoth cosmic traffic accident.” {NYT, 11/27/71, 30)
Lowell Observatory astronomers had made first accurate mapping of weather of Mars as result of worldwide cooperation of observatories in NASA-funded ground-based planetary patrol program centered at Lowell, Christian Science Monitor said. Principal investigator Dr. William A. Baum had said object of program, begun in 1969, was to “maintain nearly continuous photographic surveillance of Mars, Jupiter, and Venus during favorable periods.” Mars weather seemed analogous to weather in arid regions of earth. (CSM, 6/24/71)
Mariner 9, launched by NASA May 30, had covered 142 600 000 km (88 600 000 mi) in 167-day journey to Mars. Spacecraft was 15 300 000 km (9 500 000 mi) from earth and had received more than 600 commands, (nasa Release 71—136)
Hanna Reitsch, described by Washington Evening Star as “Nazi Germany’s famous daredevil woman test pilot and the only woman in German history ever to be given two Iron Crosses for her exploits,” told of her glider research during Star interview. “I am searching for the right currents over the Alps. I don’t have to worry about . . . borders in the air. ... As we enter space work more, we will realize how small mankind is and how necessary it is to come together in peace.” (Dean, W Star, 11/16/71, B7) nauts to Mars and return them safely to Earth in a total round-trip time of 60 days.” (A&A, 11/71, 6) Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address said tools and techniques originating from space exploration had arrived just in time to aid ecologists in saving planet earth. “Many benefits are now being realized, but we can expect far greater returns as increasingly sophisticated devices go into service.” (Program; Birmingham Post-Herald, 11/17/71) Mariner scientists reported in news conference at JPL Nov. 19 that instruments had shown planet was flattened at poles and bulging at equator and had more irregularities in its gravitational field than moon had. Bulge was discovered in area called Tharsis, on equator, making planet’s diameter 39 km (24 mi) greater at equator than through poles. Infrared spectrometer had measured reflected radiations that suggested wide range of rock compositions on Mars surface, varying from high in silicon and oxygen to low. Spectrometer had also detected small amounts of water vapor at south pole, as had been observed on previous Mariner flights. On Nov. 23 Mariner 9’s infrared interferometer spectrometer (iris) detected pocket of warm air above south polar cap in same region as water vapor traces had been found earlier. Air pocket was about 240 K (—30°C). (Wilford, NYT, 11/20/71, 51; O’Toole, W Post, 11/20, 23, 24/71; Miles, LA Times, 11/24/71; jpl Hist Off)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 satellites were “successfully continuing the scientific exploration of Mars and the space near the planet in substantially different orbits,” Tass announced. To date, 153 radio communication sessions had been held with Mars 2 and 159, with Mars 3 fbis-Sov-71-241 )
Successful free-flight development test of parachute system for Viking Mars landers to be launched in 1975 was conducted by NASA at dot Joint Parachute Test Facility in El Centro, Calif. Test was to verify functioning of main decelerator parachute and its deployment mechanism and confirm structural adequacy of system design. Deployment mortar and parachute—16 m (53 ft) in diameter, packaged in instrumented drop vehicle 3 m (10 ft) long and 51 cm (20 in) in diameter—were dropped from NASA B-57 aircraft at altitude of 15 200 m (50 000 ft), (nasa Release 71-162; frc pio)
NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed to rapid exchange of findings on Mars from U.S. and U.S.S.R. probes nearing that planet, nasa announced. Recommendations of Joint Working Groups of U.S. and Soviet scientists who met in Moscow Aug. 2-6 to negotiate agreement on joint projects and exchanges in space research and applications had all been approved. Included was telegraphic exchange of findings of special interest by NASA’s Mariner 9 (launched May 30) and Soviet Mars 2 (launched May 19) and Mars 3 (launched May 28). All three spacecraft were scheduled to reach Mars orbit in November. nasa and Soviet Academy also had agreed on joint seminars to facilitate analysis of data; exploration of feasibility of transmitting magnetometer data from U.S.S.R. ground-based observing stations in real-time to U.S. satellite ats-f (scheduled for mid-1972 launch) and retransmitting data to ground with data from onboard magnetometer; and bilateral discussions on scientific results, objectives, and strategy of planetary exploration. Further agreements were to exchange information on photography from past and future missions and all lunar maps, to continue exchange of lunar samples, to conduct multipurpose aerospace and field experiments on environment, and to make joint efforts in remote sensing of ocean. Technical Note would be exchanged on temperature sounding from satellites to develop joint experiment over Western Europe in 1973 and 1974. Information on methods of microwave measurement and of data on cloud emissivity would also be exchanged. Efforts would be made to achieve similarity in U.S. and Soviet requirements for ground receiving equipment. nasa and Soviet Academy also had agreed to research topics for meteorological sounding rocket investigations by both nations, to exchange alerts of stratospheric warmings, to conduct rocket system intercomparison tests, and to present scientific results in regular seminars and symposia. (Text; NASA Release 71-210)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3, launched May 28, was continuing its flight toward Mars. At 9:00 pm Moscow time (1:00 pm est) spacecraft was 138.8-million-km (86.3-million-mi) from Mars, having traveled approximately 472 million km (293 million mi). (NYT, 12/1/71, 20; fbis-Sov-71-231-3, 12/1/71, LI)
kasa selected Douglas Aircraft Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., and Lockheed-Georgia Co. for negotiations of three separate $ 1.5-million, six-month contracts for design phase of questol (quiet, experimental stol) program. After completion of design phase one contractor would be selected to fabricate two experimental transport aircraft for flight research program. (NASA Release 71-238) *	Description by Soviet professor of physics and mathematics M. Marov of Mars 2 scientific program to Soviet journalists was reported by Tass: “Registration of various radiations from Mars, ranging from ultraviolet light to radio waves, by sputniks from a comparatively short distance will give much more complete information about Mars. Certain findings which are still quite inadequate are readily available. It has been established that at least nine-tenths of the Martian atmosphere consists of carbon dioxide. Nitrogen is practically absent, while water vapors are very scant. The thin atmosphere of Mars is extremely heterogeneous. Its structure varies widely with seasons, the time of day and night. The structure of the surface in the areas explored is very heterogeneous too.” (fbis-Sov-71-233, 12/3/71, L3)
U.S.S.R. launched Mars 2 probe toward Mars from Baykonur at 9:23 pm local time (12:23 pm edt). At 10:59 pm Baykonur time (1:59 pm edt) spacecraft was injected into flight trajectory for Mars from “artificial earth satellite” in terrestrial orbit, according to Tass. Instruments were said to be working normally and flight was said to be close to calculated course. Primary objective of six-month, 470-million-km (292-million-mi) mission, Tass said, was to conduct complex research of Mars and its atmosphere and study characteristics of solar plasma, cosmic rays, and radiation along Mars route. Satellite was scheduled to reach Mars vicinity in November, when planet was 129 million km (80 million mi) from earth. Mars 2 was said to weigh 4650 kg (10 250 lbs)—almost five times weight of 1000-kg (2200-lb) Mariner-I scheduled for launch by nasa toward end of May. Size of Mars 2 had led U.S. space experts to predict that it might attempt Mars orbit. Mars 1, launched Nov. 1, 1962, had failed when radio contact was lost 106 million km (66 million mi) from earth. Zond 2, launched Nov. 30, 1964, had also ended in communication failure, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/71; SBD, 5/21/71, 112; Shabad, NYT, 5/20/71, 1; fbis-Sov-98-71, 5/20/71, LI; A&A, 1962; 1963; 1964)
The US.SJl.’s Mars 3 probe softlanded a capsule art the planet Mars. The capsule transmitted signals 20 seconds before falling silent. In the Toss news service photo the descent apparatus—shown here in descent position—carried a braking cane that also served as a heat shield for the capsule. The cone fell away as the main parachute, stored in the container immediately above the capsule, opened to slow the fall. (Photo courtesy of United Press International) cameras have been frustrated by a storm that has covered almost all of Mars with dust for more than two months. It’s almost impossible to imagine a global dust storm, and when one thinks of a global storm lasting for two months, it’s even harder to imagine life surviving such cataclysmic weather conditions. . . . now the dust has begun to settle on the planet, revealing striking features that man has never seen before. Nevertheless, the idea that there might be life among those features is one that seems to be a dying one.” (W Post, 12/2/71, A19)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3 probe (launched May 29) reached vicinity of Mars and ejected capsule which softlanded on planet. U.S.S.R. did not announce landing until Dec. 7 and did not release details until Dec. 19. After separation, capsule bearing Soviet coat of arms entered Mars atmosphere and parachuted to softlanding in Mars southern hemisphere between Electris and Phaetonis in area 45° south latitude and 158° west longitude. Mars 3 continued flight into orbit with 1500-km (930-mi) periapsis and 11-day period. Tass said signals from landing capsule “were received and recorded on board . . . Mars 3 and later . . . transmitted to the earth on December 2-5. The videosignals received from the surface of Mars were brief and suddenly discontinued.” (fbis-Sov-71-236, 12/8/71, LI)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 had discovered presence of oxygen and atomic hydrogen in Mars’ upper atmosphere, Tass announced. Hydrogen corona was located at altitude of 10 000-20 000 km (6200-12 400 mi) above surface, and oxygen at 700-1000 km (435-620 mi). Spacecraft also measured temperature changes on Martian surface. Individual areas on diurnal side did not exceed 258 K (—15°C, or 5°F). On nocturnal side, temperature in some regions exceeded that of environment by 20-25 K (20-25°C, or 68-77°F). (fbis-Sov-71-249, 12/28/71, L2)
NASA notified U.S.S.R. of Mariner 9 Mars orbit in telexed message to I. A. Zhulin, Soviet space expert, in Moscow. Message, from Dan Schneiderman, Mariner 9 Project Manager at JPL, said spacecraft had achieved desired orbit but ephemeris used in planning orbit required 60-km (37-mi) adjustment. Mars “appears brighter than expected by a factor of two. Surface features are almost entirely obscured, but the south polar cap can be seen because of its brightness. This is believed to be the result of a dust storm which covers the entire planet.” Infrared instruments on the two Mariner 9 cameras “appear to be seeing the [Martian] surface, but interpretation of their results is complicated by effects of the dust storm. Message invited Soviet request for additional orbit information and described Nov. 10 and 11 photos taken by Mariner 9 before Mars arrival. Photos had shown “four distinct dark features,” one “possibly Nix Olympica.” Nov. 12 photos had shown streaks 1000 km (620 mi) long originating at fourth spot. “Changes in appearance of these four dark areas over the coming weeks may provide unique information about the dust storm.” (nasa Release 71—229)
jpl announced selection of Motorola, Inc., Government Electronics Div. for negotiations on $2 179 000 contract with award fee to design, fabricate, and test flight-data subsystem for NASA Mariner Venus-Mercury spacecraft for 1973 mission. JPL also had selected Litton Industries Guidance and Control Systems Div. for negotiations on $10.4-million contract for development, fabrication, and testing of gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (to be carried on Viking lander) to analyze Mars surface, (jpl Releases 581, 582)
Thomas O’Toole described in Washington Post effects of Mariner 9 data on idea that life existed on Mars: “In the three weeks that it has spent in Martian orbit so far, Mariner 9 has found that the planet’s atmosphere is even thinner than it was thought to be—about 260 times as thin as Earth’s atmosphere. It also found Martian surface temperatures to be no higher than 80 degrees below zero. To date, Mariner 9’s
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, presented nasa FY 1972 budget request to House Committee on Science and Astronautics: FY 1972 projects—including Apollo 15 and 16, two Mariner spacecraft, first erts satellite, and continuing work toward future flights of Apollo 17, Skylab, earth resources and ats satellites, and Viking probes —represented “the fulfillment of enterprises of the 1960’s, the tailing off to completion of work in progress for many years. By 1974 the number of nasa space launches per year will have declined from 26 in 1966 to eight. After the Skylab missions in 1973, we face at least 4 years in which there will be no United States manned space flight. “Five years ago there were over 390 000 people in industry employed on nasa work. By the end of fiscal year 1971 that figure will be about 108 000. The decline will continue for a few more months, but we expect it to start increasing by the middle of fiscal year 1972, with the end-of-the-year total being about equal to that at the beginning.” U.S. was “running a serious risk of losing too much of the aerospace capability that is an essential ingredient of our long term national strength and security.” There was every indication U.S. would lose leadership in space “unless we move forward now with our space programs for the 1970’s. In 1970 the Soviets launched 88 payloads into space compared to . . . 36 for the United States. Their r&d budget is continuing to increase. They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars while we have many gaps in our planetary program. We would expect them to use automated vehicles and sample return spacecraft from the planets, while we have no such program. Finally the Soviets have a systematic continuing manned space flight program and have stated that they expect to fly a space station before we do.” U.S. should continue to compete with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” Dr. Low believed U.S. could cooperate with U.S.S.R. “in the areas we have under discussion without prejudicing any of our vital national interests.” nasa was reexamining procurement policies and practices and “beginning a serious critical appraisal of the proper size, composition, and organization of NASA’s institutional base.” Position reduction of 1500 in FY 1972 budget was in anticipation that “reduction of this magnitude would be found possible without unduly impairing our ability to carry out the program. Our budget justifications show this reduction as a flat percentage cut—about 5.1%—in all of our major activities. The actual adjustments . . . will be refined as our study of the nasa institutional base proceeds.” nasa program was 1.4% of U.S. budget, contrasting with 53% for domestic programs related to human and physical resources, yet U.S. stood to gain “tremendous benefits now and in the future” from exploration and applications of space science and technology. And whole future “as a nation and as mankind” depended on space science. “For in order to survive in the changing environment on our planet Earth, we must understand the processes that govern our universe.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said purpose of nasa Meteorology Program was to “develop and demonstrate sensors and spacecraft for making those meteorological measurements that will enable a continued improvement in weather forecasting throughout the world with an ultimate view to a limited degree of weather modification and control of severe weather systems. Projections indicate that by about 1980 it should be possible to reach a global capability to acquire information throughout the atmosphere and to develop comprehensive weather models. Once developed, these models can be used to make 14-day weather forecasts and long-range climate estimates.” Ability to develop weather models would permit basic experimenting in weather control. Space shuttle was key nasa development believed essential in 1970s, Dr. von Braun said, presenting U.S. with its greatest technology challenge for space in this decade. “Preliminary analysis indicates that if the shuttle is used in lieu of current expendable systems, the transportation costs will be reduced by at least a factor of ten. . . . Only by an investment now will we be able to have operational an economical transportation system by the end of the 1970’s to support a vigorous and balanced space flight program.” (Transcript)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on softlanding on Mars of instrumented capsule by Soviet Mars 3: “For the first time man has been able to reach Mars with implements that have proved capable both of surviving a landing and of working, for a time at least, after they have been landed. This of course is only one approach to the new studies of brother objects in space. The United States Mariner 9 may by photographic means add valuable pictorial knowledge to that which Mars 3 has reported by signal. And even if neither of these latest raids on the unknown returns as much information as men want, they have together shown that the means by which more and more can be learned are now in our hands, even if in only a primitive and imperfect state so far.” (B Sun, 12/8/71, A18)
Univ. of Toronto had announced discovery by astronomer Dr. Sidney Van Den Bergh of three galaxies composed of thousands of stars, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 11/12/71, A36) First photos were obscured by dust storm but before end of month Mariner 9 had shown that Mars bulged at equator, was “rougher gravitationally” than expected, and probably had wide variety of rock compositions; instruments had detected small amounts of water vapor at south pole and warmer air pockets above pole [see Nov. 16-23]. Spacecraft also made man’s first close photo of potato-shaped Martian moon Deimos [see Nov. 26—27] and photos of moon Phobos [see Nov. 29-30]. First Mariner photos from orbit were broadcast live by national TV network, but detail was limited by dust storms that had raged on surface since September. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, jpl project scientist, said “We’re hopeful that as the storm dies down we can get some good pictures of the dust settling to the surface. This is an unprecedented chance to watch changes in the Martian weather.” He said that if cameras worked properly pictures would be 1000 times better than any earthbound telescopes had taken. On Nov. 14 spacecraft transmitted three sequences of TV pictures. Of more than 60 photos returned, only seven revealed surface features. Dust storm continued and atmospheric experts could see no sign of abatement. Dust obscuring planet was apparently very fine sand which high winds pushed to height of as much as 16 km (10 mi) above surface. On fourth orbit spacecraft successfully completed orbit trim maneuver at 9:44 pm est Nov. 15. Maneuver changed orbital period of spacecraft to make it synchronous with Mars viewing period of Deep Space Station antenna at Goldstone, Calif. New orbital parameters were 1394-km (866.2-mi) periapsis altitude, 11-hr 57-min 12-sec period, and 64.34° inclination. Data from remote-sensing instruments confirmed earlier observations that carbon dioxide was major constituent of Martian atmosphere and also suggested possibility of “hot spots” on planet. Dr. Ellis D. Miner of JPL said sensor detected average temperature rise of 6.7 K (12°F) in area 24 km (15 mi) square below Mars equator. Temperature rise might indicate hole in cloud cover exposing mountain peak or plateau reflecting residual heat or evidence of internal source of heat on Mars, uv spectrometer data indicated dust storm was made up of fairly coarse-grained, sandlike particles, (nasa Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, ll/14r-16/71; O’Toole, W Post, ll/14r-15/71; W Star, 11/16/71, A4)
NASA sent message to Dr. I. A. Zhulin in Moscow via telex communication system established for exchange of information on Manner 9 and Mars 2 and Mars 3 missions to Mars. Message congratulated U.S.S.R. on success of Mars 2; requested Mars 2 coordinates, orbital parameters, doppler data, and data from uv spectrometer; and provided information on U.S. Mariner 9 photos of Mars and moons, doppler data, and uv spectrometer data, (nasa Release 71-240)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 probe (launched May 19) ejected capsule 1380 km (858 mi) above Mars on direct trajectory to planet’s surface. Capsule, carrying pennant bearing U.S.S.R. hammer-and-sickle coat of arms, became first man-made object to reach surface. After capsule ejection Mars 2 decelerated and entered Martian orbit with 25 000-km (15 500-mi) apogee, 1380-km (858-mi) perigee, 1080-min (18-hr) period, and 48.9° inclination. Mars 2 had traveled 470 million km (292 million mi) to reach Mars. During flight it had explored interplanetary space and three midcourse corrections had been conducted, June 17, Nov. 20, and automatically on Nov. 27. Spacecraft was reported operating normally in Martian orbit. U.S.S.R. did not indicate whether capsule softlanded or hard-landed or what mission was. (NYT, 12/1/71, 20; O’Toole, W Post, 12/1/71, A23; fbis-Sov-71-231-3, 12/1/71, LI)
Future of U.S. space program was subject of articles in America Illustrated, usia publication distributed in U.S.S.R. Jay Holmes described plans for next two decades in space including planetary exploration and Grand Tours of outer space, practical applications of space technology, and international cooperation in space. Technical advancements directly traceable to U.S. space program were described by James J. Haggerty, who forecast additional space benefits in future. Reusable space shuttle and earth-orbiting stations, continued lunar exploration, and manned voyages to Mars were discussed in article on earth, moon, and Mars. (Am III, 2/71)
NASA’s Mariner 9 completed 146th day in Mars orbit. Since launch May 30, 1971, Mariner 9 had responded to 37 764 commands and had taken 6876 pictures. Spacecraft was undergoing solar occultation (passing into shadow of Mars) and would resume acquisition of data in early June when occultation ceased. Spacecraft resources were being budgeted to keep Mariner 9 active through superior conjunction of Mars and sun in September when spacecraft signals would be deflected by solar gravity. Analysis of deflection could provide accurate check on theory of relativity. (NASA proj off)
NASA’s Pioneer 10 spacecraft, en route to Jupiter, crossed orbit of Mars and entered space never before visited by spacecraft. Pioneer 10 had safely crossed region of “Great Galactic Ghoul” 209 million km (130 million mi) from sun where two Mars-bound spacecraft had been lost and third had stopped transmitting for seven hours, apparently because of impact of high-velocity meteoroids. Since launch March 2 Pioneer 10 had traveled 249 million km (155 million mi) on its 998-million-km (620-million-mi) flight path to Jupiter and was 75 million km (47 million mi) straight-line distance from earth. It would enter Asteroid Belt in early July, reach Jupiter in December 1973, and cross orbit of Pluto in about 15 yrs. (NASA Release 72-111)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) photographed vast Mars chasm with branching canyons resembling network of dry river beds. Describing photo, which was released to press Jan. 19, Harold Masursky, of U.S. Geological Survey, said in interview that chasm probably had been caused by “faulting of the crust,” a cracking and sliding process associated with earthquakes. Masursky believed line of small craters running parallel to canyon had probably been caused by venting volcanic gases and ash. Wind erosion and landslides had probably altered canyon, but landscape in photo appeared to be geologically young. (Wilford, NYT, 1/20/72, 25)
Mariner Mars ’71 extended mission of 259 days beyond primary mission was adjudged success. Objectives of extended mission of Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971, and inserted in Mars orbit No. 13, 1971) had been to map 70% of planet with 1-km (0.6-mi) visual resolution and to study dynamic characteristics of Mars at reduced data-acquisition rate. During extended mission Mariner 9 had mapped 100% of planet and had observed large areas with infrared and ultraviolet instruments. S-band occultations and celestial mechanics measurements had proved Mars to be geologically and meteorologically active. (nasa proj off)
New York Times editorial commented on first global map of Mars produced by U.S. Geological Survey from Mariner 9 photos [see Nov. 27] : “Ever since telescopes were invented people have wondered to what extent Mars resembles Earth. Now, for the first time, the existence of a reasonably comprehensive picture of Mars provides a basis for comparison.” Despite differences from earth, “increased familiarity with the forces that have shaped its surface is bound to give man a more cosmopolitan view of how planets evolve—a view that should provide us with better understanding of the planet we call home.” (NYT, 11/29/72) November 30:	Six-day countdown for Apollo 17 began at 8:30 am EST at Kennedy Space Center. Spacecraft was scheduled for launch at 9:53 pm EST Dec. 6 (ksc Hist Off; AP, W Post, 12/1/72, A22)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) completed photo-mapping of entire Mars surface with acquisition of final elements needed in playback of 30 pictures, bringing total photo count to more than 7000. Spacecraft—in Mars orbit since Nov. 13, 1971— would make 500th revolution around Mars July 20. During next three months Mariner 9 would provide precision tracking data to test relativity theory that electromagnetic radiation—spacecraft’s radio signal— passing close to sun would be slowed by sun’s gravitational field. Additional pictures would be taken once in August, once in September, and twice in October and stored for playback in late October. Lifetime was dependent upon supply of attitude-control gas. (nasa Release 72-143)
Experiment to plot evolution of sun and earth over aeons was described in Science by Cornell Univ. astronomers Dr. Carl E. Sagan and Dr. George Mullen. Findings had indicated that sun’s energy emission had increased 40% over last 4.5 aeons and would continue to increase until earth temperature reached boiling point, in about 4.5 more aeons. Infrared characteristics of atmospheres of other planets would determine whether life on them, if any, would survive. Mars atmosphere should be approaching required conditions for emergence of life at about same time earth temperature accelerated upward. (Science, 7/7/72, 52-5)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. space mission scheduled for 1975 would include 48-hr linkup of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and crew exchange, Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said in report released by Tass. Coyuz spacecraft, manned by two cosmonauts, would be launched first. “In seven and a half hours, Apollo spaceship manned by three astronauts will be launched from Cape Kennedy. In 24 hours, Apollo will approach the Soyuz ship and link up will be made. The system that will be formed will be operated as a single spacecraft. Within two days, spacemen will move from one ship to another, scientific and technical experiments will be made and there will be television transmissions to the earth. At the end of the third day, the spaceships will be undocked and will soon land on their respective territories.” Shatalov said he hoped manned Mars mission before end of 20th century would be international flight—“Possibly it will be the Soviet-American flight.” (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, L2)
Press conference on scientific results of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, project scientist, said Mars “used to he likened to earth in science fiction, and was compared to the moon after the first pictures from Mariner 4 in 1965. Now we are seeing that Mars has a character all its own. It is not earth-like or moon-like, it is Mars-like.” Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey said Mars could be divided into four major geological provinces: Nix Olympica-Tharis volcanic province with volcanoes up to 8 km (5 mi) high and 500 km (300 mi) in diameter; Ophir-Eos equatorial plateau region with faults and rifts 5 km (3 mi) deep; cratered and smooth terrains with large circular basins like lunar impact basins; and south polar cratered terrain covered with glacial sediment layers up to 100 m (330 ft) thick. Convincing evidence that water had played active role in evolution of Mars was shown in Mariner 9 photos of deep, winding channels that might have once been beds of fast-flowing streams. Masursky suggested two explanations for apparent heavy rains and floods on Mars in past: volcanic heat might have melted water ice stored below surface as permafrost or increased dosages of sunlight on polar caps every 50 000 yrs, because of axis wobbling, might have melted polar caps completely. Dr. Geoffrey A. Biggs of Jpl described north polar hood of variable clouds that appeared to have general west-to-east flow pattern, with some systems resembling small cyclones. Photos also showed “white cloud phenomenon”—brilliant white spots, believed to be water ice clouds, associated with volcanoes. “The clouds appear mostly in the afternoon, when warmer air is moving up the slopes and cooling as it goes.” Pictures of north polar area showed wavelike clouds “formed by a simple, harmonic movement of air, of winds up to 115 miles per hour [185 kilometers per hour] . . . very much like the cold fronts shown in earth atmosphere pictures.” (Summary statement and abstracts; Wilford, NYT, 6/15/72, 1; Swaim, Pasadena Star-News, 6/15/72)
Smithsonian Institution displayed collection of 60 works by astronomical artist Chesley Bonestell in Aerospace Art Hall of Arts and Industries Building. Artist had been commissioned by Collier’s magazine in 1952 to illustrate series of articles by rocket expert Dr. Wernher von Braun, later NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and by rocket historian Willy Ley. Articles had resulted in Viking Press books: Conquest of Space, Conquest of the Moon, and Exploration of Mars. Smithsonian exhibition was coincidental with American Museum showing of Bone-stell’s works in New York [see May 16]. (Smithsonian Release; Smithsonian Pio) June 1:	President Nixon returned from state visits to Austria, U.S.S.R., Iran, and Poland and reported to Congress on trip. Commenting on agreements signed with U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings, he said: “Recognizing that the quest for useful knowledge transcends differences between ideologies and social systems, we have agreed to expand United States-Soviet cooperation in many areas of science and technology. “We have joined in plans for an exciting new adventure ... in the cooperative exploration of space, which will begin—subject to Congressional approval of funding—with a joint orbital mission of an Apollo vehicle and a Soviet spacecraft in 1975.” President asked for “fullest scrutiny” of antiballistic missile treaty signed May 26, “because we can undertake agreements as important as these only on a basis of full partnership between the executive and legislative branches of our Government.” {PD, 6/5/72, 975-81)
New York Times editorial commented on space cooperation: “These past few years astronomy has probably advanced further than in any previous century since the invention of the telescope. Fantastic progress has been made through American and Soviet exploration of the moon, Mars and Venus.” Need was “to build on this new base of knowledge with a program of further manned and unmanned space exploration conducted under a system of international cooperation which combines the resources, manpower and knowledge of many nations. No generation has ever faced a nobler challenge than space now poses before all humanity.” (NYT, 4/16/72, 5:12)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
U.S. planned to commemorate 200th anniversary of Nation’s birth by attempting to land unmanned spacecraft on planet Mars July 4, 1976, according to NASA spokesman quoted in Washington Post. Attempt would be made by Viking spacecraft scheduled to enter Mars orbit about July 1, 1976. (W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
Mariner Mars ’71 primary mission—to explore Mars from Martian orbit for period sufficient to observe planet’s surface and view selected areas during dynamic changes, photograph planet, and obtain infrared and ultraviolet data on atmosphere and surface characteristics—was adjudged successful by NASA. Mariner 8 launch May 8, 1971, was not successful because of malfunction of Atlas-Centaur booster. Mariner 9 was successfully launched May 30, 1971, and reached Mars Nov. 13, 1971. All Mariner 9 instruments operated successfully and were continuing to transmit data. When Mariner 8 was lost, mission plan for Mariner 9 had been altered to meet primary mission objectives in best way. Plan had been altered second time when dust storm on Mars delayed systematic mapping of planet. (NASA proj off)
NASA released three photos of Mars taken by Mariner 9 Aug. 7. Pictures showeid that Mars north polar icecap was shrinking and showed sedimentary systems during late spring. Fractured terrains, partially flooded by volcanic extrusions, were visible in center of planet. (LA Her-Exam, 9/7/72)
U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) had completed 111 revolutions of Mars and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) had completed 6 revolutions, Tass announced. Radio contact with spacecraft remained stable and onboard instruments were continuing to function satisfactorily. (fbis—Sov, 2/22/72, L2)
Space researchers should look for insect life on Jupiter and for seeds and pollen on Saturn, Russian-born cosmologist Dr. Immanuel Velikovsky said during lecture sponsored by Ames Research Center’s Biotechnology and Planetary Biology Divs. at arc. He hypothesized that Venus and Mars had been in different orbits and had passed close enough to earth in centuries before Christ to cause cataclysms described in Old Testament. Dr. Velikovsky also suggested that several magnetic shells within solar system could return echoes and urged that spacecraft be sent to investigate them, (arc Astrogram, 8/3/72, 1; Mead, San Jose, Calif, Mercury, 8/15/72)
Mariner 9 mission ended as attitude-control gas supply was depleted and engineering telemetry signal ceased during 698th Martian orbit of spacecraft launched May 30, 1971. Mariner 9 had reached Mars Nov. 13, 1971, and was 383 675 000 km (238 416 000 mi) from earth when engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory sent 45 960th, and last, command—to turn off radio transmitter. Spacecraft was expected to remain in Mars orbit some 50 yrs. During 349 days (more than one half Martian year) of orbital activity, Mariner 9 had maintained instrumented surveillance of Mars and made first closeup photos of Martian moons Phobos and Deimos. Major findings had included: geologically active planet with volcanic mountains and calderas larger than any on earth, equatorial crevasses more than 3000 km (2000 mi) long and three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, indications that free-flowing water might have existed in Mars’ geologic history, evolution of monumental dust storms that raged to altitudes of 50 to 60 km (31 to 37 mi) above Mars surface, and realization that dust storms and cloudiness accounted for much of variability of Mars’ appearance over years. Mariner 9 was first man-made object to orbit another planet. Mariner project, managed for NASA’s Office of Space Science by jpl, had been planned as two-spacecraft mission to Mars but Mariner 8, launched May 8, 1971, failed to enter orbit when Centaur stage of Atlas-Centaur booster malfunctioned after normal countdown and liftoff from Eastern Test Range. Spacecraft had reentered earth’s atmosphere. Plans had been revised and Mariner 9 had been launched successfully to conduct missions of both Mariners. Data from Mariner 9 experiments would provide groundwork for 1975 Viking lander mission to search for evidence of life on Mars, (jpl Release 634; A&A 1971)
Photographic equipment carried by U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft in Mars orbit were described by Tass: “Automatic devices take pictures on the film which is automatically processed after photographing and then, on command from earth, the pictures are sent by television channels to the flight control centre.” Each spacecraft carried two “photo-television devices with wide-angle and long-focus objectives. ... all units and elements are placed together in one rigid body with the objective fixed outside and in the wide-angle camera—together with the objective and a device for changing colour filters.” Pictures were taken synchronously and transmitted with “an optico-mechanical television device.” (fbis—Sov, 3/8/72, LI)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former nasa Administrator, delivered 1972 Tizard Memorial Lecture at Westminster School in London. Discussing man’s future in space, Dr. Paine evaluated role of applications satellites: Their “great economic and social value” was apparent “although their full potential is not yet appreciated. Men on every continent regularly use these services today; shares can be bought in the enterprises that provide them. We must not, however, overlook the equal value of the new information about the earth’s origin, history, environment, and destiny that our more basic lunar and planetary scientific programs are providing. Already studies of radiative energy transport in the atmosphere of Mars have contributed to terrestrial meteorology; lunar geological surveys have provided new clues to the early formation and structure of earth. The line between science and application in this rapidly advancing area is continually shifting and new scientific understanding of such questions as the origin of the Ice Ages might be of incalculable human importance.” (Text)
British press correspondent Arthur Smith presented British view of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs since Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: “Two major events in space marked 1971—both of them signs that America’s formidable lead in space exploration is being whittled away by the incredibly dynamic program” of U.S.S.R.: launch of Soyuz 11, which put U.S.S.R. ahead of U.S. in total launches for first time since 1958, and U.S.S.R.’s landing of Mars 3 capsule on Mars—“relatively unproductive from the scientific point of view,” but impressive. “These two events demonstrate that the Soviet space program is now making great strides after many years of relatively minor achievement in both manned and unmanned exploration and application. The characteristic pattern was a Soviet achievement announced to a surprised world, followed some months later by a more sophisticated and more useful U.S. version of the same mission, yielding far more scientific data, but little prestige.” U.S.S.R. program was characterized by excessive secrecy because, according to Soviet officials, rockets used in space program were similar to those used in military program. Smith said genuine reason for secrecy “is the desire to guard against a failure in the full blaze of world publicity.” U.S.S.R. “guards against ever having to admit failure by announcing launches only post facto. If there is a launch pad failure there is no announcement at all. If orbit is reached by the spacecraft, but it does not function as planned, no mention is made of this in the curt bulletin.” If lunar or planetary probe failed to enter planned trajectory, mission objective “is not mentioned, and the spacecraft is merely allocated a number in the catch-all Cosmos series. ... It is impossible to be absolutely certain how many of these escape stage failures there have been, but there may have been as many as 10 or 15 aimed at Venus and Mars alone.” Soviet program had “little ... of the technical virtuosity of the American approach,” but had more impetus and would “obviously continue on a growing scale. Apart from the progress in individual projects, the ever increasing number of Soviet launches demonstrates that the Russian equivalent of NASA is financially more secure. And the speed with which the Soviet space establishment can respond to a failure is also a pointer to the massive scale of the back-up precautions which are taken.” Soviet program, by its nature, was ensured greater financial security. “By their very success in being able to reach an unparalleled level of technology in their spacecraft, the American engineers have been working against their own best interests.” {Bull Atom Sci, 4/72, 18-24)
nasa’s Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe (launched March 2) entered Asteroid Belt, beginning first reconnaissance of huge region of dust and rocks that circled sun between orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Doughnut-shaped belt was about 3 billion km (1.8 billion mi) around, 280 million km (175 million mi) wide, and 80 million km (50 million mi) thick. Asteroids in belt ranged in size from dust particles to rock chunks as large as Alaska. Passage of Pioneer 10 through belt would permit first measurements of asteroids too small to be seen with earth-based telescopes and of amounts and kinds of asteroidal material. During seven-month passage through belt, spacecraft was expected to pass within 8.9 million km (5.5 million mi) of asteroid Palomar-Layden Aug. 2 and asteroid Nike Dec. 2. Pioneer 10 carried three experiments for measurements in Asteroid Belt—asteroid-meteoroid detector, gas-cell-array meteoroid detector, and imaging photopolarim-eter. (nasa Release 72-136; arc Astrogram, 7/20/72, 1)
Dr. William W. Duke, twin brother of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., replied in letter published by Washington Post to April 26 article by Post columnist Nicholas von Hoffman that criticized astronauts and Apollo 16 mission. “My brother stated publicly that he would go to the moon anonymously. He sought no personal gain. No one will recall the names of these space explorers, but each time one mission is completed, the next is easier. I am sure the second, third, or one hundredth man to sail around the world found it easier than the one preceding. Who is to judge what is to be gained now or one hundred years hence in and from space?” (W Post, 5/10/72, A15) May 10—24:	Committee on Space Research (cospar) held 15th meeting in Madrid. First firm indication of water ice on Mars from photos returned by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Dr. James A. Cutts. He and team had noted that residual south polar cap 320 km (200 mi) wide was unchanged throughout southern summer but was hidden by thin carbon dioxide frost that covered region 3200 km (2000 mi) in diameter during winter. In spring, it appeared that dry ice again evaporated and cap shrank to 320-km zone of water ice. Working sessions on terrestrial planets and outer planets were held by NASA and Soviet scientists to discuss programs for exploration of Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter. Discussions fulfilled recommendation of August 1971 nasa-U.S.S.R. Working Group that planetary exploration be discussed jointly at international colloquia. Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council submitted United States Space Science Program: Report to COSPAR. Report, covering 1971, summarized analyses and observations from experiments on board spacecraft, sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft. (Miles, LA Times, 5/11/72; Text; NASA Int Aff; NASA Release 72—106; W Post, 5/23/72, A10)
Dept, of Defense was trying to develop nuclear warhead that could evade Soviet missile defenses, Wall Street Journal reported. DOD spokesman had said USAF had been working on “evasion technology” for several years but program—budgeted for $42.1 million over past two years— was in early r&d stages. (WSJ, 2/22/72, 7) New plan—necessitated by budgetary restrictions and congressional recommendation, and endorsed by National Academy of Sciences— National Research Council’s Space Science Board—would launch two spacecraft in 1977 on trajectory that would carry them by Jupiter and then Saturn during rare alignment of planets. Spacecraft for mission would be based on Mariners developed to explore inner planets Mars, Venus, and Mercury. They would have large antennas for longdistance communication, be powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators, carry more than 68 kg (153 lbs) of instrumentation including TV cameras, and be launched by Titan-Centaur-Burner III boosters and accelerated by Jupiter’s gravity and orbital velocity for flight to Saturn. Possible Saturn encounters included flying close to planet’s satellite Titan—larger than planet Mercury and only satellite known to have atmosphere. Spacecraft would encounter Jupiter in about IV2 yrs and Saturn about 3% yrs after launch. Mission plan flexibility would permit selection of different flyby trajectory at Saturn for second spacecraft based on data from first. Plan would maintain option to use Pioneer-class spacecraft for Jupiter and Saturn orbiters in late 1970s. Project responsibility had been assigned to Jet Propulsion Laboratory. In other testimony, Dr. Naugle said NASA had developed heat sterilization techniques for Viking lander and new thermoradiation techniques expected to have future space and industrial applications. Program initiated measures to ensure that all planetary missions had “acceptably low probability of impacting or contaminating the target planets.” (Transcript; NASA Release 72-42)
Soviet news agency Tass reported completion of Polar Morning—joint U.S.S.R. and France experiment at E. T. Krenkel Hydrometeorological Observatory in Arctic. During three-month expedition, series of meteorological rockets 'had carried Soviet and French payloads to altitudes between 90 and 180 km (56 and 112 mi) during period of transition from winter to summer and from polar night to polar day. Data were obtained on atmospheric temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud formations, corpuscular radiation, and solar activity. (FBIS-Sov, 6/16/72, LI) June 15:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Apollo 16 Astronauts Charles M. Duke, Jr., John W. Young, and Thomas K. Mattingly II met with President Nixon at White House to discuss April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission and joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Following discussion Dr. Fletcher and astronauts held press conference. Dr. Fletcher said President was “very pleased” with progress made toward joint mission. “The President particularly wanted to emphasize that . . . this is only the beginning of what he conceives as a long association with the Soviet Union in many other areas of space cooperation. ... we are busy working on other kinds of things that we can do together . . . perhaps through the turn of the century, doing things together for economic reasons and because he feels strongly that the international aspect of this is important in improving relationships. If we can do this together, we can do other things together.” President also emphasized worldwide space cooperation. As areas for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in future, Dr. Fletcher thought “the ones we can be sure of” were “the cooperative program on Mars [and] a new cooperative program on Venus, where we explore the upper atmosphere and the entire atmosphere and they explore the surface. We are going to be doing that together.” (Other nasa officials explained later these would be coordinated efforts rather than joint missions.) July meeting of principals at Manned Spacecraft Center would “iron out the management” of joint docking mission. Astronaut Young said that “real problem” was communication; “once we solve that problem we can prove that we can work together in a lot of other areas besides.” Dr. Fletcher said plans for joint astronaut and cosmonaut training had not been concluded, “but it is going to be absolutely essential that the cosmonauts come over here and train on our equipment and vice versa. That much has been agreed to.” Training program probably would start “within about a year.” Dr. Fletcher summed up progress made on joint mission since May 24 signing of cooperation agreement: “We have set up the agenda for the meeting which will primarily involve the management aspects. ... We also have, at home, worked out some of the details of the specifications . . . and now are waiting approval.” Perhaps most “spectacular” progress had been “great enthusiasm from Congress for the mission, particularly when we told them this was not going to cost any more money.” (Transcript; WSJ, 6/16/72)	.
Soviet scientists V. Moroz and L. Ksanfomaliti described in Izvestia findings on Mars atmosphere from Mars 2 and 3 spacecraft. Difference in contrast on two wavelengths between continents and seas during dust storm and change in contrast in same field had permitted evaluation of dust particle size and cloud thickness. Average radius of particles over Iapigya region Dec. 15, 1971, was estimated to be less than one micrometer and density of particles to be 100 million per sq cm (645 million per sq in). “If clouds of such density uniformly envelop the entire planet, its atmosphere must have contained several thousand million tons of dust.” Estimates suggested that particles have mostly silicate composition, “which agrees with the infra-red spectra obtained by Mariner 9. Particles of such a tiny size . . . fall very slowly—for about a month even in the absence of supporting vertical currents in the atmosphere. Hence the conclusion that no prolonged storm in the true sense of the word, i.e. constant winds in the period of investigation, occurred.” Unlike Venus, where cloud layer and atmosphere were more pervious and created “hothouse effect,” surface of Mars “gets cool rather than heated, giving rise to what may be described as an ‘anti-hothouse effect.’ When the storm ended, the temperature rose.” Water vapor content of atmosphere was low during and after the dust storm (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/22/72, LI)
First laboratory demonstration of controlled fusion—peaceful use of hydrogen-bomb reaction to make electricity—could occur within three years, Washington Post reported. Intensely concentrated laser light beam would be used to trigger fusing of atoms. Fusion would produce energy sufficient for conversion into plentiful electric power with potentially unlimited fuel, a form of hydrogen from sea. Physicist Edward Teller had said there was “outside chance” that laser-fusion would carry men to Mars and back by end of century. U.S.S.R. was believed to be two to three years ahead of rest of world in both laser-fusion and other fusion research. (Cohn, W Post, 8/11/72, A3)
Low-altitude qualification test of Viking parachute—decelerator system to slow Viking spacecraft for softlanding on Mars 1976—was conducted by NASA at Dept, of Defense Joint Parachute Test Facility in El Centro, Calif. Parachute, 16-m (53-ft) in diameter and deployed by mortar, was dropped from B-57 aircraft. It opened on schedule, but dropped payload. Test was first of two low-altitude tests planned for 1972 and followed series of six development tests. High-altitude tests with balloon-launched parachute would be conducted during summer. Investigation was under way to determine cause of failure, (frc Release 6-72; W News, 4/28/72, 45)
Cameras on board NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe (launched May 30, 1971) were turned off to check out malfunction in onboard computer. (nasa Release 72-67)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) had orbited moon 1358 times and was operating satisfactorily, Tass announced. Spacecraft had studied moon’s gravitational field, measured interplanetary magnetic field and meteor-flow density, studied characteristics of space radiation in lunar space for comparison with Mars 2 and Mars 3 data, and collected data on dynamics of changes in intensity of space radiation corpuscular flows. (fbis-Sov, 1/31/72, LI)
Mariner 9 project scientists were pondering past and future of planet Mars as spacecraft (launched May 30, 1971) began final weeks of Mars probe, New York Times said. Questions of existence of water on Mars, Martian atmosphere, and possible future use of planet as refuge for man when earth became uninhabitable had “no clear answers.” Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech believed Mars was currently evolving, had never had any vast bodies of water, and might be facing atmospheric dead end.” Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey had said presence of river-like channels on Mars indicated existence of liquid water in recent past. Dr. Carl E. SagAn of Cornell Univ. had suggested that periodic changes in Mars’ angle of rotation could make Martian climate unstable, alternating between present ice age and warm, earthlike areas that could support “thriving biology.” Mars controversy centered on Mariner 9 photos that showed many channels on Mars seemingly carved out by flowing water. (Wilford, NYT, 10/8/72, 68)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
Col. H. J. Odenthal (usaf, Ret.), pioneer airman who once assisted in rescue of Orville Wright after his aircraft had crashed, died at age 84. Col. Odenthal had helped organize Signal Corps air photographic and mapping division and had been awarded Croix de Guerre for his mapping flights in France during World War I. (Barker, W Post, 1/23/72, B16) January 22—25:	Intelsat-IV F—4 comsat was launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat) . Launched from Eastern Test Range at 7:12 pm est by Atlas-Centaur booster, satellite entered elliptical transfer orbit with 36 523-km (22 694.3-mi) apogee, 5984-km (3718.3-mi) perigee, and 28.2° inclination. Primary objective was to place satellite in transfer orbit accurate enough for onboard propulsion systems to transfer it to planned synchronous orbit for commercial communications over Pacific. Apogee-kick motor was fired at 7:32 pm est Jan. 24 and Intelsat-IV F—4 entered circular orbit with 35 787-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 25 625km (22 136.4-mi) perigee, 23-hr 52-min period, and 0.7° inclination over Pacific at 165° east longitude. It would drift 1.1° per day to reach station at 174° east longitude in early February. Satellite’s first major mission would be coverage of President Nixon’s visit to People’s Republic of China in February.	, Intelsat-IV F-4 was third comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1402 kg (3090 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000—9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F-3 had been launched Dec. 19, 1971, and was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; nasa Release 72-16) January 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA plans for continuing fruitful space program in interview published by Christian Science Monitor: “For the next few years, we may have fewer of the more spectacular explorational missions .... We will focus more on . . . communications satellites, weather satellites, earth resources survey satellites.” Next Applications Technology Satellite (ats) would demonstrate direct TV broadcasting in region of Rockies and Alaska, using large satellite with big antenna that could beam programs directly to augmented receivers in individual homes. Demonstration—-in cooperation with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare—would work through educational network rather than directly to homes, however. Comsats were “not quite so exciting an aspect of space technology” in U.S. but, “worldwide, there has been more interest in this than in almost any other aspect of our program.” Interest equaled that of ERT satellite. “Countries with vigorous mineral exploitation and agricultural development are interested in ERT satellites .... Countries with underdeveloped communications and education, such as India, are keenly interested in the broadcasting satellites.” In weather satellite field, new sophisticated instruments “give hope that we can get a really world weather observing network going.” Infrared sensors, microwave sensors, and high-resolution optics that obtained temperature profiles throughout atmosphere by looking “through holes in cloud systems” should help “to get points all over the globe where we now get only pieces of the picture.” NASA would try processing materials in zero g during Skylab program. “If it works with men doing it, there are cheaper ways we could do it without men. It may be one of those things that will be worth doing when we can get routine access to space with the shuttle.” In response to question, Dr. Fletcher said second Skylab would be “a very good thing for the country. But I’m not sure the budget needed for both a Skylab and the shuttle would be salable. The shuttle is more important in the long run. Not to do more of the Skylab sort of thing will be bad for prestige. The Russians will be doing much more than we will. I’m sure there will be criticism from Congress and the public.” But with shuttle and current budget level, “we could do virtually all those things we have talked about doing in this century. We could go back to the moon and establish crude bases .... We could establish a permanent space station. We just might be able to send men to Mars and get them safely home.” Apollo industrial base had already been destroyed, Dr. Fletcher said. “We could assemble a nucleus of people who know these things within NASA. But that’s about all.” As NASA turned toward space shuttle, “We hope and expect that many of the people who worked on Apollo will be in that program, so we won’t lose all the basic space flight know-how.” In international cooperation, France had asked to participate in Skylab mission and U.S.-U.S.S.R. meetings to establish compatible space docking system had progressed. “It looks as though we can do it technically. With existing hardware, we could do a docking in something like 1974 to 1975.” Scientific community was “still debating whether it would prefer an intensive Jupiter and Saturn explorational program or some form of grand tour to other planets as well,” Dr. Fletcher said. There was “no slackening of interest in Grand Tour” on NASA’s part. (CSM, 1/22/72)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
First photos of Mars taken by U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft were shown on Moscow TV. One photo showed equatorial zone with sun at low angle throwing long shadows over mountainous area. Second photo showed sharply defined, ring-shaped formation against light-colored background. Origin of formation, visible through dust clouds, was not established. Third photo showed craters of Syrtis Major. (NYT, 1/23/72)
Tass reported Luna 19 achievements as Soviet lunar probe launched Sept. 28, 1971, neared end of its activity. During more than 4000 lunar orbits spacecraft had transmitted data in more than 1000 communication sessions. Experiment data had indicated presence of plasma produced in near-lunar space by interaction of “space irradiation and the lunar surface.” Luna 19 had photographed lunar area “to study individual parts of the lunar surface and possibilities for using orbital panoramas for the navigation of space apparatus.” Probe had recorded more than 10 increases in flux of solar cosmic ray protons, resulting from powerful solar flareups. During lifetime, Luna 19 onboard systems had functioned normally. Tass said two-year monitoring of space radiation by Luna 19 and predecessors Lunokhod 1 (lunar roving vehicle landed on moon by Luna 17), Verms 7 and 8, and Mars 2 and 3 would “make it possible to ascertain the energy spectrum, the charge components of cosmic rays, and the conditions of their propagation in the interplanetary medium.” (fbis-Sov, 10/4/72, LI)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
Results of U.S.S.R. research of Mars as released by Soviet press were summarized by Interavia. Initial analysis of data collected by Mars 2 and 3 (launched May 19 and May 28, 1971) spacecraft during interplanetary flight had indicated large variations in composition of interplanetary plasma ions at 20 million km (12.5 million mi) from earth. Data had also revealed new information on distribution of solar plasma around solar system and its relationship with interplanetary and terrestrial magnetic fields. No magnetic field had been detected near Mars, indicating possible lack of liquid core. Orbits of spacecraft had been selected to cover areas of Martian surface difficult to investigate from earth-central latitudes of southern hemisphere to 65° south, equatorial zone, and northern hemisphere to 29° north. During Martian orbit infrared radiometer data had shown certain areas of surface to be definitely warmer than immediate surroundings, indicating possible volcanic activity. Mars 2 and 3 had found steam content in Martian atmosphere to be 2000 times less than that existing in terrestrial atmosphere. At times precipitated water could be 50 micrometers; at others, less than 10. Since photos taken by NASA’s Mariner 9 revealed impressive valleys which could have been formed by erosion, Soviet scientists had theorized that higher temperatures and pressures, sufficient to produce water in liquid form, existed on Mars in previous era. Very sharp differences in planet’s brightness, never before observed from earth, were observed by visible range photometer. Data were collected from measurement of radio-wave reflection. After landing, scientific results from Mars 2 and 3 had been meager. Mars 2 had hardlanded a capsule on Mars Nov. 27, 1971. Photos and measurements by Mars 3 (which softlanded a capsule Dec. 2, 1971) had indicated a dust cloud 6 to 8 km (4 to 5 mi) thick covering landing area, leading to speculation that either dust storms had raged over area and caused capsule to land incorrectly or capsule had sunk into dust layer. Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov had said U.S.S.R. planned to use 1973 launch windows if program of Martian exploration continued as planned. (Interavia, 10/72, 1139—41; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Institute of High Energy Physics at Serpukhov, near Moscow, inaugurated experimental complex which could extract proton cluster with maximum energy from 70-bev proton accelerator in millionth fractions of a second. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/9/72, LI) June 8-9:	NASA’s Mariner 9 spacecraft—orbiting Mars since Nov. 13, 1971—began photographing Mars after two-month rest period. Clear photos of Mars south and north poles—not clearly visible with earth-based telescopes and obscured from spacecraft by clouds in winter and spring—were taken June 8 and stored before transmission June 9 to Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station. Pictures were taken during 418th revolution in orbit with 16 900-km (10 500mi) apogee and 1650-km (1000-mi) perigee. Mariner 9 would take about 500 pictures during next nine weeks. It had taken 6876 photos covering 85% of planet between Nov. 13, 1971, and April 2, 1972, before it entered occultation period. (NASA Release 72-123)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced appointment of Dan Schneiderman, former manager of Mariner Mars 1971 Project, as manager of Civil Systems Program Office. He would manage JPL effort to develop applications of laboratory capabilities to problems in medical engineering, public safety, urban land use, and transportation, (jpl Release 622)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, described major alterations in “nature of the space effort” to be expected with 1978 introduction of space shuttle, in signed New York Times article. National space program had “turned an important corner in 1972—a year that, in a very real sense, was a year of decision” in choosing to proceed with shuttle. U.S. had “turned from a period of space exploration to a period of space exploitation for practical purposes.” By 1978 it would be “realistic to consider a variety of missions either not practicable at present cost levels or that were beyond the state of the art as it was in the pre-shuttle era.” Missions would include advanced, space-based communications systems that, when used for education, would “have the potential for eliminating illiteracy from the face of the earth.” Shuttle-launched advanced-version Nimbus satellites, combined with weather-modeling ground computers, would permit experiments in weather modification to dampen violent storms. Earth resources program data would provide precise picture of crop and timber conditions and extent of attacks by disease, drought, and fire. By 1980s, pilot space manufacturing operations might be in progress. “Super pure vaccine could thus be produced. Perfectly homogeneous alloys, fiber composites and perfectly round ball bearings are other possibilities.” During 1980s, “program of planetary exploration should record the completion of a close look at all the planets in our solar system as well as a detailed study of Mars, Jupiter and Venus. Large orbiting telescopes will be aimed at the outer reaches of the universe, examining such phenomena as quasars and pulsars.” (NYT, 12/4/72, 50)
Charles W. Mathews, NASA Associate Administrator for Applications, testified on future applications of NASA research in domestic communications before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1973 authorization hearings: “Domestic communications systems . . . will make available many television-handwidth channels, for both public and commercial use, to all the population . . . including remote and sparsely populated regions. Several . . . channels could be available for educational and instructional use. There are likely to be universities of the air which will permit many students . . . to achieve college degrees while spending only a small . . . time in academic residence.” Improved systems would “permit an increase in the number of people who could receive actual pre-school training and training in early-childhood education and health-care practices.” Health care could be improved and costs reduced through hroad public access to health-care services and information, while centralized health-record-keeping could aid hospital personnel, administrators, and private physicians. Two-way television teleconferences between health professionals could become possible. In law enforcement, “fingerprints and other criminal records and data could be almost instantaneously available anywhere in the country, and television conferencing could make possible the remote taking of testimony as well as remote identification procedures.” Postal service would improve “with the advent of electronic mail handling. Satellite links may be expected to carry a majority of the long distance letter mail, making inexpensive overnight delivery possible to all but the most remote locations. New satellite systems for aviation and maritime traffic management will reduce the accident rate and increase the efficiency of transoceanic and coastal transportation of goods and people. NASA Deep Space Network support of Mariner 9 mission (launched May 30, 1970) was described by Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition: “From lift-off on May 30 to insertion into its egg-shaped orbit around Mars on November 13 and continuing during orbital operations around Mars, Mariner 9 has been monitored and controlled by the deep space network. The navigational accuracy required to insert Mariner 9 into Martian orbit was unprecedented in prior flights into deep space. The aiming point . . . after a flight of about 380 million kilometers (240 million miles) was an area only 160 kilometers (100 miles) square. This represents an aiming area some 100,000 times smaller than was attainable for the Mariner 2 flight to Venus in 1962. Since the network issued the commands for retroengine firing and Mariner 9 was injected into orbit... the spacecraft has been completing two orbits of Mars each earth day and recording some 30 television pictures of the Martian surface on each orbit. After each orbit, when the spacecraft can be ‘seen’ by the Goldstone 64-meter [70-yard] antenna, Mariner 9 transmits back the tape recorded pictures upon command from the network.” (Transcript)
Phase II of prototype development program for advanced medium STOL (short takeoff and landing) transport (amst) was authorized by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Contractors Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. would design, build, and test two prototype aircraft, using existing engines, (dod Release 863-72) Dissident group, Scientists and Engineers for Social and Political Action, unsuccessfully attempted to disrupt opening aaas meeting and later held press conference to protest alleged AAAS attempts to “exclude political dissent from scientific and community groups.” (Lyons, NYT, 12/27/72, 14)	_ Space Shuttle Payloads Symposium Dec. 27-28 considered space shuttle system and its capability, science payloads, space operation roles, and other aspects of space shuttle system. Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in NASA Office of Space Science, discussed effect of data derived from Mars and Venus probes on understanding of solar system, during Dec. 29 session on NASA planetary research. (AAAS Bull, 11/72; AAAS PAO) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Deputy Director of National Science Foundation, presented progress report on nsf’s Research Applied to National Needs (rann) Program Dec. 29. rann, originated in August 1968, was “gaining in strength and effectiveness.” It had been receiving “excellent proposals in great numbers from good people” and had in hand “proposals which would cost over $400 million to support—which unfortunately, would somewhat overstrain our present budget.” (Text) William A. Fischer of U.S. Geological Survey said Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by NASA July 23) had discovered at least two major deposits that might contain large quantities of copper. “And if I were a geologist looking for oil and natural gas, I’d buy up every erts photograph of Northern Alaska and Northern Canada that I could get my hands on.” (Kirkman, Cl Press, 12/28/72) During shot meeting Dr. John B. Rae, Chairman of Dept, of Humanities and Social Sciences at Harvey Mudd College, was elected shot President for term expiring Dec. 31, 1974; Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, was elected to Advisory Council. (NASA Hist Off) December 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 541 from Plesetsk into orbit with 348-km (216.2-mi) apogee, 218-km (135.5-mi) perigee, 81.3° inclination, and 90.2-min period. Satellite reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; 1/31/73; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)
Discovery that calcium chloride concentration in brackish waters of ponds in Victorialand region of Antarctica—most Mars-like area on earth— prevented growth of microorganisms was announced by NASA. Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Dr. Roy E. Cameron and Frank A. Morelli had concluded that any water found on Mars might be as salty and sterile. They had successfully grown microorganisms in Antarctic soil samples, but no form survived when kept in pond water. “In this environment,” Dr. Cameron said, “the capacity of life to adapt and survive is pushed to its limit and beyond. The concentration of living things around water sources in the dry valleys and their thinning out and final disappearance on the cold, dry slopes may provide the model for the distribution of life we may . . . someday find on Mars.” (nasa Release 72-90)
Mission officials for Viking Mars mission were concerned about tenuous values of dielectric constant (measure of electrical charge a substance could withstand at a given electrical field strength) estimated from radar observations of Mars surface, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Massachusetts Institute of Technology investigators had found strong signal in 2-5 dielectric-constant range and weaker signal above that. Values suggested Mars had either hard bedrock surface impenetrable by spacecraft sampling equipment or deep dust surface that could not support landing vehicle. (Av Wk, 9/11/72, 11)
Soviet scientists writing in magazine Zemlya I Vsellennaya had suggested that canals on Mars were optical illusions created by dark features of Mars surface relief, Tass reported. Scientists—using data from U.S. Mariner 9 and U.S.S.R. Mars 2 and 3 spacecraft (all three launched in May 1971 and still in orbit around Mars)—had said large-scale pictures of Mars showed no signs of canals, but showed planet was pockmarked with craters. They had concluded Mars surface relief was about 300 million yrs old and that craters were destroyed twice as fast as those of moon because Mars atmosphere encouraged erosion, (fbis-Sov, 7/5/72, L4)
Last in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was held over White Sands Missile Range by Martin Marietta Corp. under Air Force Research Laboratories direction. Decelerator was dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft) to check out parachute system at subsonic conditions. In previous tests rocket motors had boosted speed after balloon had carried system to desired altitude. [See July 11 and 26, Aug. 13, and Dec. 14.] (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio; NASA Release 72-118) Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of stars in ultraviolet range between 1000 and 3000 A to investigate composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space and stellar sources. Secondary objective was to evaluate onboard computer, light baffle, inertial reference unit, electronically scanned star tracker, and heat pipes. Spacecraft carried two experiments—Princeton experiment package (pep), 80-cro (32-in) Cassegrainian telescope and photoelectric spectrometer; and Univ. College London (ucl) x-ray experiment containing three telescopes and collimated proportional counter. All spacecraft operations were carried out as planned, with spacecraft checkout completed Aug, 24, experiment checkout completed Aug. 26, and stabilization and control system checkout completed Aug. 28. By 2:00 pm edt Aug. 29 Oao 3 had completed 120 orbits with systems operating almost perfectly, pep was viewing bright star Zeta in constellation Ophiuchus and obtaining excellent data. UCL experiment was undergoing calibration and alignment and would begin observing x-ray sources in September. Fourth OAO launched by NASA, Oao 3 at 2200 kg (4900 lbs), 2 m wide and 3 m high (7 x 10 ft), was heaviest and most complex automated spacecraft developed by U.S. It had new gyro inertial reference unit with four star trackers, electrically scanned star tracker, precision digital solar-aspect sensor, and onboard computer that could handle 16000, 18-bit words and store 1024 ground commands. OAO-B had crashed Nov. 30, 1970, when shroud failed to separate after launch. Oao 2 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was still returning valuable data. Oao 1 (launched April 8, 1966) had failed because of high-voltage arcing in star trackers and malfunction in power supply system. OAO program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72-156)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1970, 1971, 1972 (nsf 71-35). Federal obligations for research and development (r&d) in 1970 totaled $15.3 billion excluding plant; slight rise to $15.4 billion was expected for 1971. Figure was decrease of 5% in constant dollars. Basic research obligations were expected to rise from $2.1 billion in 1970 to $2.2 billion for 1971 and $2.4 billion for 1972. Federal support for basic research declined in 1970 but was expected to reach new record highs for 1971 and 1972. Bulk of Federal basic research, 81%, was funded by NASA; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; National Science Foundation; Atomic Energy Commission; and Dept, of Defense. NASA had led in basic research support since 1961, with 29% of total in 1971. Applied research obligations totaled $3.5 billion in 1970 and were expected to rise to $3.8 billion for 1971, increase of 8%. Total was expected to reach $4.2 billion in 1972—all-time high in current dollars. dod, hew, and NASA continued to dominate Federal applied research effort and would account for 78% in 1971. Obligations for development totaled $9.7 billion in 1970 and would decline 3%, to $9.4 billion, in 1971. In 1972, Federal development total was scheduled to rise to $10.0 billion, or 1966 level, dod, nasa, and AEC were most prominent in Federal development effort in 1960-1972, accounting for 92% in 1971. dod funded 63%; nasa share had declined since 1965 to expected 19% for 1971. Although total Federal R&D obligations were expected to increase 9% from 1970 to 1972, nasa and aec decrease continued. NASA estimate for 1972, however, was smallest reduction since downward trend began in 1967. Report noted increases in key programs—Skylab, space shuttle, Viking Mars explorations, and unmanned missions to outer planets—had almost offset decreases in Apollo program. (Text)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on planetary exploration program at opening session of FY 1973 nasa authorizatization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Dr. Naugle presented plan under study for “much more modest outer planets exploration program” instead of originally proposed two-mission, four-spacecraft Grand Tour of all outer planets, canceled because of budgetary restrictions. Jupiter exploration would continue. “We are studying a mission for the initial exploration of Saturn. We would take advantage of the rare alinement of the planets to launch two Mariner-class spacecraft in 1977 on a trajectory which would carry them first past Jupiter and on to Saturn to investigate that strange planet. ... At present, this program appears to be an excellent outer planets mission within the current constraints. However, we are studying other options with our science advisory groups to determine the set of outer planets missions which provide the most significant scientific information.” Viking project to softland spacecraft on Mars in 1976 remained “most significant element of the ongoing planetary exploration program.” Mariner 9’s orbiting of Mars had been major highlight in 1971 planetary program. To date, “Mariner 9 . . . has been in orbit 96 days, is still healthy and operating nominally. ... it has transmitted back to Earth over 5700 pictures of Mars, a number of closeups of its two moons, and measurements of surface features and atmospheric properties by ultraviolet and infrared spectrometers.” NASA had mapped approximately 66% of Martian surface at resolution of 1 km (0.6 mi) or better. “To date we have visited Venus and Mars, and will soon reach Jupiter and Mercury. Within the next year we shall have studied Mars in detail from orbit and within 5 years shall have begun an intensive automated exploration of its surface. By the end of the decade we expect to know whether life exists, has existed, or could exist on Mars.” Three spacecraft to be launched in 1972 would open “brand new areas of research or application.” Pioneer-F would be launched in March to begin study of Jupiter. Next, Earth Resources Technology Satellite would open new field of earth study. In fall, astronomy Explorer satellite would begin to study gamma rays from stars. Major
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on use of U-2 aircraft to map storm damage in Chesapeake Bay area [see June 2]. Soviet Embassy had purchased residence in area and was improving property. “We just hope every precaution will be taken with the flood-mapping spy plane, so that the new era of sweetness and light between the United States and the Soviet Union will not come crashing down in flames just because somebody at the CIA wants an aerial closeup of the Russians’ new basketball court.” (W Star, 7/10/72) July 11:	Viking parachute system to lower instruments onto Mars surface in 1976 was damaged during first in series of three high-altitude tests over White Sands Missile Range. Parachute was carried to 5900-m (19 500-ft) altitude by large balloon and then boosted upward to supersonic speed by rocket. Damage had occurred when parachute deployed at 43 300-m (142 000-ft) altitude, where dynamic pressure reached 689.5 newtons per sq m (14.4 psf), instead of in thinner air at 45 300 m (148 500 ft) with 598.5 newtons per sq m (12.5 psf) as planned. Objective was to demonstrate capability of parachute system at highest speed and most severe loading conditions expected at Mars. NASA said parachute would have functioned satisfactorily in actual Mars landing. Since launch was only partially successful, it would be repeated in August. [See July 26, Aug. 13 and 19, Dec. 14.] (nasa Release 72-118; NASA proj off; Today, 7/14/72)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had approved recommendations of joint working session of scientists on planetary exploration held in Madrid May 19-20, NASA announced. Session had recommended that Mars study try to determine physical and chemical properties of planet’s surface, seek evidence of biological activity, determine precise composition of Mars atmosphere, and ascertain role of water in Mars’ evolution. Venus study should determine how and why planet became hotter than earth by determining planet’s atmospheric composition, cloud structure, depth of sunlight penetration in Venusian atmosphere, and characteristics of Venusian surface. Outer planets study should emphasize exploration of Jupiter and Saturn and environments. Session agreed meeting should be held before year’s end to define promising Mars landing sites and small group of U.S. and Soviet scientists should meet to consider probe of Venusian atmosphere. Madrid session had been held in accordance with recommendation of Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Exploration of NearEarth Space, the Moon and the Planets, made Aug. 6,1971. Cochairmen of Madrid session were Dr. Georgy I. Petrov of Soviet Academy and Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in nasa Office of Space Science, (nasa Release 72-187)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe—orbiting Mars since Nov. 13, 1971—had resumed its scientific examination of Mars following engineering analysis of onboard computer, NASA announced. Cameras had been turned off March 17 while trouble-shooting procedures were conducted. Cause of problem had not been determined, but systems were working properly and problem had not recurred. Mariner 9 was 288 million km (179 million mi) from earth and had returned 7000 pictures of Mars and mapped 85% of Mars since launch May 30, 1971. Last pictures to be taken by Mariner 9 until first week in June had been recorded March 22 and 23 and science instruments would be turned off March 30. From April 2 to June 4 Mariner 9 would pass through Mars shadow once during each orbit for periods of up to 100 sec, during which spacecraft would operate on battery power. Limited science operations would resume after June 4, with spacecraft recording data and taking pictures about once a week until mission ended in November. Primary objectives of mission had been completed Feb. 11. (NASA Release 72-67)
Brazilian Agriculture Minister Cirne Lima inaugurated new meteorological satellite tracking station in Brasilia, Brazil. Station was second built in Brazil; first was in Rio de Janeiro. (FBis-Brazil, 2/3/72, D3) February 2:	Mariner 9 news conference was held at NASA Hq. Spacecraft (launched May 31, 1971) was in 81st day in Mars orbit, had accepted 25 000 commands, and had taken about 5000 pictures. Dr. Bradford Smith of New Mexico State Univ. said wind-transported dust that had obscured early Mariner 9 photography was more widespread and occurred more frequently than generally had been supposed; substantial quantities of surface dust were displaced each Martian year by local winds that varied with season and with specific areagraphie location; and large-scale atmospheric instabilities occurred, producing hemispheric and global dust storms which were seasonal but apparently did not occur every Martian year. Storm observed by Mariner 9 had begun in late September 1971, reached its peak in late October, and had cleared slowly until mid-December. Planet was quite clear in February. Mariner .9 photos included pictures of huge volcano with base 500 km (300 mi) wide, Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey told press. “. . . as the storm cleared we were able to establish that the dark spots that we saw barely sticking up through at first” were “the very summit of Nix Olympica. This tall mountain with a complex crater at the top and the scalloped edges and the flat, or non-raised rims indicated to us that this was probably a multiple volcanic vent. As the storm continued clearing finally we could see all the way down to the great plains at the base of the mountain. Now this is a great volcanic pile .. . twice as big as the great volcanic pile that forms the Hawaiian Islands. The Hawaiian pile is about 225 kilometers [140 miles] across and . . . about 9 kilometers [6 miles] high. It is the largest volcanic pile on the earth. It is something like 32,000 feet [9800 meters] from the floor of the Pacific to the top of the mountain.” Photos also showed “spectacular channel” 100 km (60 mi) long with numerous side branching valleys that ended in featureless areas. Absence of vents at ends of valleys made gaseous eruption formation improbable and suggested channel might have been formed by water erosion. Highest amount of water vapor—one thousandth of that in earth’s atmosphere—above Mars’ south polar cap suggested that water vapor was being released from region as cap retreated. Absence of vapor over north polar cap indicated that water vapor there was condensed in carbon dioxide and was transported by storm or by general circulation from south polar cap to north polar cap. Vapor over south polar regions was slightly less than 20 precipitable micrometers. Mariner 9 photos of Mars had provided data which conflicted with data from 1969 Mariner 7 Mars probe. From 1969 photos of heavily cratered planet experimenters had decided that Mars was “a dead planet, very primordial . . . the product of the accumulation of the cosmic debris that fell in to form the planet.” Mariner 9 photos showed “something very, very different indeed. ... we can see the great volcanic piles and because of the crispness of the edges and the lack of craters, we think these are geologically young . . . [and] we have a geochemically evolved planet.” Comparison of 1969 and 1971 photos showed that south polar cap regions completely covered by frost in 1969 were only partially covered in 1971. During period when photographed by Mariner 9 little separations had widened and solid carbon dioxide coverage had broken up until many dark spots showed through as the ice sublimated and revealed underlying dark rocks. Dr. Charles A. Barth of Univ. of Colorado reported that Mars atmosphere was primarily carbon dioxide but also contained atomic hydrogen and atomic oxygen. “The atomic oxygen comes presumably from the photo-dissociation of carbon dioxide and the atomic hydrogen comes most probably from the photo-dissociation of water vapor.” Amount of atomic hydrogen varied very little with altitude. Atomic hydrogen extended some 20 000 km (12 000 mi) from planet like a “great big sphere of glowing hydrogen atoms with the spacecraft running around through it. Those hydrogen atoms are put there from photo-dissociating water vapor and because of the very low gravitational field of Mars, it is relatively easy for these atoms to escape. In fact, the picture that we have, is that water comes up out of the surface of Mars, goes into the lower atmosphere . . . [and] gets deposited in the polar caps; when the polar caps thaw, it is released into the atmosphere.” Atomic hydrogen was escaping into upper atmosphere at rate equal to 380 cu m (100 000 gallons) of water per day. (Transcript)
Map of entire globe of Mars—first detailed map of another planet, prepared by U.S. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) and processed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory—was published by New York Times. Map showed entire Martian surface in Mercator projection at scale of 1 to 25 million at equator and in two special polar projections. Other maps were being prepared for even more detailed study of Mars. Map reprinted in Times would be released by U.S. Geological Survey early in January. Times commented that map was produced in Flagstaff, Ariz., few miles from mountain-top observatory where Dr. Percival Lowell in 1877 observed presumed canals on Mars that “inspired so many tales of Martians,” canals that were “nowhere to be seen on the map of Mariner 9.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/27/72, 1, 30; usgs Map Info Off)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe photographed area of Mars 800 km (500 mi) from south pole from 3335-km (2072-mi) altitude. Photos, released to press Jan. 11, showed pits and hollows—including two large closed basins 16 km (10 mi) wide—with more detail than seen before. According to Dr. Carl E. Sagan of Cornell Univ., spots occurred in sizes from more than 160 km (100 mi) to size of Yankee Stadium in New York. Many blotches seemed to be associated with craters, indicating that they might be wind shadows where hill or other feature had protected downwind area from dust deposition. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/12/72, 1)	_ _
Legislation to rename Jet Propulsion Laboratory as H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory effective Jan. 4 [see Oct. 21] had set off negative reaction, Los Angeles Times reported. “General feeling” among JPL scientists and engineers was that Laboratory and its work should not be involved with politics. Protest petition had been signed by 210 students of California Institute of Technology, which operated Laboratory for NASA. Cal Tech officials were surprised and concerned at not having been consulted about change and planned to talk to Government officials in Washington, D.C. {LA Times, 11/5/72) * Spokesman for Cape Kennedy local of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees said Boeing Co. officials had defied union demands to submit wage dispute to Federal arbitrators. Attorney Bernard Mamet said 60 members of local had vowed to walk out by Dec, 5 if their request was denied. He said Boeing had halted negotiations in eight-month dispute and had refused to resume talks before Nov. 14. Boeing technical writers were asking at least partial restoration of April 1971 wage cut. Dispute had raised “slim threat” of walkout on eve of Apollo 17 launch, Orlando Sentinel said later. Sympathy strike by other locals of union could cause “serious problems.” (0 Sen, 11/8/72) November 6:	NASA selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for two unmanned Viking spacecraft in summer 1976 was announced by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs, in telephone interview. NASA also released Mariner 9 photos of sites-— two at edge of Nix. Olympics slopes, another near slopes of three smaller volcanoes north of canyons along Martian equator, fourth on desert plain, and fifth in region of flattened craters at edge of highland terrain. Observations from Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had shown sites were low, relatively warm regions, possibly moist, where life form was most likely to be discovered. Prime objective of Viking missions was to determine if Mars harbored life or potential for life. In choosing sites, project scientists had eliminated nearly one third of Mars because of high elevations. In mountainous regions, Viking parachutes would not have sufficient atmosphere to brake spacecraft descent. Scientists also had rejected areas where surface appeared too soft for spacecraft landing, too hard for retrieval of soil samples, or so steep that spacecraft might tip over on landing. Attention had centered November 6:	Selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for mass's two unmanned Viking spacecraft in 1976 was announced. The map showing the sites was based on photos televised from Mariner 9, launched May 30, 1971, and in orbit around Mars since Nov. 13, 1972. All the sites were fairly smooth areas near scientifically interesting geological features and were in regions of the planet where warmer temperatures and greater likelihood of water increased chances of finding evidence of life. The first map of the entire globe of Mars, prepared by the VS. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9, was published Nov. 27. on broad Mars equatorial band with brightest sunlight and highest temperatures, which increased chance of finding water vapor in atmosphere and thus of finding biological activity. Landing zones were about 65 km (40 mi) wide and 650 km (400 mi) long. Precise sites would be selected after further analysis of Mariner 9 photos. U.S. and Soviet scientists 'would meet during winter to compare Mars landing targets. There was “no use in landing on top of each- other. We would also like to optimize the coverage of Mars.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/7/72, 61; NASA pio)
Vladimir A. Kirillin, Chairman of U.S.S.R. State Committee for Science and Technology, and Soviet space expert Academician Boris Petrov, held Moscow press conference following signing of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space and science and technology agreements. Petrov said: “It is difficult to overestimate the importance of these works, this research, which has pursued humane goals of ensuring the safety of space flights. The concluded agreements give ground for the belief that these directions in Soviet-American cooperation in outer space will develop successfully in the future.” Kirillin said of science and technology agreement: “I think that if we get down to the realization, to the implementation of this agreement, it will definitely yield positive results.” (Transcript) May 25:	NASA’s Mariner 9 spacecraft, in its seventh month in Mars orbit, was in period of both sun occultation (April 2-June 4) and earth occultation (May 6-June 24) for short periods of each orbit. Sun occultations—when spacecraft passed into shadow of Mars and was powered by onboard battery—were declining from peak total time of 97 min. Only data from celestial mechanics and earth occultation experiments and engineering telemetry were being received. Battery was recharging satisfactorily twice daily and spacecraft was in good condition. Earth occultation—when Mars was between spacecraft and earth— varied from 43 to 90 min orbit. Resumption of limited data acquisition from scientific instruments would begin in June to conserve attitude control gas. (NASA Special Release)
Tenth year of interplanetary exploration was celebrated by Jet Propulsion Laboratory on 10th anniversary of arrival at Venus of Mariner 2, launched by NASA Aug. 27, 1962. Five more Mariners—designed and built by JPL engineers—had been launched during decade. In 1965 Mariner 4 (launched Nov. 28, 1964) flew by Mars, obtaining first close-up pictures. Mariner 5 (launched June 14, 1967) helped determine atmosphere of Venus was 75 to 100 times more dense than earth’s. Mariner 6 (launched Feb. 24, 1969) and Mariner 7 (launched Mar. 27, 1969) took photographs of Mars surface from as close as 3500 km (2200 mi). Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) gathered data during 698 revolutions of Mars, provided map of entire planet, and showed evidence of volcanic activity and free-flowing water in planet’s geologic history, (jpl Release 640; A&A 1962; nasa Release 72-241)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
Science agreements signed during U.S.-U.S.S.R. summit meetings May 22-26 were praised in Science article: “Taken together, they represent not only a significant expansion of programs already in existence, but forays into areas hitherto unexplored.” Agreements were designed to “insulate cooperative scientific endeavors from the stresses of international politics by putting authority into the hands of appropriate government agencies rather than the foreign ministries.” In space agreement, “nasa is operating on the assumption that the joint docking is only the first in a series of increasingly ambitious mutual experiments—serving both the causes of economy and international understanding—which could conceivably lead to something as grandiose as a joint landing on Mars 20 years hence.” (Holden, Science, 6/9/72, 1106-8)
Air Force qualification of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was announced by Air Force Systems Command. Qualification had followed July 11 and 26 and Aug. 13 and 19 tests by Martin Marietta Corp. at Roswell and White Sands, N. Mex. Tests had included supersonic, transonic, and free-fall environments. In Aug. 19 test, decelerator had been dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft). Previous tests had used rocket motors ignited after balloon had taken test system to desired altitude. In each test, decelerator deployed to slow down simulated softlanding instrument package, (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio)
Pravda article by scientists from Soviet Academy of Sciences Institute of Space Studies described preliminary results from U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 probes. Spacecraft (launched May 19 and May 28, 1971) had measured atmospheric humidity and surface temperature, photometered atmosphere and surface, and photographed surface. Temperature along route from 58° south latitude, 330° longitude to 30° north latitude, 190° longitude had been determined. Highest temperature—recorded near mid-day region—was 253 K (—20°C; —4°F). On night side of planet temperature dropped to 183 K (—90°C; —130°F). Dust storm that had covered Mars since Mars 2 reached planet Nov. 27, 1971, was subsiding. “Photometric recordings obtained by means of the red filtre show dark areas corresponding to the Martian ‘seas’ that were previously absolutely undistinguishable. But the recordings made with the ultraviolet filter again showed bright clouds.” Onboard instruments to record emissions in three spectral bands containing lines of hydrogen, oxygen, and argon atoms showed that hydrogen emissions stretched to more than 3400-km (2100-mi) altitude and oxygen atoms concentrated near surface up to 600-800 km (370-500 mi). (Tass, fbis-Sov, 1/10/72, L3)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Tass reported completion of U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 missions. Spacecraft, launched May 19 and'May 28, 1971, had reached Mars in November and December 1971 and had transmitted data on planet and atmosphere. Mars 3 instrumented capsule had landed on Mars and transmitted data from surface for 20 sec. Preliminary findings were: temperature ranged from 163 K (— 166°F) to 286 K (55°F); soil had low conductivity, with Martian seas warmer than continents; surface-level atmospheric pressure was 50-60 newtons per sq m (5.5-6 millibars), 200 times less than earth’s; carbon dioxide atmosphere broke up into carbonic oxide molecule and oxygen atom at 100-km (62-mi) altitude; atmosphere was 10 times less dense than earth’s and was closer to surface; and magnetic field charges exceeded interplanetary background level 8 times. (fbis-Sov, 8/25/72, LI)
Second in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of Viking parachute system was conducted over White Sands Missile Range. Helium-filled balloon lifted simulated Viking entry vehicle from Roswell, N. Mex., to 11 200-m (36 880-ft) altitude where payload was dropped and rocket motors ignited, boosting payload to 41 000-m (135 000-ft) altitude. Parachute deployed as planned and payload landed at wsmr about 56 km (35 mi) northwest of Holloman Air Force Base. Objective—to check parachute system at transonic conditions and at lowest parachute loading conditions expected over Mars—was met. Successful completion of three tests—one supersonic, one transonic, and one subsonic— would qualify Viking parachute system for use on Mars mission scheduled for launch in 1975. [See July 11, Aug. 13 and 19, Dec. 14.] (nasa Release 72-118; NASA proj off)
Report of Soviet progress in space presented at annual meeting of Soviet Academy of Sciences appeared in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Academician M. D. Millionschikov said 1971 had been year of achievement in space. Creation of “the world’s first manned orbital scientific station, Salyut, was a major event. . . . Exploration of the moon and the planets with the help of automatic space vehicles has continued. Recently, a magnificent space experiment was completed—the Luna-20 automatic station’s delivery to earth of soil samples from the almost inaccessible' lunar mountain region. Two automatic ‘Mars’ stations were created. . . . Separating from the Mars-2 station, a capsule landed a pennant. . . and the Mars-3 descent vehicle made the first soft landing on the surface of Mars. In addition to the scientific exploration of space, broad plans were elaborated for utilizing satellites for extra-atmosphere astronomy. Work began on the utilization of satellites for exploring natural resources in the interests of the national economy including geological survey work, agriculture, forestry, water economy, fishing, the hydro-meteorological service, and geodesy.” (fbis—Sov, 3/13/72, L2)	_
Scientists were developing estimate of interactions between unvisited deep-space planets and solar wind in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration project to program future deep-space missions. Series of space environment models had been developed by Ames Research Center scientists Dr. Arthur W. Rizzi, NOAA physicist Dr. Murray Dryer, and Dr. Wen-we Shen of Texas Instruments, Inc. Scaled magnetopause or ionospheric shell had been made for each planet by using available data on earth, Mars, and Venus, and extending models that had worked well for these planets to cases of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, (noaa Release 72-161)
U.S.S.R. hoped to land robot life-detection laboratory on Mars within few years, according to Leninskoye Znamya (Lenin’s Banner) newspaper article by Soviet space experts. Automatic Microbiological Laboratory would scoop up sample of Martian soil and examine it for microorganisms such as bacteria, yeasts, and fungi that might be able to survive in thin Martian atmosphere. Laboratory would also draw Martian air through filter to trap and analyze microorganisms and would detect emission of heat and carbon dioxide. (Wilford, NYT, 3/27/72, 7; upi, W News, 3/13/72, 5)
Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70 (Senate Document 92-51) was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The 670-page report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.— noted that Soviet space program remained “a strong and growing enterprise” unhindered by budgetary strain and undimmed by deaths of three Soyuz cosmonauts in 1971. Current level of Soviet space activity exceeded that of U.S. at its peak in 1966, with perhaps 2% of Soviet gross national product devoted to space (U.S. spent about 1% of its gnp at peak). Although U.S. launch record had been declining steadily since 1966, Soviet launches had continued to climb, at least until 1970. Contrary to assertion that it was concentrating its efforts on unmanned program rather than manned program, U.S.S.R. apparently was still planning manned lunar landing and might spend $49 million on both advanced unmanned and manned lunar programs. U.S. would have committed $35 billion to total Apollo program when complete. In unmanned research satellite program “the level of activity currently runs ahead of the corresponding level of work at NASA.” Compendium of every known Soviet launch that had achieved orbit showed that, along with scientific satellites, Cosmos program consisted of unmanned tests of spacecraft designed to carry cosmonauts, lunar and planetary probes that failed to leave earth orbit, unsuccessful Mars probes, and military research and development and observation satellites that accounted for 80% of Cosmos payloads. According to study, Cosmos series through April 1971 had included at least 16 tests of fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and 22 tests of experimental spacecraft designed to inspect and destroy other nations’ observation and navigation satellites. Soviet achievements in near future were dependent on success or failure of G booster (in Saturn V class) or similar booster. Studies of moon with Luna series spacecraft would continue, perhaps with spacecraft launched by advanced booster carrying both rovers and sample returners. Planetary program would continue, probably with flyby mission to Jupiter and landing mission to Mars. Dr. Sheldon stressed that “the Soviet program is not a sham. It may be exploited for political purposes, but it is real and it is pursued in earnest.” (Text)
Special awards ceremony marking outstanding success of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars mission was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—assisted by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology—presented 32 NASA medals. Dan Schneiderman, Manager of Mariner Project, was awarded NASA Distinguished Service Medal for “creative leadership in conception, organizational planning, and management of a highly efficient Mariner 9 team which . . . achieved all objectives of the most successfully productive mission to Mars.” (JPL Release 624)
Experiments at U.S.S.R.’s Radio Physics Institute had suggested that upper Mars mantle was hard and porous like earth dendrites, Tass reported. Report on study had said small, isolated dust regions were source of Mars dust storms and there was no uninterrupted dust mantle. Dust over Martian surface was no more than 1 mm (0.04 in) thick. White polar caps were reported to be hard-frozen carbon dioxide. (fbis-Sov, 7/31/72, LI)
Decision to plan large multipurpose optical telescope to be launched and serviced by space shuttle in 1980s was announced by NASA. Large Space Telescope (lst) to study energy processes in galactic nuclei, early stages of stellar and solar system formation, supernova remnants and white dwarfs, and other phenomena relevant to origin of universe would also provide long-term monitoring of atmospheric phenomena on Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Telescope, able to observe galaxies 100 times fainter than those seen by most powerful ground-based optic telescope, would weigh between 9000 and 11000 kg (20 000 and 25 000 lbs) and have length of 12 to 16 m (40 to 52 ft) and diameter of 3.6 to 4 m (12 to 13 ft). It would include diffraction-limited mirror with 3-m (10-ft) diameter. LST project management had been assigned to Marshall Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 72—98)
Mariner 9 probe (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) completed 232 orbits of Mars. Primary mission objective of photographing Mars from south pole to northern hood had been completed. Jet Propulsion Laboratory was preparing to assemble map of Mars, using more than 100 overlapping pictures taken by Mariner 9 and data from onboard instruments for corresponding surface and atmospheric characteristics. (nasa Release 72—48)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory was fashioning three large photomosiac spheres of Mars from thousands of photos taken by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971, to become the first spacecraft to orbit another planet Nov. 13, 1971). Two 1.2-m (4-ft) globes would be completed, one for NASA Hq. and one for Lewis Research Center. A 1.8-m (6-ft) globe would be exhibited in JPl’s museum, (jpl PIO; Miles, LA Times, 7/22/73)
NASA Public Information Director Richard T. Mittauer died of Hodgkin’s disease in Alexandria, Va., at age 46. He had joined NASA in 1959 and had received a NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work on the 1971 Mariner Mars mission. (W Star & News, 7/2/73, B5) July 2:	The Skylab 3 mission to carry the second crew to work and live aboard the Skylab 1 Workshop (launched May 14) would be launched no earlier than 7:08 am EDT July 28, NASA announced. Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean (commander), Dr. Owen K. Garriott (science pilot), and Jack R...Lousma (pilot) would conduct scientific and technical experiments for 56 days. Splashdown was scheduled for 8:38 pm edt Sept. 22 in the Pacific, (nasa Release 73-125)
Selection of the Chryse valley near the mouth of the Martian Grand Canyon and of Cydonia in the Mare Acidalium, 1600 km (1000 mi) northeast, as landing sites for NASA’s two unmanned Viking spacecraft in July and August 1976 was announced at an Hq. press conference. The two spacecraft were scheduled for launch on their year-long, 740-million-km (460-million-mi) journey toward Mars in the summer 1975. The sites had been selected by prominent scientists after a one-year evaluation of 22 potential areas for scientific interest and the probability of a successful landing. The possibility of finding water at these sites increased the chances of finding evidence of life. Backup sites were Tritonis Lacus and Alba. Arriving at Mars, the spacecraft would enter a highly elliptical orbit and then separate into two parts, an orbiter and a lander. Each lander would carry a miniature chemical laboratory to analyze Martian soil for signs of life. A 3-m (10-ft) retractable claw would scoop soil samples for analysis. Other instruments would analyze the atmosphere and measure pressure, temperature, wind velocity, and quake activity. The orbiter would perform visual, thermal, and water-vapor mapping. (Transcript; nasa Release 73-91)
Climatic changes on Mars indicated by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA
A New York Times editorial noted that “works aimed at exploring the planets by instruments of the most diverse sort” continued activity after the close of manned exploration of the moon. It commented on the discovery by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists that the Venus equatorial area was dominated by huge craters [see Aug. 5]. (NYT, 8/8/73, 32) Mars 7, which would reach its destination in mid-March 1974, was similar in design and mission to Mars 6. Both spacecraft—intended for exploration of Mars, near-Mars space, and the interplanetary medium— carried Soviet- and French-built scientific equipment. All four Mars probes would carry out research in combination. Tass said Mars 4 would perform experiments using instruments on Mars 6 while Mars 5 would work in conjunction with Mars 7. On Aug. 10, at 4:00 am Baykonur time (7:00 pm edt, Aug. 9), Mars 4 was 6 432 000 km (3 997 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 5, 5 067 000 km (3 148 000 mi) from the earth; Mars 6, 1535 000 km (954 000 mi) from the earth; and Mars 7, 102 000 km (63 000 mi) from the earth. Tass reported that all spacecraft were proceeding according to their programs. A midcourse correction of the Mars 6 trajectory Aug. 13 and of the Mars 7 trajectory Aug. 16 put the flight paths “within the pre-set limits.” Tass said onboard systems of all four probes were functioning normally and measurements were being made of physical characteristics of interplanetary space, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; fbis-Sov, 8/10/73, LI; 8/16/73, LI; 8/17/73, LI; SBD, 8/13/73, 217) August 9:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of identical, parallel, $800 000, 17-mo contracts to Itek Corp. Optical Systems Div. and Perkin-Elmer Corp. for competing preliminary designs and program definition of the Large Space Telescope (lst). The large, multipurpose, orbiting, optical astronomical facility would be launched by the space shuttle, which also would return it to the earth for major maintenance and refurbishment. The LST would use a 3-m (10-ft) primary mirror and—because of its size, quality, and location above the earth’s atmosphere—would be able to resolve objects 10 times smaller and 100 times fainter than those observed by ground telescope, (msfc Release 73—110)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. would lay off 1000 employees to reduce operating expenses, the New York Times reported. The expense paring had been ordered by Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements to increase operating efficiency after the controversy over increasing costs of the Crumman-produced F-14 fighter aircraft. (Andelman, NYT, 3/28/73, P28) March 28—29:	Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: The Office of Space Science had assumed total responsibility for collecting, handling, and analyzing data from the Apollo program, and “we plan to devote the next several years to their detailed analysis and interpretation. Our objective is a better understanding of the origin, history and present environment of the Moon, and the definition of goals and objectives of possible future flight programs. These studies will also use the data from the still-continuing flight program of the Soviet Union.” The French-built laser reflector on the Soviet lunar roving vehicle Lunokhod 2 deposited on the moon by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), “in addition to the three carried by Apollos 11, 14, and 15, provides another control point for lunar mapping studies and other scientific objectives. The close cooperation between the French and Soviets in putting the device on the Moon and between the Americans and French in securing early observations is a striking example of the possibilities for effective scientific cooperation in space among the nations of the world.” Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972) was “very much a pathfinder as it goes to Jupiter. We know Jupiter has intense radiation fields. We plan for Pioneer 10 to pass by Jupiter about three-and-a-half Jupiter radii from the planet. We think that Pioneer 10 at that distance . . . will be able to survive as it goes through those radiation belts. If by chance it does not, then we would probably retarget Pioneer G so that it stayed farther out.” If Pioneer 10 survived the radiation belts, “we would probably target Pioneer G closer so that we could get a better look at Jupiter and get more information about the intensity of the radiation belts as we get closer to Jupiter.” (Transcript) March 28-30:	A symposium on federally sponsored university research in transportation noise was conducted at Stanford Univ. by the Dept, of Transportation in cooperation with NASA and the National Science Foundation. Papers presented by university researchers and representatives of Government agencies covered jet noise, combustion noise, noise from moving bodies, sound propagation through ducts, rotor noise, high-intensity sound, tire noise, and economic and community aspects of noise, (dot Release 15-73; dot pio) March 29:	usns Vanguard, 181-m (595-ft) nasa tracking ship, left Port Canaveral, Fla., for Mar Del Plata, Argentina, to support Skylab missions scheduled to begin in May. Vanguard would be a link in NASA’s worldwide tracking network relaying two-way information between a spacecraft and mission control at Johnson Space Center in Houston via Goddard Space Flight Center. En route Vanguard would record tracking data for the Pioneer G launch scheduled for April 5. (gfsc Release; Skylab prog off)
Univ. of Texas physicists A. A. Jackson IV and Michael P. Ryan, Jr., proposed in a Nature article that the event that leveled forests in a wide region of Siberia on June 30, 1908, was the passage of a black hole that had plunged completely through the earth. They suggested that ships’ logs for that date be examined for evidence of an unusual occurrence. The object that fell on Siberia had been referred to as the Tunguska meteorite, although it had left no crater or other clearly identifiable meteorite residue. “We suggest that a black hole of substellar mass . . . could explain many of the mysteries associated with the event.” (Nature, 9/14/73, 88-89) September 14—23:	The first major international aerospace show in Latin America was held in Sao Paulo, Brazil. More than 250 firms from 11 nations displayed products from satellite equipment to metal forgings, aircraft, helicopters, and small components. Aircraft exhibited included the British Hawker Siddeley Harrier vstol [vertical or short takeoff and landing] fighter, Fokker F-28 twin-jet transport, Israel Aircraft Industries’ Arava cargo transport, Aeronautica Macchi MB-326 jet trainer-fighter, Aerospatiale A-300B Airbus, Canadair CL-215 amphibian, Northrop F-5E light jet fighter aircraft, and Lockheed C-5A heavy logistic transport. Of the nations invited to participate by the sponsoring Brazilian Ministry of Aeronautics, only Japan and the U.S.S.R. had declined. (Av Wk, 9/17/73, 22; Interavia, 9/73, 954) September 17:	The liquid-fueled “core” vehicle of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was moved from the Vertical Integration Building to the Solid Motor Assembly Building in the Titan complex at Kennedy Space Center. Twin 26-m (85-ft) solid-fueled-rocket strap-on boosters would be attached to the core. The Titan-Centaur, scheduled to be launched on its proof flight in January 1974, mated the Titan III core vehicle and its twin solid-fueled rockets with the Centaur high-energy liquid-fueled final stage. The 49-m (160-ft), 3610-kg (7959-lb) configuration was designed to carry heavy payloads on orbital and planetary missions, such as the Viking Mars mission and the joint U.S. and West German Helios mission to the sun, during the mid- and late 1970s. The liftoff thrust of the twin solid-fueled boosters was 10.8 million newtons (2.4 million lbs). On its proof flight the Titan-Centaur would carry a mass model of the Viking spacecraft and a 66-kg (145-lb) Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment (sphinx) spacecraft, to measure in orbit for one year the interaction of space plasmas with high-voltage surfaces. The main purpose of the flight would be to demonstrate that the launch vehicle and launch facilities could support operational missions and that the Centaur could perform an operational two-burn mission and an operational three-burn mission carrying a payload to a synchronous altitude of 35 888 km (22 300 mi). The effort to integrate the Titan with the Centaur had begun in the mid-1960s when NASA recognized the need to fill a performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and Saturn launch vehicles, (ksc Release 215-73)	*
A need “to shift gears and return to the main line of development in space flight” was underlined by Michael A. G. Michaud in a Spaceflight article: The purposes of space flight “go far beyond our lifetime. Ultimately, our journey away from Earth will determine the future of the human race; this millennial, evolutionary effort must not founder now for lack of a satisfying rationale.” The basic purpose of space flight was “to expand the realm of Man.” Reasons were to challenge human abilities, learn more about the universe we live in, search for extraterrestrial intelligence and prepare for contact with it, develop and test technologies for earth use, stimulate and employ advanced sectors of the economy, improve orbital applications of space technology with immediate benefits, develop and test military technology, and encourage international cooperation. Michaud proposed a medium-term program to the year 2000 to assemble a manned space station in earth orbit, build a base on the moon, land human beings on Mars by 2000, prepare for interstellar flight, search for planets in other systems, and begin the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. A long-term program beyond 2000 would plan to send unmanned probes to the most promising nearby stars, create a permanent colony on Mars, experiment in planetary engineering—possibly on Venus, “where orbiting space vehicles could introduce materials into the atmosphere that might change its composition” —launch the first manned interstellar flights, and communicate with extraterrestrial intelligence. [SF, 10/73, 362-5)
New Mexico Univ. geologist Dr. Bradford A. Smith said riverbeds on Mars probably had dried because of orbital changes. When the Mars orbit was more elliptical than at present, the perihelion would be much closer to the sun, perhaps producing long-term climate changes which might, “at certain times, permit liquid water to exist.” Dr. Conway B. Leovy, Univ. of Washington, said dust storms encountered by Mariner 9 were “phenomena which will recur on Mars depending on the particular astronomical relationship between the perihelion and the solstice.” Dust storms might have been responsible for “the remarkable laminated terrain which has been observed in both polar zones.” Scientists had determined from Mariner 9 photos that the planet was a more varied and dynamic body than expected. Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences, said: “Mars is like three planets: the old cratered planet, the young volcanic active planet that you see, and then an entirely different situation in the polar regions in Mars.” Mars as “planetary laboratory” of towering volcanoes, deep rift valleys, broad plateaus broken by fault lines, ancient planes with moonlike craters, sand dunes, clouds with water ice, and ever-changing polar caps would “substantially increase our basic knowledge of planets . . . and . . . when that history is written you will find that planetary exploration has contributed in a major way to the health and welfare of life on this planet.” (Transcript)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt visited Kennedy Space Center to thank employees for their efforts in making manned exploration of the moon possible. Dr. Schmitt said man would explore Mars in the not too distant future. “The reason it is possible to talk this way and not be accused of talking science fiction is because there’s no longer science fiction. It’s now only science prediction.” (upi, LA Her-Exam, 2/21/73)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
The U.K. Trades Union Congress announced that it was asking its 9.5 million members to boycott French products for a week in protest against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific. (W Post, 6/28/73, B19) June 27-28:	Pioneer 11, launched by NASA April 5 toward a December 1974 rendezvous with the planet Jupiter, became the second spacecraft to cross the orbit of Mars. By June 28 the probe was 76 781 000 km (47 711 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at 108 000 km (67 110 mi) per hr. The earth had passed between the spacecraft and the sun, permitting scientists to look for the earth’s magnetic tail, the extension of the magnetic field blown away from the earth by the solar wind. Data had suggested a malfunction in the spacecraft radio transmitter but were insufficient to identify the problem. The backup traveling-wave tube was being used. Flight controllers had fired the thrusters on Pioneer 10—twin probe launched March 2, 1972, toward December 1973 meeting with Jupiter— on June 21 to trim its course slightly and ensure passage behind Jupiter’s 1 moon Io. Pioneer 10, traveling at 43 470 km (27 000 mi) per hr, was 533 540 000 km (331 542 000 mi) from the earth. It had crossed the orbit of Mars in 1972 and finished crossing the Asteroid Belt in February, (nasa Release 72-122) June 28:	NASA held three Skylab 1-2 postflight reviews at Johnson Space At a summary review of the May 14-June 22 mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that Skylab 1—2 had accomplished the intent of its 48 experiments—6 earth resources, 15 medical, 5 astronomical, 17 scientific and technological, and 5 student-proposed. Space station operation experience had been gained and there were no constraints on continuing the Skylab program as originally planned. More data had been handled in real time than ever before and gave “no reason to believe that all of the things that we had previously said we accomplished in flight are not going to give us creditable scientific data for analysis by scientists.” Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, earth resources experiment package project scientist, said during an erep review that the erep experiments had gathered good data for 145 principal investigators on 13 km (8 mi) of magnetic tape. Data were collected over six foreign countries—Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Venezuela. There were 186 individual task sites covered, including the Puerto Rican trench, the Gulf of Mexico, the Wabash River area, and the Amazon River basin. During a review of the Skylab 2 crew health, Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said medical experiments on the Workshop had yielded very interesting results. All three crew members had stayed within their preflight baseline levels on the bicycle ergometer study. In the motion-sensitivity study—with two crew members participating—the preflight threshold level (the point at which motion sickness symptoms would begin) of science pilot Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin was 121/2 rpm in the rotating chair, at which speed he could perform 50 head movements. Pilot Paul J. Weitz had a preflight threshold of 15 rpm and 40 to 50 head movements. Both men could do 150 head movements in flight at preflight speeds without symptoms. During tests immediately following splashdown both men had experienced vestibular disturbances with even the slightest head movement. The symptoms had disappeared within two days and both crewmen had performed at preflight speeds on the third day following recovery, completing 150 head movements without symptoms. (Transcripts)
Results of the Mariner 9 ultraviolet spectrometer experiment to measure seasonal variation of ozone on Mars were reported in Science by Univ. of Colorado and Cal Tech scientists. Observations made between Nov. 14, 1971, and Oct. 27, 1972, had shown ozone to be present in polar regions of Mars and to have seasonal variation. In summer, the amount in the polar atmosphere was less than three micrometer-atmospheres. In autumn, ozone increased and was found in association with formation of the polar hood. In winter, the maximum amount of ozone was present, “57 micrometer-atmospheres over the polar hood and 16 over the polar cap. In spring, the amount over the polar cap decreases mono-tonically until by the beginning of summer the ozone disappears. Ozone is not observed in the equatorial region during any season.” (Barth et al., Science, 2/23/73, 795-6)
The present total electric power demands of the U.S. could be supplied by solar energy plants with a 2000-km (1240-mi) total area, assuming 30% efficiency, Associate Director Walter E. Morrow, Jr., of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Lincoln Laboratory said in a Technology Review article. “This is about 0.03 per cent of the U.S. land area devoted to farming and about 2 per cent of the land area devoted to roads; and it is about equal to the roof area of all the buildings in the U.S.” (Tech Rev, 12/73, 31^3) During 1973: The U.S. put 26 payloads into orbit in 23 launches and the U.S.S.R. orbited 107 payloads in 86 launches. The U.S. total included 13 spacecraft orbited by the Dept, of Defense in 10 launches (2 of them multiple launches) and 13 by nasa. nasa’s 13 successful launches out of 14 attempts nearly matched the agency’s 1972 record of 17 flawless launches out of 17 attempts. NASA’s Skylab program successfully launched the first U.S. experimental space station—the Orbital Workshop—and three successive crews to man it. Skylab 4, the final mission and the longest-duration manned space flight to date (84 days 1 hr 16 min), also set records for man’s cumulative time in space (84 days), duration of extravehicular activity (7 hrs 1 min), cumulative orbital eva time for one mission (22 hrs 21 min), and distance in orbit for a manned mission (55.5 million km; 34.5 million mi). By the year’s end the Workshop had circled the earth more than 3350 times and housed nine astronauts. The Skylab 2 crew’s repair in space of the Skylab 1 Workshop, after aerodynamic forces damaged it during liftoff, salvaged the endangered program and proved man could do difficult construction work in space. The Skylab 2 crew spent 28 days in space and the Skylab 3 crew 59 days, each mission a record at the time. The missions proved man could live and work in space for extended periods; expanded solar astronomy beyond earth-based observations, collecting much valuable new data that might revise understanding of the sun and its effects on the earth; and improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space, returning more information than planned. In NASA’s unmanned program, Pioneer 10 (launched in 1972) swept past Jupiter in December 1973 at a distance of 130 000 km (81 00Q mi). The first spacecraft to fly beyond the orbit of Mars and to penetrate the Asteroid Belt capped its two-year, 826-million-km (514-million-mi) journey by returning more than 300 closeup photos of Jupiter and its inner moons and providing new information on the planet’s atmosphere and magnetic field. By the year’s end Pioneer 10 was beginning its five-year extended mission to reach Saturn’s orbit in 1976 and the orbit of Uranus, the limit of spacecraft communications with the earth, in 1979. Thereafter it was to become the first man-made object to escape the solar system. Pioneer 11, launched in April, had passed safely through three fourths of the Asteroid Belt on its way to its December 1974 encounter with Jupiter. Mariner 10, headed toward Mercury via Venus, was more than 14.5 million km (9 million mi) from the earth; it would pass by Venus in February 1974 and would provide the first closeup view of Mercury in March. NASA also selected landing sites for the Viking project’s landing of two spacecraft on Mars in 1976. Orbiter and lander critical design reviews, spacecraft thermal and structural tests, and other hardware tests were completed during the year. Scientific satellites launched in 1973 included Explorer 49 in lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise using occultation of the moOn to reduce background interference, Explorer 50 to complete a study of the interplanetary environment over an 11-yr solar cycle, and Explorer 51 to study the earth’s outer atmosphere. As December ended, scientists were studying Comet Kohoutek with optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar from the ground; high-flying aircraft; and instruments on unmanned satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4. Noaa 3, launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, would provide atmospheric soundings and very-high-resolution, day-and-night cloud-cover imaging. Two communications satellites, Intelsat-IV F—7 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization and Anik 2 Canadian domestic comsat, were successfully launched, as well as Nnss 0—20 Transit navigational satellite for the Navy. Erts 1, launched in mid-1972 as the first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, completed its 7000th photo-taking orbit of the earth, demonstrating the great potential of remote-sensing of the earth’s resources by providing data for use throughout the world. All but one prime contractor for the space shuttle had been selected and design was proceeding on schedule. Most of the shuttle orhiter subcontractors were lined up, with fabrication to begin in FY 1975. Nine nations in the European Space Research Organization agreed to build the Spacelab for a wide variety of applications as a shuttle payload. nasa and dod made joint system studies for the space tug and tentative agreement was reached for DOD to develop an initial tug stage for the shuttle. The first two powered flights of the X—24B lifting body were successfully made in the NASA and Air Force hypersonic aerospacecraft research program. NASA also vigorously pursued solutions to problems of aircraft noise, pollution, safety, and operational efficiency and technology for future-generation aircraft. Flight tests of NASA’s digital fly-by-wire advanced flight control system indicated the system improved handling qualities of aircraft in all flight conditions, with the reduced aircraft weight increasing payload potential and reducing fuel consumption. The JT8D engine refan program progressed to scheduling ground tests for February 1974. The engine modifications—in 727, 737, and DC-9 aircraft, models that made up 60% of the domestic commercial fleet— were expected to reduce areas affected by aircraft noise by 75%. A 67% reduction in 727 aircraft landing noise was anticipated from a two-segment landing procedure being tested in the NASA and Federal Aviation Administration noise abatement program. Automobile engines were used to demonstrate an internal combustion concept for reducing pollution emissions while increasing engine efficiency for general-aviation aircraft. New flight research programs included the remotely piloted research vehicle project in which the pilot flew scale models from a ground-based cockpit, eliminating risk to the test pilot and reducing test-flight costs more than 50%. In NASA’s sounding rocket program, more than 80 flights studied atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; male astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of the electromagnetic spectrum; and supported other programs. Rocket launches provided a reference for calibration of equipment on Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount. Forty-nine balloons were flown for scientific research and for development of new technology for long-duration orbital missions. DOD’s year included further development and implementation of satellite communications and navigation systems, development of new military aircraft, and construction of advanced medium STOL prototypes. The U.S.S.R.’s record 86 launches topped 83 in 1971 and 74 in 1972. The 107 Soviet payloads included 85 Cosmos satellites, 2 Intercosmos, I	Luna, 2 Meteor, 1 Prognoz, 1 cooperative Soviet-French Oreol, 2 manned Soyuz, 1 Salyut, 4 Mars probes, and 4 Molniya I and 4 Molniya II	comsats. The Luna 21 probe landed the Lunokhod 2 self-propelled vehicle on the moon for lunar studies. Soyuz 12 carried two cosmonauts into orbit on a two-day mission in September, the first Soviet manned flight since 1971, and Soyuz 13 carried two cosmonauts on an eight-day mission in December. Spacecraft system tests and experiments were reported successful on both flights. (Pres Rpt 1974; NASA Release 73281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74; A&A 1973; gsfc SSR, 12/31/73; gsfc Sounding Rocket Div)
The U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Interplanetary Exploration released a statement following a weeklong meeting in Moscow. Scientists had met to analyze data about the Mars surface and atmosphere for selection of future landing sites for unmanned spacecraft. They also had discussed new results from exploration of Venus by Venus 8 (launched by U.S.S.R. March 27, 1972) and earth-based optical and radio measurements. Recommendations for cooperation would be announced when confirmed by both sides [see March 5]. The Group had been established under a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences agreement of January 1971. U.S. scientists were led by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in nasa’s Office of Space Science. Soviet participants were headed by Academician Georgy I. Petrov, Director of the Institute of Space Research, (nasa Release 73-20)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified on the effects of the Apollo program before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: Apollo “did not just sweep across our landscape to successful achievement of its specific objectives. Its effects on Earth are permanent and pervasive. Not just the hundreds of thousands of jobs it provided, the schools and homes it caused to be built, and the economic impact of the program itself; not just the invaluable accretion of scientific knowledge; not just the restoration of faith in American technological leadership—but a radical and enduring upgrading of technological capability throughout American industry. It is such advances that have enabled the United States to retain its preeminence in high technology production. And it is the continuation of such preeminence that is at stake when we consider the future of our space program.” (Transcript) April 5-26:	NASA’s Pioneer 11 (Pioneer-G), second Jupiter probe, was successfully launched into an excellent trajectory from Eastern Test Range at 9:11 pm est by a three-stage Atlas-Centaur-TE.........M-364—4 launch vehjcle. Eighteen hundred persons watched the nighttime launch after touring the Kennedy Space Center Flight Training and Vehicle Assembly Buildings, where Skylab was being prepared for a mid-May launch. Pioneer 11 sped away from earth at a velocity of 51 800 km per hr (32 200 mph), equaling the speed of Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, and still heading toward Jupiter), which flew faster than any previous man-made object. The primary objective was to obtain precursory scientific information beyond the Mars orbit with emphasis on investigation of the interplanetary medium during the 609- to 825-day journey, the Asteroid Belt, and Jupiter and its environment. The secondary objective was to advance the technology for long-duration flights to the outer planets. The 259-kg (570-lb) spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 12 scientific experiments to measure magnetic fields, plasma, cosmic rays and charged particles; the electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared ranges; and the asteroid-meteoroid population. During the encounter trajectory with Jupiter, the spacecraft would provide the best possible information on the radiation environment, provide good viewing conditions of Jupiter before periapses, and obtain a short occultation of the spacecraft by Jupiter. The spacecraft also carried a pictorial plaque identical to the one carried on Pioneer 10 for identification of its origin by any possible intelligent beings of another solar system. Six hours following launch the large number of thruster pulses used to precess the spacecraft and point the antenna toward the sun provided the impulse to deploy fully one of the two radioisotope thermoelectric generators that had failed to deploy completely at first. The magnetometer boom was deployed and the spin rate stabilized at 5.4 rpm. On April 6 four science instruments—the helium vector magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid, detector—were turned on. An April 11 midcourse correction moved the target point at Jupiter from slightly ahead of the planet as it moved on its orbit, and above the equatorial plane, to slightly behind the planet and below the equator. The adjusted course would allow several mission choices: to make an equatorial pass either close to or distant from the planet to inspect one or more of its moons; to pass over the flattened pole of the planet; to fly on to Saturn in 1980; or, like Pioneer 10, to leave the solar system and escape into interstellar space. The option chosen would depend on Pioneer 10 findings during its pass of Jupiter in December. Nine of the twelve experiments were turned on and were operating normally.	. The control center for Pioneer 11 was transferred April 16 from Jet Propulsion Laboratory to the Pioneer Missions Operations Center at Ames Research Center. On April 26 Pioneer 11, traveling at 9.34 km per sec (20 900 mph), was 14 350 000 km (8 920 000 mi) from the earth. A second midcourse correction was made. The operation of all spacecraft subsystems was normal and 11 of the 12 experiments were transmitting good data. Six to seven hits had been recorded by the meteoroid detector. The infrared radiometer remained to be turned on. The spacecraft was expected to enter the Asteroid Belt in August 1973 and reach Jupiter in December 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by Ames Research Center. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1968, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays. (NASA prog off; nasa Releases 73-41, 73-72; arc Release 73-43; icsc Release 61—73)
Dr. Wolf V. Vishniac, Univ. of Rochester microbiologist and biological scientist in NASA’s Viking Mars lander program, died at age 51 after falling down a steep slope during a scientific expedition to Antarctica for NASA. Dr. Vishniac was studying how microbes multiplied in the arid Antarctic soil. He had been a member of NASA’s Lunar and Planetary Missions Board 1967—1970. He had served on the Office of Manned Space Flight’s Joint Editorial Board on Space Biology and Medicine since 1965 and was coediting Volume One of “Space Biology and Medicine.” He had been a member of the Viking Biology Team since 1969, had served on the Lunar Sampling Analysis Team in 1968 and 1969, and had been active on the Space Sciences Board of the National Academy of Sciences, (nasa Release 73-277; AP, NYT, 12/ 13/73, 48) December 10-14:	More than 120 papers by scientists worldwide were presented at the Third Earth Resources Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center. The Symposium highlighted data from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by nasa July 23, 1972), which had provided more than 100 000 images of the earth’s surface. Also emphasized was the extension of scientific techniques and findings discussed in a March symposium, including applications directly benefiting the public in dealing with local and regional resource problems, (nasa Release 73—271; gsfc pio) December 11:	Mariner 10, NASA’s two-planet probe launched Nov. 3 toward Venus and Mercury, had discovered that the gas remnants of the exploding star Gamma Velorium in the Gum Nebula were twice as hot as scientists had expected, the Washington Post reported. Instruments aboard the spacecraft had detected ultraviolet radiation from the nebula so intense that it corresponded to temperatures as high as 56 000 K (100 000°F), suggesting that some stars were undergoing even more violent nuclear reactions than expected. Dr. Bruce Murray, California Institute of Technology scientist, was surprised that so old a nebula was still radiating any detectable heat. The discovery might be “the start of a whole new field of astronomy. . . . Never before have we been able to detect interstellar radiation associated with this temperature range.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/11/73, A10)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Dr. Roy E. Cameron and Frank A. Morelli had departed for a two-month research project in Antarctica to determine the degree of man’s impact on the environment, jpl announced. The National Science Foundation-sponsored ecological measurements of Antarctica’s primitive soils would also provide information for NASA’s development of life-detection systems for Viking landers on Mars, (jpl Release 643)
Sir Robert Watson-Watt, Britain’s “father of radar,” had died in Scotland at age 81, the Washington Post reported. Watson-Watt was credited with directing and accelerating development of radar immediately preceding World War II. He was best known for his work in the use of radio waves to detect aircraft, but also had developed an underwater detection system for use against German U-boats during the Battle of the North Atlantic. (Hailey, W Post, 12/7/73, C15) December 8:	The risk to future development of man’s life outside the earth was “that the public will come to denigrate what Skylab has done and rate it below the achievements” of Pioneer 10, an Economist article said. Pioneer 10’s pictures, “passable photographs” of Jupiter, were “better than no pictures at all, but if the evidence of the first space shots past Mars are anything to go by, useful results require the cameras to go in much closer than Pioneer was able to do, and to stay in orbit round the planet for long enough to take ... a set of controlled mapping pictures. Pioneer 10 has shown that it is going to be technically possible to do this; the next stage is to build the space probe that will do it. When it comes to this sort of detailed work, the instruments on board tend to need the fine adjustments that only men can give them.” The U.S. should be planning “another Skylab with instruments calibrated to look further into space than the present ones. The results could be even better than Pioneer 10’s.” (Economist, 12/8/73, 20)
“The equatorial sinuous channels on Mars detected by Mariner 9 point to a past epoch of higher pressures and abundant liquid water. Advective instability of the martian atmosphere permits two stable climates—one close to present conditions, the other at a pressure of the order of 1 bar [100 kilonewtons per sq mi] depending on the quantity of buried volatiles. Variations in the obliquity of Mars, the luminosity of the sun, and the albedo of the polar caps each appear capable of driving the instability between a current ice age and more clement conditions. Obliquity driving alone implies that epochs of much higher and of much lower pressure must have characterized martian history. Climatic change on Mars may have important meteorological, geological, and biological implications.” (Science, 9/14/73, 1045-8)
U.S. Patent No. 3 730 287 was granted to nasa and to aerospace designer Edward Hryniewiecki of Comprehensive Designers, Inc., a Jet Propulsion Laboratory subcontractor, for a vehicle designed to explore planets with difficult terrain. Each of four legs with triangular wheels would have its own motive power for movement by walking, by turning wheels, or on tires revolving around the wheels like endless tracks. The vehicle had been planned for unmanned, remotely controlled exploration of Mars, but NASA was willing to license manufacture for oil and mineral exploration and rescue operations. (Pat Off pio; Jones, NYT, 5/5/73, 45)
nasa launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment to a 290.8-km (180.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed satisfactorily. Preliminary estimates indicated the experiment was 90% successful, (gsfc proj off) September 22:	One of four U.S.S.R. spacecraft—Mars 4, 5, 6, or 7, launched toward Mars July 22 and 25 and Aug. 5 and 9—would soft-land near the Mars south polar cap to test the physical properties of Martian soil and surface rocks and check the possibilities of transmitting TV pictures of the surrounding terrain to earth, Roald Sagdeyev, Director of the Space Research Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in a Tass interview. Mars 4 and 5 were 19 515 000 km (12 126 000 mi) and 18 584 000 km (11548 000 mi) from the earth and would reach Mars in February 1974. Mars 6 and 7 were 16 664 000 km (10 354 000 mi) and 15 623 000 km (9 708 000 mi) from the earth and would reach Mars in March 1974. Radiation and magnetic measurements were being made and cosmic rays were being studied, Sagdeyev said. The stations also would investigate solar noise in the meter wave band as well as register the flux of solar plasma. United Press International reported later that Western space experts had speculated that a landing craft might carry a Marsokhod roving vehicle to explore the Martian surface. UPI also reported that it was believed that the U.S.S.R. departure from the usual practice of not announcing mission goals was to demonstrate Soviet willingness to cooperate with the U.S. in view of the plans for a 1975 joint U.S.— U.S.S.R. mission. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 9/24/73, Ul; AP, W Post, 9/24/73, A21)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin galactic astronomy experiment. The second, launched two hours later, carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 3—13:	NASA’s Mariner 10 (Mariner-J) Venus-Mercury probe was launched into a parking orbit from Eastern Test Range at 12:45 am est by an Atlas-Centaur Dl-A launch vehicle. After a 25-min coast, a 130-sec burn of the Centaur engines injected the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would allow Mariner 10 to pass within 5300 km (3300 mi) of Venus Feb. 5, 1974. Using the gravitational field of Venus to change the speed and flight path of the spacecraft, Mariner 10 would travel toward a March 29 encounter with Mercury, approaching the sun more closely than any other planetary mission. Mariner 10 would be the first spacecraft to use gravity assist in a dual-planet mission and the first to explore Mercury. The primary objective was to measure Mercury’s environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity-assist mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED! The seven experiments aboard the octagonal 503-kg (1108-lb) spacecraft included a TV camera and an infrared radiometer to investigate the planet’s surface; plasma science experiment, charged particle telescope, and magnetometer to investigate the environment around the planet and the interplanetary medium; dual-frequency-radio science experiment and ultraviolet spectrometer to measure characteristics of the Mercury neutral atmosphere and ionosphere if they existed; and celestial mechanics experiments to measure planetary mass characteristics and test the theory of relativity. All experiments had been designed and selected for their Mercury scientific objectives but also would obtain important data at Venus and during the cruise phases. The Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station was unable to maintain command lock with the spacecraft following spacecraft injection. Acquisition of the star Vega by the spacecraft Canopus tracker also was delayed, but two-way communications were established within an hour and, after repeated commands, Vega was acquired. Solar panels, high-gain and low-gain antennas, and plasma science and magnetometer booms were deployed. On Nov. 4-5 four moon and three earth TV picture mosaics were completed. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft was 1 394 000 km (866 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at a speed of 4.32 km (2.68 mi) per sec. All science experiments except the infrared radiometer and electrostatic analyzer had been turned on. The scanning electron spectrometer portion of the plasma science experiment was not operating properly and the problem was being analyzed. Four trajectory correction maneuvers were scheduled during the mission. The first, Nov. 13, successfully adjusted the flight path for closest approach to Venus on Feb. 5, 1974, as planned. A second would be made Jan. 18, 1974. On Feb. 9 and March 1, 1974, after the Venus encounter, maneuvers would target the Mariner 10 to pass Mercury at 1000-km (620-mi) altitude. The Mariner program, including mission operations and tracking and data systems, was managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., was responsible for the launch vehicle. Previous missions had been made to Mars, including Mariner 4, 6, 7, and 9 (launched Nov. 28, 1964; Feb. 24, 1969; March 27, 1969; and May 30, 1971). Mariner 9 had been the first spacecraft to orbit a planet other than the earth. All others had been flyby missions. (nasa prog off; jpl Release 673) November 3—January 9, 1974:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 interplanetary probe (launched March 2, 1972) became the first spacecraft to reach Jupiter during a two-month encounter, returning new findings about the giant planet and continuing toward Uranus and eventual exit from the solar system. November 3—December 3:	Encounter operations were begun Nov. 3 by Ames Research Center controllers and scientists and on Nov. 4 Pioneer 10 began sending photopolarimeter images of Jupiter to the earth three to eight hours a day. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft, 25 000 000 km (15 500 000 mi) from Jupiter, had begun measuring the placet’s atmosphere above Jupiter’s orange-and-blue-striped cloud tops and the characteristics of particles making up the dense clouds. On Nov. 8 the spacecraft crossed the orbits of Hades and Poseidon, the first two of Jupiter’s outer moons, and on Nov. 9 and 11 it crossed the orbits of Pan and Andrastea. At a Nov. 19 press briefing at arc Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, said that low temperature in that area of the solar system slowed evolution and scientists hoped to find objects not very different from what they were at their formation. “The passage of Pioneer 10 past Jupiter also marks the gateway to the exploration of the outer solar system. This is an exploration which is critical if we truly want to understand the formation and evolution of our solar system.” Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said that Pioneer 10 had encountered 100 times more space dust than expected during the journey between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter. He expected that 30 times more particles would be detected as the spacecraft neared Jupiter. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s moons Demeter, Hera, and Hestia Nov. 22 and was 11400 600 km (7 084 000 mi) from Jupiter. By Nov. 25 a charged particle detector aboard the spacecraft had begun to show traces of particle radiation. Preliminary indications were that the probe was beginning to cross into Jupiter’s magnetosphere, estimated to be 20 times stronger than the earth’s. The planet’s radiation belts contained particle concentrations up to 1 million times higher than the earth’s Van Allen Belt and were considered by some scientists to be extremely dangerous to the spacecraft’s electronics. At a distance of 8 336 400 km (5180 000 mi) from Jupiter, spacecraft instruments began returning pictures of Jupiter’s great red spot. The final spacecraft-attitude change before encounter was made Nov. 26 and a 24-hour day of imaging and polarimetry began. At 3:30 pm EST Nov. 26 Pioneer 10 successfully crossed Jupiter’s bow shock wave at a distance of 7 709 000 km (4 790 000 mi)—with great turbulence when the solar wind hit Jupiter’s magnetic field. The spacecraft was unaffected by the turbulence hut data from 6 of its 11 instruments changed dramatically. Solar wind speed abruptly decreased to half the normal velocity and solar wind temperatures rose sharply. On Nov. 27, at a distance of 6 760 000 km (4 200 000 mi) from Jupiter, the spacecraft crossed into the planet’s true magnetic envelope, the region of interplanetary space into which the solar wind could not penetrate. Pioneer 10 crossed the magnetopause, entering the magnetic field for the first time at 3:30 pm est. At a Nov. 29 press briefing arc scientists said new data had shown the reach of Jupiter’s magnetic field to be greater than predicted. It stretched more than 13 000 000 km (8 000 000 mi) in diameter and its strength was 40 times that of the earth’s ma'gnetic field. Its direction was south, rather than north as predicted. The strength of the magnetism at 6 400 000 km (4 000 000 mi) from the planet seemed to rise and fall in a regular 10-hour phase, possibly because of the planet’s rotation. Jupiter’s mass was also found to be greater than estimated and the spacecraft was being drawn toward Jupiter faster than planned; it would arrive at its closest approach two minutes earlier than predicted. On Nov. 30 Pioneer 10 recorded a sharp drop in magnetic and radiation measurements, indicating disappearance of the magnetic field. Eleven hours later the spacecraft again crossed the magnetopause, which had apparently been driven toward the planet by a disturbance in the solar wind. At 1 427 500 km (887 000 mi) from the planet, the spacecraft entered Jupiter’s dipole magnetic field. Preliminary data indicated that the outer portions of Jupiter’s magnetic field did not rotate with the planet and were more flattened than the earth’s field. Also, the magnetic dipole center was appreciably offset, both radially and toward the north from the center of the planet. The magnetic axis was tilted from the spin axis. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s innermost moons—Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, and Io—Dec. 2-3. As it came within 446 000 km (277 000 mi) of Ganymede, the infrared radiometer indicated the moon’s surface temperature was 125 K (—235°F). Six hours before its closest approach to Jupiter the probe entered the dangerous region of intense radiation and, soon after, the imaging system ceased returning picture data. Radio commands switched the system back to normal operation within 30 minutes, however. The press later reported that NASA attributed the mishap to an unidentified flight control room guest who had inadvertently pressed against a cathode ray display, pushing a button that cut out eight instruments. December 3—11:	As the gold and silver spacecraft approached Jupiter and radiation intensity increased 10-fold every two hours, reaching 65 million ev 90 min before periapsis, tense scientists paced the floor of arc’s Mission Control with fingers crossed. At 9:25 pm est Dec. 3, after a flight of 641 days and 826 000 000 km (513 000 000 mi), Pioneer 10 sped past Jupiter at an altitude of 130 000 km (81 000 mi), traveling 155 140 km per hour (96 400 mph), the fastest speed ever achieved by a man-made object. The spacecraft’s 11 instruments sent back readings and pictures that came in loud and clear, taking 46 minutes to reach a jubilant team on earth. “Needless to say, we’re elated,” Dr. John Wolfe, Pioneer Project Scientist, told cheering newsmen. The Washington Post later described the scene at arc: “So deluged were Pioneer scientists with transmissions of the spacecraft’s instruments, they were literally changing their minds about Jupiter’s physics and chemistry every hour.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “Some of us have been looking through telescopes at Jupiter since our early teens. This is more than we ever dreamed of.” The spacecraft suffered no apparent failures and continued to function as planned. However, preliminary estimates of radiation belt parameters and observed effects on the spacecraft and instrumentation indicated that the margin of survival had been small. As Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter, the spacecraft was accelerated and slung by the planet’s gravity into a new trajectory that would take it past the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and, traveling at a constant 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph), out of the solar system toward the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 10 would be the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. By 7:00 pm EST Dec. 4, it had traveled nearly 1600 000 km (1000 000 mi) beyond Jupiter. December 11—January 9:	arc Mission Control ended Jupiter picturetaking Dec. 11 and returned to routine interplanetary operations. The spacecraft recrossed the bow shock wave Dec. 12 and continued into interplanetary space. By Dec. 14 the spacecraft was 10 881000 km (6 761 000 mi) from Jupiter, traveling at 83 525 km per hr (51 900 mph) toward the edge of the solar system. Preliminary findings from the encounter included the discovery of an ionosphere (implying a tenuous atmosphere) surrounding Jupiter’s moon Io, detection of helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere, new density measurements of the entire Jovian system that would affect current theories on the formation of the universe, and new temperature measurements of Jupiter that indicated little difference between average daytime and nighttime temperatures. Pioneer 10 was expected to continue collecting and returning data until it reached the orbit of Uranus in 1980, almost 3 200 000 000 km (2 000 000 000 mi) from the earth. Data returned would determine whether the second Jupiter probe, Pioneer 11 (launched April 5 and crossing the Asteroid Belt since August), could safely be retargeted closer to the planet. The Pioneer 10 mission was officially adjudged a success Jan. 9, 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by arc. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1969, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays, (nasa prog off; arc Release, 11/6/73; nasa Releases 73-243K, 73-256, 73-279; Wilford, NYT, 11/25/73; 11/30/73, 1; 12/4/73, 1; 12/5/73, 13; O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/73, Al; AP, W Star-News, 11/28-29/73; AP, B Sun, 12/3-4/73; Miles, LA Times, 12/4/73; 12/6/73) November 3:	The Skylab 4 launch crew successfully completed a simulated launch of the Saturn IB booster at Kennedy Space Center. The booster was scheduled to lift the Apollo command and service module and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue into orbit Nov. 10 to dock with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) and begin NASA’s third manned Skylab mission. Following the perfectly timed simulation, the fuel was drained from the launch vehicle and preparations for the final countdown were begun. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/73, A7)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, now an Eastern Air Lines, Inc., senior vice president, left Moscow after a visit to the U.S.S.R. at the invitation of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. During the visit, which began April 28, Borman laid a bouquet at the Kremlin wall where Yuri Gagarin and other cosmonauts were buried and visited the cosmonaut training center and a Salyut orbital station mockup at Star City. In an interview he said that he believed the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz space flight was “the forerunner, the prototype to exactly the type of mission that we’ll eventually see going to Mars. It is very difficult to project the pace at which space exploration will go forward, because it doesn’t depend on technology so much as it does on economic and political action. But I think that by the end of this century we will have a manned earth mission to Mars.” (Tass, fbis—Sov, 4/30/73, L2; 5/3/73, G2; Moscow News, 5/19-25/73)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1924 913 fixed-price-incentive contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for incorporation of engineering change proposals on the F-4 fighter aircraft production contract. A $1 294 776 fixed-price-incentive contract to General Dynamics Corp. for additional funding for inspection and correction of F-lll landing gear pin deficiencies also had been awarded, (dod Release 296-73) June 14:	Tentative selection of 22 scientists—including one each from France and Germany—from among 72 scientists who responded to NASA’s August 1972 invitation to provide experiments for one of two Pioneer spacecraft to probe Venus in 1978 was announced by NASA. Mission objectives were to gather information on the Venusian atmosphere and clouds. Participating scientists would define experiments studying composition and structure of the atmosphere down to the surface, the nature and composition of the clouds, the circulation pattern of the atmosphere, and the radiation field in the lower atmosphere. The mission—comprising a bus, a large probe, and three small probes —would use a spin-stabilized, solar-powered spacecraft. The trip from earth to Venus would take 125 days. The probes would be separated from the bus 10 to 20 days before entry into the Venusian atmosphere. The large probe would descend through the atmosphere in iy2 hrs; the small probes would fall free to the planet’s surface about 75 min after entry. The bus would be targeted to enter the Venus atmosphere at a shallow angle and transmit data until it was destroyed by atmospheric-friction heat. The atmosphere probe was scheduled for launch in May 1978, about three months before a Venus orbiter was to be launched. Both spacecraft would arrive in the vicinity of Venus in December 1978. By comparing the atmospheres of Venus, Mars, and the earth, scientists hoped to construct an efficient model of the earth’s atmosphere to predict long-term climate changes and short-term effects of environmental pollution. Experiments for the orbiter mission would be selected in early 1974. (nasa Release 73—115)
The U.S.S.R. launched its Mars 4 probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 12:31 am local time (3:31 pm edt, July 21) into a parking orbit from which it was inserted into a 470-million-km (290-million-mi) trajectory toward Mars. All systems performed satisfactorily, Tass reported. The spacecraft would reach Mars in February 1974 to continue scientific exploration of the planet and the space near it begun by Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971). United Press International reported Western sources as saying the apparent aim of Mars 4 was to softland research instruments and TV cameras on the Martian surface. Mars 4 would be the fourth Soviet spacecraft to reach Mars. Mars 1 (launched Nov. 1, 1962, to fly by Mars) had transmitted data to the earth for more than four months during its journey, before communications went dead. Mars 2 had been put into orbit around the planet and transmitted data to the earth into August 1972. An instrumented capsule from the spacecraft crashlanded on the Martian surface Nov. 27, 1971, becoming the first man-made object to reach the surface. Mars 3 had also attempted to softland an instrumented capsule, during a dust storm. TV pictures were transmitted to the earth for 20 sec before transmission ceased abruptly. The spacecraft ended its mission in August 1972. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/73; fbis-Sov, 7/23/73, LI; upi, NYT, 7/23/73, 8; A&A 1962, 1963, 1971, 1972)
The next 10 yrs in transportation could be the decade of the hovercraft, Jane’s Surface Skimmers said in its 1973-74 edition. Editor Roy Mc-Leavy noted that'the Soviet Ekranoplan already carried 900 fully armed troops at more than 350 km per hr (220 mph) over almost any surface. Hovercraft production would almost certainly develop into “one of the world’s major industries.” U.S. Navy surface ships might cost as much as $50 million; France was studying “hoverfrigates”; and the U.S.S.R. was joining in “this more sophisticated approach to naval strategy.” (AP, W Post, 11/29/73, A32) November 28—December 1:	An International Colloquium on Mars was held at Cal Tech and Jet Propulsion Laboratory by nasa, the American Astronautical Society, and the American Geophysical Union to evaluate new ideas stimulated by the successful Mariner 9 mission to Mars (launched by nasa May 30, 1971). Four hundred scientists from 10 countries participated in the program, which discussed Martian surface history and evolution, atmospheric history as related to interactions with the surface, and future exploration of Mars, (nasa Release 73-255; jpl pio)
Photo-mapping of Mars by Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had revealed multiple circular features surrounding both poles which might indicate that the Martian north and south poles had moved, California Institute of Technology scientists reported in Science. Some of the concentric patterns were centered on points displaced from the present north and south poles of Mars, implying that these were ancient positions of the poles and testifying to a slow drift of the Martian spin axis. Such a drift of the earth axis could explain the evidence for radical climate changes in the past—fossil coral reefs in Greenland and fossil forests in the South Pole—and revive the debate with scientists who believed the climate changes were due to the constant moving of the earth’s continents and oceans. (Murray, Malin, Science, 3/9/73, 997999)
The U.S.S.R. had abandoned its women’s cosmonaut training program, the Washington Evening Star and Daily News reported. Gen. Georgy T.	Reregovoy, commander of the Soviet cosmonauts, had said in an interview with the Polish newspaper Express Wieczerny in Warsaw, “We train only young men, not women.” (upi, W Star & News, 2/23/73, A3) February 24:	A Raltimore Sun editorial commented on the Feb. 15 press conference on the Pioneer 10 Jupiter probe (launched March 2, 1972) : “There was reason to worry for Pioneer’s wellbeing, as it traveled the section beyond Mars; so many chunks of rock float along there, on such erratic tracks, that our expensive new-model spacecraft could have inadvertently smacked into something a great deal bigger than itself. Even a sideswipe might have thrown it off course. Happily, it has registered contact only with the sort of fine-grained debris that litters space in general.” Pioneer 10 had indicated the existence of more asteroids between the earth and Mars than previously realized and fewer between Mars and Jupiter. “Or is it so new a phenomenon, that the closer to earth’s big cities you come, the thicker the traffic gets?” (R Sun, 2/24/73)
nasa’s Pioneer 11 probe, launched April 5, was traveling at 120 000 km per hr (74 000 mph) and had covered 48 million km (30 million mi), one fifth of its 20-mo journey to the planet Jupiter. All experiments and spacecraft systems were functioning well. Instruments were sampling the sun’s field and wind, measuring solar and galactic cosmic ray particles, measuring hydrogen and helium in interstellar space, and making sky maps of the zodiacal light (sunlight reflected from cosmic dust between the earth and Jupiter). Meanwhile, Pioneer 10 (launched March 3, 1972) had covered 560 million km (350 million mi) of its 1-billion-km (620-million-mi) flight path and was due to arrive at Jupiter in December. Good data were being returned from all scientific instruments. Pioneer 10 was defining for the first time the interplanetary medium far beyond the orbit of Mars and the Asteroid Belt, (nasa Release 73-107)
Federal support to universities and colleges had declined 7%, to $3823 million, during FY 1973 in the first decline since 1970, the National Science Foundation reported. The drop had been largely the result of a $267-million decrease in funds from the Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare but other significant decreases were posted by nsf, down $40 million; Dept, of Defense, down $11 million; and NASA, down $8 million. Federal funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million, 5% below 1972. Two science fields had shown an increase in Federal r&d support between 1972 and 1973'. Life sciences’ $934 million was a 4% increase; engineering’s $204 million was up 6%. (nsf Highlights, 15 July 74) 15— 16 July: Western Union Telegraph Co.’s Westar 1—first U.S. domestic communications satellite, launched by NASA 13 April—began operations during inaugural ceremonies in New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. McFall, Chairman of the Board and President of Western Union Corp. transmitted the first message, from New York to Los Angeles, using the original Morse key to tap “What hath God wrought!” It was the same message sent by inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24 May 1844 over the first experimental telegraph, a 65-km line between the Capitol in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md. Regular commercial operations began 16 July, providing services for Westar J’s first two commercial customers, American Can Co. and Bank of America. (Westar Inaugural Transmission press kit, 15 July 74) 16— 29 July: NASA launched Aeros 2 (Aeros-B) aeronomy satellite for West Germany from Western Test Range at 4:51 am pdt on a four-stage Scout launch vehicle into polar orbit with an 879.0-km apogee, 221.3km perigee, 95.65-min period, and 97.44° inclination. The NASA mission objective—to place the Aeros 2 satellite in an earth orbit permitting successful achievement of the scientific objectives—was met and the mission was adjudged successful 26 July. The scientific objective was to measure the main aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and the solar ultraviolet radiation in the wavelength band of the main absorption. The long-range objective of the satellite, which carried one Goddard Space Flight Center and four West German experiments, was to provide a model of the ionosphere from which upper atmospheric conditions could be predicted. By 29 July the vehicle and experiments were performing satisfactorily and the West Germans were initiating spacecraft operations. A July 1965 agreement between the U.S. and West Germany had provided for a series of cooperative satellite projects. The Aeros program, the second in the series, was authorized by a 10 June 1969 agreement and Aeros 1 was launched 16 Dec. 1972. The 1974 contract between NASA and the West Germany Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (bmft) for the Aeros 2 launch provided for reimbursement of NASA for launch vehicle and services. NASA would also provide one experiment, tracking, and backup for data acquisition, bmft was responsible for development of spacecraft and instrumentation operation and control of the satellite after launch, and data reduction and analysis except for the gsfc experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. (nasa mors, 30 Nov 72, 8 & 29 July 74; NASA Releases 69-91, 74-183; gsfc SSR, 31 Oct 75) The 1969 launch of Apollo 11 was commemorated 16 July by ceremonies at Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. At 9:32 am edt, the moment of launch, Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., unveiled a plaque designating the site a National Historical Landmark. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told the thousands of guests: “No matter our achievements, ... we cannot relax our pursuit of knowledge, for we must face the coming crises of our time. Every effort must be made to see that the opportunity which our technology presents is not lost. We may be sure that the opportunity will not occur soon again, if ever. To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources— a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no return.” Unless “we continuously restore the fund of basic knowledge, we shall ultimately exhaust it. . . . “Some day we will establish scientific outposts on the Moon, and even tap its mineral resources. And in the not-too-distant future astronauts may tread the surface of Mars and the glaciers of the moons of Jupiter in search of extraterrestrial life. . . . The future began here at 9:32 a.m. on July 16, 1969. At that moment on July 16 in the year 2069, launch windows to Mars, Neptune, and Pluto will be open. Will we fly through those windows? I think we will.” In 19 July ceremonies at the San Clemente, Calif., Western White House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names of each astronaut who had represented “this country in a flight above the surface of the Earth.” President Nixon told Armstrong the greatest contribution to the space program was not the exploration or technology but the “spirit you and your colleagues . . . have had the opportunity to demonstrate.” The Smithsonian Institution hosted 20 July activities marking the day of the landing. Speaking on the Mall in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Under Secretary Robert A. Brooks said Apollo 11 had been a “dramatic demonstration . . . that progress in human affairs does not spring full blown from the efforts of one man or group of men. What we saw was the culmination of the efforts of hundreds of scientists and engineers from Leonardo da Vinci ... to the Apollo 11 astronauts. Each built on what his predecessors had accomplished until the accumulation of knowledge made possible the kind of quantum leap forward represented by the Apollo Program.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, called the day of the landing “the day man ended an era of one-planet civilization and began a new age as traveler and colonizer of the universe.” Despite difficulties, men would “make more of these steps into the vast but exciting reaches of the solar system.” A 21 July service at the Washington Cathedral in Washington, D.C., dedicated the Space Window donated by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator at the time of the landing. The window, designed by Rodney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory, representing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. During the ceremony, Armstrong presented a 7.18-g, 3.6-billion-yr-old lunar rock, brought from the moon by Apollo 11, to the Cathedral. The rock would be inserted into a hydrogen-filled plexiglass container embedded as the centerpiece of the window. (PD, 22 July 74, 815; NASA Activities, 15 Aug 74, 5-14; transcript; program)
Noting the space program’s emphasis had shifted earthward now that space flight was an accepted and almost routine part of life, John N. Wilford commented in the New York Times that “it is only natural that after surveying the canyons of Mars, the clouds and haze of Venus and the radiation belts of Jupiter, men turn back and take a new look at the earth and, in the words of T. S. Eliot, ‘know the place for the first time.’ ” (NYT, 10 Feb 74,7) Mars 5 was put into orbit around Mars at 6:45 pm Moscow time (11:45 am edt) 12 Feb., with a 32 500-km apogee, 1760-km perigee, 25-hr period, and 35° inclination. Mars 6 and 7, launched 5 and 9 Aug. 1973, would approach Mars in March. During a 22 Sept. 1973 interview with Tass, Director Roald Sagdeyev of the Space Research Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences had said one of the four Mars probes would softland near the Martian south polar cap to test the physical properties of the soil and surface rocks and check the possibilities of transmitting TV pictures of the surrounding terrain to earth. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 14 Feb. 74, Ul; A&A 1973)
A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of a series of articles in Saturday Review/World. Soviet atomic scientist Andrei D. Sakharov envisioned flying cities—artificial earth satellites with important industrial functions. The satellites would hold nuclear and thermonuclear installations with radiant cooling of heat exchangers, to avoid heating the earth, and would also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater attempts to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for and transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and searching outer space for space stations of extraterrestrial civilizations. Powerful telescopes set up on the moon would permit scientists to see planets orbiting the nearest stars. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said that in 50 yrs every interesting crater and cranny of the moon would have been visited and revisited and lunar exploration would be replaced by lunar exploitation. Underground lunar colonies, protected from extreme temperatures, would consist of pressurized compartments connected by tunnels. One day man might want to build an atmosphere on the moon to avoid the inconveniences of living in a near vacuum, but in the nearer future the use of the moon’s vacuum for activities such as materials processing was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of the moon, always facing away from the earth, could hold radio and x-ray telescopes for transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. Deep craters, which received no sunlight and had temperatures nearing absolute zero, would be ideal for low-temperature laboratories where scientists could investigate the point where molecular motion nearly stops. Lunar agriculture would be underground under lights in modified lunar soil fed with a nutrient solution. Although by 2024 the only extraterrestrial colonies would be on the moon, men probably would have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space might well use a miniaturized heart-lung machine, circumventing the need for breathing and spacesuits. Dr. Wernher von Braun, former Marshall Space Flight Center Director, predicted a worldwide satellite search would be started for additional deposits of metal ore, coal, oil, shale, and natural gas. Satellite data would also provide key data for a badly needed worldwide food supply management system. Von Braun predicted nuclear lasers in geosynchronous orbit would handle millions of TV channels simultaneously and billions of telephone conversations and would lead to worldwide video-telephone service. Advanced meteorological satellites would provide accurate two-week weather forecasts and disaster warnings, saving millions of dollars in property damage. (Saturday Review/World, 24 Aug 74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a speech at Utah State Univ. that he was “certain there is intelligent life somewhere in this universe, but probably not in this solar system.” Primary life would probably be found in our solar system, with Mars as the most likely candidate. The U.S.S.R. was expected to land a spacecraft on Mars within the next few weeks, but in an area not likely to have any life form. A NASA spacecraft would land on Mars in 1976 in the area most likely to have water. NASA intended to continue systematic exploration of the solar system and to search for extraterrestrial life. (Bean, Logan [Utah] Herald Journal, 20 Feb 74)
Bacteria found frozen in Antarctic ice and soil for a possible 1 million years had grown and reproduced in the laboratory when put into nutrient fluids, the National Science Foundation announced. If the estimate of the age proved correct, the bacteria would be the oldest examples of life ever found on the earth. Results of the project, spdnsored by nsf and nasa’s extraterrestrial life detection program, would add weight to the theory that some forms of life might be frozen into the permafrost of planets such as Mars. The bacteria had been found at a depth of about 130 m near the main U.S. base on Ross Island. Later samples also had been found in Taylor Valley 95 km away. A senior scientist in the project, Dr. Roy E. Cameron of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said in a telephone interview with the New York Times that rod-shaped, club-shaped, and spherical specimens grew and reproduced, but one type, particularly interesting because it had been capable of spontaneous movement, could not be made to reproduce, (nsf Release 74-155; Schmeck, NYT, 30 April 74)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was quoted as saying in an interview: “From what we know today, there is no medical reason to bar a two-year mission to Mars. . . . We still need more data, but I don’t think the medical findings from a six-month or a year-long mission would differ appreciably from the experience with our three Skylab missions.” On a two-year mission to Mars (not likely to be considered before the early 1990s), “we’re going to have a hard time keeping people completely busy,” leaving astronauts more time to think of their isolation. “That’s another problem we’ll have to deal with.” Meanwhile, all the data indicate “that man is really adapting to the zero-gravity environment of space. He does that in a way that causes some very large fluctuations initially in various body systems” but, “with time, it appears that these fluctuations settle down.” (US News, 11 Feb 74, 62-64)
Data from U.S.S.R. space probes Mars 4, 6, and 7 [see 9-12 March] had indicated that several “tens percent” of the Martian atmosphere was made up of an inert gas, probably argon, Tass quoted Prof. Vasily I. Moroz as reporting in Izvestiya. The data would substantiate Soviet scientists’ belief that several million or even several hundred thousand years ago Mars had an atmosphere with a density close to that of the earth. In addition, data from Mariner 9 (launched 30 May 1971) and Mars 5 had shown that the planet had had surface water and might “acquire it again, for such changes take place during the planet’s geological history . . . with a definite periodicity.” New data was increasing hope of finding the simplest biosphere. “In any case, in the not so distant geological past Mars apparently had . . . die conditions necessary for the emergence of life. The reappearance of such periods in the future is not ruled out.” The Western press later quoted U.S. scientists as saying that the presence of large amounts of argon would have “dramatic implications” and would tend to support the theory that the Martian climate had been going through a series of cycles during which ice ages alternated with warmer and wetter conditions. But Dr. Carl E. Sagan of Cornell Univ. said during a telephone interview that the 90% content of carbon dioxide in the Martian atmosphere had been well established, so that “at most 10% of argon was barely possible.” (fbis-Sov, 26 March 74, U1; Shabad, NYT, 7 April 74,34)
The first system to use solar energy to heat a U.S. school began operation in Timonium, Md. The $568 000 project, jointly sponsored by the National Science Foundation and AAl Corp. [see 2 Feb.], was rushed into operation in six weeks to use the remainder of the winter’s chilly days to gather experimental data for future solar heating systems. (Richards, W Post, 8 March 74, C2) 7, 12-14 March: Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on NASA’s space science program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1975 authorization hearings: A Solar Maximum Mission (smm) satellite was proposed for FY 1975 design study and launch in the next period of maximum solar activity, 19781979. smm would investigate solar flares and related phenomena and their effects on the solar-terrestrial system, making, for the first time, simultaneous measurements of flares across the electromagnetic spectrum—within a national program of satellite, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations of the sun during maximum activity. The spacecraft would be shuttle-retrievable for refurbishment and reflight with advanced solar physics experiments in the 1980s. Requested funding for the Large Space Telescope (Ls’r) for FY 1975 was $6.2 million, to proceed with design of telescope optics, detectors, and support systems. NASA had originally planned to spend about $10 million in FY 1975 on the lst—to be launched on the space shuttle in 1980—but reduced the request to reflect the four- to six-month delay in shuttle development. NASA—in cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory, Sandia Laboratories, and West Germany—was developing an Aries sounding rocket to support the physics and astronomy program. Aries, which used the 2nd stage of surplus Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles, would provide a greater lift and longer flight time than possible at the price of rockets now in use. Cost overruns on the 1975 two-spacecraft Viking mission to Mars could total 10% of the original $838-million estimate for the program because of hardware development problems. Major problems with the biology instrument included packing the sophisticated instruments into a small volume, development of very small valves to inject sufficiently small amounts of nutrients into Martian samples, and thermal control. The instrument was running $21.2 million over the budgeted cost. Difficulties also had been encountered in producing enough 0.005-cm plated magnetic wire of uniform characteristics for the onboard computer. Dr. Naugle said that, although the overall coniplexity of the spacecraft had been underestimated, “we expect these problems to be solved and to launch both Viking spacecraft on schedule in 1975.” (Transcript) Experiments were designed to demonstrate an attitude control accuracy of better than three arc minutes using a gas jet system, measure the performance in orbit of operational infrared sensor components, demonstrate an inexpensive Canopus sensor of high reliability, measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft, determine interference generated by the propane gas control system, demonstrate a basic sensing element with application in digital sun and earth albedo sensors, and measure degradation of silicone solar cells in orbit. NASA’s objective of placing the satellite in an earth orbit that would permit achievement of the scientific objectives was met, and the mission was adjudged a success 19 March. Under a December 1972 Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the U.K.’s Dept, of Trade and Industry, NASA would be reimbursed for launch vehicle and services. Developed for the U.K. by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., the 83.5-by 66.5-cm, 92-kg spacecraft was powered by a four-panel 250-cm-long solar array of 1800 solar cells. Miranda was deployed in a fully sunlit polar orbit with a yo-yo despin system and its attitude control system acquired the sun through three sun sensors. The eighth NASA launch of a U.K. satellite and the fourth on a Scout vehicle—Miranda carried the names of 80000 Boy Scouts from nine U.S. states on a microdot. (NASA MOR, 21 March 74; NASA Releases 74-36, 74-53; UN Reg;- Newport News, Va, Daily Press, 22 Feb 74; SBD, 12 March 74,59)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Grigory Khozin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Institute of U.S. Studies expressed resentment of criticism by some U.S. press members and others of Soviet motives and technical ability in the cooperative Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Writing in the weekly Literaturnaya Gazeta, Khozin particularly censured suggestions of early Soviet reluctance to cooperate in space and of Soviet spacecraft docking difficulties, made in the recent book U.S.-Soviet Cooperation in Space by former U.S. Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., Foy D. Kohler. He accused “certain U.S. circles” of being “glad to cast a shadow” on ASTP and to “smear the forthcoming joint experiment precisely because it is a joint one [and] promotes the establishment of normal relations between countries.” Khozin declared that the U.S.S.R., as well as U.S. space program leaders and “ordinary Americans,” favored further close cooperation in space. (fbis-Sov, Sept 74, B2-3; Smith, NYT, 19 Sept 74) 18 September—21 October, 24 November-14 December: Two sets of critical surface-simulation tests were successfully conducted on the Viking lander proof-flight vehicle in a Martin Marietta Corp. thermal vacuum chamber under Martian temperature and pressure conditions. The tests verified the ability of Viking systems to withstand Martian temperatures and verified lander operations and ground support systems from the acquisition of a simulated Martian soil sample to analysis, interpretation, and reporting of data by Viking science teams. The spacecraft performed tasks—using the surface sampler, imaging system, meteorological sensors, x-ray spectrometer, seismometer, and thermal control systems—in temperatures ranging from 178 to 308 K (—135° to 95°F). (nasa prog off, interview, 21 Oct 75; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74,44-45)
The Titan IIIE-Centaur proof-flight vehicle (TC-1), launched by NASA from Eastern Test Range Complex 41 at 9:48 am edt carrying a Viking spacecraft model and the sphinx satellite, was destroyed after the Centaur engine failed to start. At 8.1 min from launch, after normal separation from the Titan booster, the Centaur main-engine start failed and the vehicle automatically went into the restart sequence. A second attempt to start the engine failed at 9.2 min after liftoff. Since the vehicle had not achieved orbital velocity the Range Safety Officer at the Antigua, West Indies, tracking station transmitted destruction commands and the Centaur was destroyed at 12,5 min after the liftoff. The vehicle fell into the Atlantic Ocean 3530 km downrange. Inflight data indicated that the liquid-oxygen boost pump had failed to operate during both attempted engine starts. A committee was formed to investigate the failure and recommend corrective action. Although the primary objective of demonstrating the capability of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was not accomplished, some objectives were fulfilled: demonstration of the capability of the launch facility to support a Titan-Centaur launch, structural integrity of the vehicle, Centaur guidance and control of the Titan, Titan-Centaur separation, and Centaur standard shroud capability. The Viking Dynamic Simulator had been instrumented to verify flight loads for the two planned 1975 missions to Mars. Remaining attached to the Centaur stage, the vds was to have flown a typical Viking launch trajectory with a shortened bum to limit the spacecraft to a low earth orbit, to test the guidance system, and estimate injection accuracy. The sphinx Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment spacecraft had been intended for launch into an elliptical orbit to investigate the effect of charged particles in space on high-voltage solar cells, insulators, and conductors. The launch vehicle combined NASA’s versatile high-energy liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen Centaur upper stage with the Air Force-developed Titan III booster, a two-stage liquid-propellant core rocket augmented by two strap-on solid-fueled rocket motors. It was designed to fill the performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and the Saturn vehicles and boost NASA’s heaviest unmanned payloads into orbit or interplanetary trajectories. The first of six scheduled operational missions—the U.S. and West German Helios solar probe scheduled for the fall—would be configured to a two-burn mission to obtain data lost on the proof flight. The Titan-Centaur program was managed by NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center was responsible for the Titan-Centaur system. The Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization was responsible for the Titan IIIE booster, including aerospace ground equipment and Launch Complex 41 site activation. Kennedy Space Center directed launch operations at etr. (NASA mors, 25 Jan, 24 June 74; NASA Release 74r-25; UPI, W Post, 12 Feb 74, A2; Robinson, Today, 13 Feb 74)
Tentative NASA plans for launching 810 payloads into space in the next two decades were outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. The total, for late 1973 to 1991, included non-NASA payloads for Government agencies (other than the Dept, of Defense), foreign agencies, and private industry. The tentative payload model—presented to Congress in October 1973 to show “what could be done in the 1980s” when the space shuttle was in use—included as many as 10 missions to the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1990 and 1991 two very heavy payloads might be sent to orbit one of Jupiter’s moons and land an instrument package. Tentative missions to the inner planets included five missions to Venus, one of them with a lander, and two spacecraft to orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return samples from the two moons of Mars. Lunar missions under consideration included a lunar polar orbiter in 1979, two other orbiters in the 1980s, two lunar rovers in the 1980s, a lunar halo satellite to ensure communications with the hidden side of the moon, and two lunar rovers in 1990 and 1991 that could return samples to the earth from any point on the moon. Other plans under consideration were a flyby and rendezvous with Comet Encke and a landing on the nucleus, a flyby of Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. Of the 810 total payloads, 57 were designated for planetary exploration and 753 for earth orbit. Scientific satellites for earth orbit were Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large Solar Observatories, Large Radio Astronomy Observatories, and x-ray telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing. In the applications field were large Earth Observatory Satellites. And NASA expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation satellites for other agencies or private industry through 1991, not including those for DOD. Of some 300 payloads to be flown in the Spacelab, most would be NASA payloads in the fields of astronomy, physics, earth observations, earth and ocean physics, communication and navigation, life science, and space technology. Of non-NASA payloads, 10 would be for private industry space processing, beginning in 1985. Some 10% were expected to be flown for foreign users. The large number of contemplated missions, even with the increasing number of U.S.S.R. launches, was expected to have very little impact on the environment. Effects of the major constituents of the solid-fueled rocket booster exhaust—water vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, and aluminum oxide—would be negligible. (Text)
nasa and European Space Research Organization officials met in Paris to discuss future cooperative missions to the planets. Joint mission possibilities included an out-of-the-ecliptic flight to study the sun, missions to Jupiter and Mercury, and experiments on missions to Venus and Mars. NASA would receive suggestions for the 1980s from European nations during the next few months, nasa Director of Planetary Programs Robert S. Kraemer had said that international cooperation would be necessary for one third to one fourth of the payloads the agency envisioned for the next 15 yrs. (nasa, Spec Asst to Deputy Assoc Admin, interviews, 20-21 Jan 75; Couvault, Av Wk, 1 April 74, 38-9)
Computer enhancement of multispectral photographs from Erts 1 satellite (circling the earth since 23 July 1972) had been proved useful for finding mineral and water deposits on the earth. Computer image enhancement, first used at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to improve early spacecraft pictures of the moon and Mars, had identified surface signs of known mineral deposits for JPL and U.S. Geological Survey investigators. Twenty ERTS-identified points had been verified in a test area, exploratory drilling had uncovered water-bearing rock 12 m below an ERTS-indicated water hole, and fractures indicating other drilling sites had been revealed, (nasa 74-27)
“I am sure life will move out from the Earth, probably first to the Moon and then to Mars,” Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech reviewing NASA’s planetary program before the National Space Club. Just what form of life would be transplanted, whether man or some simple organism, would be the subject of debate. Four planets—Jupiter, Venus, Mars, and Mercury—had already been visited. The next major event would be the Viking landings on Mars in 1976. Historically, two significant events in 1965 had determined the direction of the planetary program. The first was r. study at Woods Hole, Mass., which had recommended that the space program, following Apollo, should search for life on the planets and give first priority to the study of Mars—while also maintaining a wide-ranging program of general planetary exploration—because Mars most closely resembled the earth and was the most likely to support life. The second event, the 14 July 1965 flight of Mariner 4 past Mars, supported the recommendations when it found evidence of water in the Martian atmosphere. “In retrospect, I think the decision . . . has been sound.” But a major decision that faced NASA this summer, one year before the launch of Viking, was whether there should be follow-on Viking missions. “Should Mars continue to have first priority in planetary exploration? . . . Clearly, if we find evidence of life on Mars, . . . Mars will have first priority.” (Text)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, would receive the National Civil Service League’s Career Service Award for Sustained Excellence, NASA announced. Dr. Naugle had joined NASA in 1959 as head of the Nuclear Emulsion Section at Goddard Space Flight Center and, in 1967, had become Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Science at Headquarters. Under his leadership, scientists had mapped the entire surface of Mars, collected the first detailed information about Jupiter and its moons, and advanced the use of unmanned spacecraft as astronomical observatories. Dr. Naugle would receive the award, given to Federal officials with at least 10 yrs outstanding public service, on 9 Oct. Dr, Carolyn Huntoon, Johnson Space Center, would receive the League’s Special Achievement Award for her design of a Skylab experiment that had measured biochemical reactions to weightlessness. (NASA Release 74-252)
NASA had deleted a backup Viking lander spacecraft and would substitute the proof test orbiter for one of two flight orbiters to help offset significant cost increases and meet target dates for the two 1975 missions to explore the planet Mars, NASA reported to Speaker of the House Carl Albert. Technical problems in the guidance-and-control computer, biology instrument, and lander proof-test capsule qualification had delayed cornpletion of the landers, made the schedule “extremely tight,” and increased costs an estimated $48.8 million over the $89 million in the FY 1975 budget. NASA notified the House that' it planned to use for Viking $48.8 million available from the Skylab program after its successful completion. (Text in Viking Proj Hearings, House Subcom on Space Science, 21-2 Nov 74)
NASA was presented the Principality of Monaco’s gold and diamond-studded Silver Jubilee plaque at the Annual Awards Luncheon of the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C., for its contribution to worldwide television. The award was presented to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, by U.S. Information Agency Deputy Director Eugene P. Kopp on behalf of Prince Ranier III of Monaco, who had said that NASA’s live telecasts from the moon deserved recognition as “one of the most dramatic television events of the past quarter century.” (jsc Roundup, 29 March 74,1) Mars 6 and 7—continuing to transmit data on solar wind and radiation from heliocentric orbit—were part of a series of four automatic stations launched to explore the Martian atmosphere and surface. Mars 4 and 5, launched 22 and 25 July 1973, had approached the planet 10 and 12 Feb. Mars 4 flew by Mars when its braking engine failed to fire. Mars 5 went into a successful orbit and continued to transmit data to the earth. Earlier, Mars 3 had softlanded a capsule on Mars 2 Dec. 1971 during a windstorm; the capsule had transmitted 20 sec before falling silent. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 15 March 74, Ul; 21 March 74, Ul; Pravda, fbis-Sov, 27 March 74, Ul; W Post, 15 March 74, A29; gsfc SSR, 31 March 74; Av Wk, 25 March 74,17; 1 April, 11)
Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology, announced the appointment of Dr. Bruce C. Murray as Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, succeeding Dr. William H. Pickering who was retiring after 21 yr in the position. Dr. Murray, a Caltech professor of planetary sciences for 15 yr, had also been a researcher on JPL space missions for more than 10 yr. He was completing scientific descriptions of Venus and Mercury from Mariner 10 data, gathered during a February 1974 encounter with the planet, and comparing the surface histories of Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the moon with the history of the earth. Dr. Pickering had been with JPL since 1944 and had served as its Director since 1954. As Director, Dr. Pickering led JPL in designing and building the first orbiting U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958). Also under his leadership, JPL had designed the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner spacecraft that were launched to gather information on the moon and nearby planets. (NASA Release 75—179)
Viking Lander 1 would undergo a critical milestone in its development, terminal sterilization, beginning 13 June, Robert S. Kramer, NASA Director of Planetary Programs, said at a Viking news conference in Washington, D.C. The Lander would remain in the oven for 2.5 days and then be removed and checked out. Past missions had failed because “maybe we knew how to sterilize a spacecraft but we didn’t know how to make one work after it was sterilized,” Kramer said. However, “we think we know a lot more now than we did 15 years ago. We believe we have developed the techniques to be fully reliable, but when we complete that test along about next Tuesday morning, then we are going to find out for sure.” A. Thomas Young, Viking Mission Operations Manager at Langley Research Center, said that plans called for launch of Viking 1 on 11 Aug. and launch of Viking 2 on 21 Aug. Mission planners had deliberately arranged for the first Viking to arrive at Mars on 18 June 1976, after 10 mos of travel, and Viking 2 to arrive on 7 Aug. 1976, about 1 yr after it was launched. Both spacecraft would spend about 17 days in orbit examining landing sites “to assure ourselves that they continue to be safe.” The sites, which had not been examined since 1971, must be checked again because Mars was a dynamic planet. Lander 1 was scheduled to begin its descent 4 July and start black-and-white photography immediately upon landing. Color photography would begin 18 hr later. The first soil sample would be collected on the eighth day. Analysis of the sample would take 12 days to complete, and 20 days would be required to complete one cycle of all surface science. Young noted that, to avoid confusion during the mission, Martian days would be called “sols” because they were a half-hour longer than earth days. During surface operations, the Orbiter passing overhead once a day would remain synchronized with the Lander; on the pass, the Orbiter, acting as a communications satellite, would relay information from the Lander to earth. When the Lander completed its work, the Orbiter would perform observations of its own, studying Martian surface features, including the proposed Lander B landing site, from orbit. (Transcript)
The Soviet Union might attempt to land an automatic microbiological laboratory on Mars before the U.S. Viking spacecraft, whose twice-delayed launch is now scheduled for 20 Aug., could arrive, the Christian Science Monitor reported Finnish astronomer Heikka Oja as telling the British Interplanetary Society. By launching a probe between 17 Sept, and 3 Oct. and using higher speeds and shorter trajectories, the Russians could reach Mars in May 1976, 2 mo before the scheduled Viking arrival. Between 1971 and 1973 the Soviets had made 4 attempts to land probes on Mars; only Mars 3 (launched 28 May 1971) succeeded in softlanding a capsule (on 2 Dec. 1971). Landing in a dust storm, it ceased transmitting after 20 sec. Oja said the Soviets hoped to repeat this experiment, this time in a region near the south polar cap of Mars where the thin, mostly carbon dioxide atmosphere might contain moisture. (Gatland, CSM, 19 Aug 75) . .
NASA had awarded a $152 565 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, and test of the Space Shuttle external tank, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The contract, which covered the first increment of the external tank project for 1 Sept. 1973 to 30 June 1980, called for a maximum production rate of 24 tanks per year and delivery of major ground-test articles and 6 flight-model tanks. The work would be done at Michoud Assembly Facility under the direction of MSFC. (MSFC Release 75—28) During January: Opportunities and Choices in Space Science, 1974, a report published by the Space Science Board of the National Research Council, recommended that NASA undertake the Large Space Telescope as the only new space research start in FY 1976. The telescope should be followed by a series of permanent national and international observatories in orbit. The report also recommended that, budget permitting, NASA undertake in 1977 a lunar—polar mission, a Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter, a Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission, and a solar maximum mission. However, NASA should compare the importance of the Pioneer—Jupiter orbiter with the Mariner—Jupiter—Uranus mission if current FY 1977 budget estimates would not support both missions. Other recommendations included an immediate reevaluation of strategy for missions to explore the outer solar system during the next decade and for returning a Martian surface sample to earth instead of landing an unmanned laboratory to perform analyses as current plans propose. The report strongly endorsed the High Energy Astronomical Observatories (HEAO), Pioneer—Venus mission, and Mariner— Jupiter—Saturn mission as vital to the nation’s space science efforts. (Text)
Intelsat IV F-6 communications satellite was destroyed by a NASA range safety officer 415 sec after launch from Eastern Test Range when the Atlas-Centaur test vehicle tumbled out of control. Lifting off at 6:35 pm EST, the mission had been normal to Atlas booster-engine cutoff at 138 sec. Then telemetry data indicated several malfunctions, including electrical problems and loss of altitude. After destruction, the vehicle impacted in the Atlantic Ocean 800 km downrange from the launch site. An investigation of the failure was begun under the direction of Lewis Research Center and the mission was officially judged unsuccessful 6 March. The failure was the first for an Atlas-Centaur since May 1971, when a circuit problem in the Centaur ended the launch of the Mariner 8 Mars probe. The 1400-kg Intelsat IV F-6, launched by NASA on a cost-reimbursable basis for the Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the 89-member-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, was intended to be the primary spacecraft over the Indian Ocean region, with Intelsat IV F-5, launched 13 June 1972, becoming the backup. The failure of Intelsat IV F—6 would have no immediate effect on Intelsat global communications; Intelsat IV F-5 could provide the primary function and Intelsat III F-3, launched 6 Feb. 1969, was still capable of providing limited backup. The Intelsat IV F-6 mission had been scheduled originally for launch in February 1973 but experienced a series of delays from problems in both the satellite and the launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 26 Feb 75, 13 March 74; PAO, interview, 21 Feb 75; NASA Releases 73—83, 75—7, 75—47; NASA “Note to Editors,” 3 May 73, 27 June 75; SBD, 24 Jan 75, 127)
NASA’s use of the firefly s two light-producing chemicals, luciferin and luciferase, to test for the chemical presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), an energy-storage compound present in every living cell, had increased interest in luminescence as a tool for medical research, the New York Times reported. Research done in 1948 by Johns Hopkins Univ. scientists had demonstrated that ATP was the third essential ingredient—along with luciferin and luciferase—necessary for the firefly’s glow, and that the amount of light generated was directly proportionate to the level of ATP present. The Hopkins scientists had also developed a simple test for life itself, since luciferin and luciferase added to any living matter could reproduce the firefly’s glimmer. NASA applied this information, with more sophisticated lightdetection instruments, to develop a test for life on Mars for use aboard the Viking spacecraft (launched 20 Aug.) NASA scientists working with the firefly chemicals at Goddard Space Flight Center had developed many applications, including a method of detecting bacteria in water; this permitted speedy diagnosis of urinary infections, as well as testing the effect of various antibiotics on particular infections. Univ. of Calif, scientists continued the research, adapting the techniques for related work in measuring creatine phosphokinase (CPK) in the bloodstream. CPK, present in all human blood, was produced in abnormally high quantities during muscle-cell degeneration that accompanied cardiac arrest or muscular dystrophy. CPK could be treated to produce ATP and, with the application of firefly chemicals, to produce a glow proportionate to the amount of CPK in the bloodstream. Researchers had used the measurements as a quick blood test to tell whether a patient had suffered a heart attack. (NYT, 25 Aug 75) 26 August—3 September: NASA launched Symphonie 2, France and West Germany’s second experimental communications satellite at 9:42 pm EDT 26 Aug. from Eastern Test Range. A three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle boosted the spacecraft into a synchronous transfer orbit with a 37 974-km apogee, 413-km perigee, 678.3-min period, and 13.2° inclination. On 29 Aug. at 11:48 am EDT, ground controllers activated the onboard liquid-fueled apogee motor to circularize the. orbit at geosynchronous altitude. By 31 Aug. Symphonie 2 was in an orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 35 364-km perigee, 23-hr 47-min period, and O.CP inclination. NASA’s primary objective for the mission—to launch the Symphonie 2 into a synchronous transfer orbit with sufficient accuracy to enable the satellite to accomplish its operational mission—had been successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on 3 Sept. When finally positioned at 11.5° west longitude over the equator, the 402-kgSymphonie 2 would provide 1200 telephone, 8 voice, and 2 TV channels for experimental communications between Europe and the African and South American continents. Second of two experimental comsats developed by the French-West German Consortium Industriel Franee-Allemand pour le Satellite Symphonie (CIFAS), under the direction of Germany’s Gesellschaft fur Weltraumforschung GFW and France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Symphonie 2 would expand the French-West German experimental satellite TV and telegraph communications program begun with the launch of Symphonie 1 on 18 Dec. 1974. In October 1973 NASA had agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis, and in June 1974 had signed a launch services contract with the consortium. Estimated cost of hardware and services was $12 million. Goddard Space Flight Center, under the direction of the Office of Space Science, was responsible for the launch vehicle and for limited tracking during initial activities. When the satellite separated from the vehicle third stage, the Symphonie Project Operations Group in France and West Germany would assume operational responsibility. (NASAMORs S—492— 204— 75— 02, 25 July, 3 Sept; GSFC SSR, 31 Aug 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21—27 Aug 75; NASA Release 75— 234)
The press commented on the mission of the Viking spacecraft to Mars [see 20 Aug.]. The Washington Post said that the essence of the space program had been “to provide mankind with new knowledge, not in hopes that this knowledge will be useful immediately here on Earth but in hopes that it will expand our understanding of the universe in which we live and . . . enable us to reach better solutions to our philosophical and political, as well as practical, problems.” The Viking missions had opened a new era in which the search for knowledge was to be done largely by machines; the rewards promised to be rich, beyond measure in strictly monetary terms. The Christian Science Monitor agreed, commenting that Viking represented “an opportunity for mankind’s self-awareness to take a greater stride away from earth-centered thinking than was afforded by Neil Armstrong’s historic step on to the moon.” Discovering organic life on Mars would strengthen the conviction that life existed abundantly throughout the universe and that we were not alone. Some had questioned whether the U.S. should spend a billion dollars on such a program when resources were hard pressed on earth, but anew discovery, that life was not a meaningless chance but part of a grand design, could give new inspiration to humanity’s efforts to deal with earthly problems. Here was a challenge for the architects of detente, the Monitor asserted. The U.S. and Russia had been needlessly duplicating scientific efforts, their cooperation amounting to little more than “arm’s-length information exchange.” The two countries had much to share. “By abandoning costly competition for a truly joint program, the two countries could gain from each other’s capabilities, minimize the cost to each of them, and pursue this cosmic outreach on behalf of all mankind.” (W Post, 22 Aug 75, A24; CSM, 22 Aug 75, 28)
Astronomers in the People’s Republic of China said they had discovered two minor planets between Mars and Pluto, reported a British press delegation visiting Nanking Observatory. The press quoted the Chinese as saying that the planets, observed in January, were rarely visible because of their position in the solar system. The Chinese had named the planets Purple Mountain One and Purple Mountain Two, for the name of the mountain on which the Nanking Observatory was located. (Reuter, W Post, 7 May 75)
Twenty-five spacecraft on twenty-four vehicles were scheduled for launch by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The 25 spacecraft included 14 for NASA programs, 10 for other organizations, and 1 as a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting the year would be the 15 July launch of an Apollo spacecraft carrying Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton as the U.S. contribution to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Apollo would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19—launched 7 hr earlier than Apollo and carrying Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov—allowing both crews to exchange visits and perform joint scientific experiments. The two sets of Viking spacecraft, scheduled for 11 and 21 August launches, would journey through space for a year before arriving in the vicinity of Mars. There each set of spacecraft would separate into an orbiter and a lander to make orbital and surface investigations of the Martian environment. Other NASA spacecraft would include ERTS-B Earth Resources Technology Satellite and SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, in January; GOES-C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, in March; OSO-I Orbiting Solar Observatory, Nimbus-F experimental meteorological satellite, and Explorer 53 (SAS-C Small Astronomy Satellite), in May; GOES-A Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, in June; Explorers 56 and 57 Dual Air Density Explorers, on a single booster in July or August; Explorer 54 (AE-D Atmospheric Explorer), in September; and Explorer 55 (AE-E), in December. The 10 spacecraft to be launched by NASA for other organizations included 5 comsats for Communications Satellite Corp.: IntelsatIV F—1 in February, Intelsat-IVA F—1 and F—2 in July and October, and Marisat A and B in April and July. Other reimbursable launches would include Telesat—C (Anik 3) for Canada in March, COS-B Celestial Observation Satellite in July for the European Space Agency, Symphonie—B experimental comsat in September for France and West Germany, RCA-A (RCA —Satcom 1, in orbit) comsat in December for RCA Corp., and ITOSE-2 Improved TIROS Operational Satellite in late 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Helios— B would be launched late in 1975 as a cooperative effort with West Germany. The schedule called for 18 of the 24 launches to be made from Kennedy Space Center, 5 from Western Test Range, and 1 from San Marco. For the launches NASA would use a Saturn IB, 3 Titan-Centaurs, 5 Atlas-Centaurs, and 15 Thor-Delta launch vehicles. (NASA Release 75—5; KSC Release 180—74)
Scientists were calling for names for the thousands of mountains, craters, and chasms being found on planets faster than they could be named, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The two Viking spacecraft scheduled to reach Mars in 1976 and the two Soviet Venera spacecraft scheduled to approach Venus in October would no doubt uncover a host of new unnamed features. Names for known features on Venus, Mars, and the moon would be officially chosen at the August 1976 meeting of the International Astronomical Union (IAU), world clearinghouse for solar-system nomenclature. (Jones, CSM, 7 Aug 75, 2) ...
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
Scientists believed that light flashes observed by Skylab 4 crew members during their 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974 mission as they flew through the South Atlantic Anomaly—a slight asymmetry in the earth’s magnetic field where the Van Allen radiation belt dipped unusually low over Brazil—were a previously unsuspected form of radiation, Science magazine reported. The radiation seemed to consist of atomic nuclei heavier than hydrogen which, when stripped of electrons, would carry multiple positive electric charges. The astronauts had seen the flashes when the spacecraft cabin was dark and they were preparing for sleep. Scientists suspected that the flashes were stimulated within the retina of the eye by the high-energy cosmic-ray particles. Normally earth was shielded from cosmic rays by the magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays could reach as far into the field as the Skylab orbit. Because the magnetic-field shielding of the earth weakened toward the geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic-ray exposure as Skylab moved away from the poles. During two test periods, light-flash observations of Astronaut William R. Pogue showed a close correlation with exposure variations. (Pinsky et al., Science, 30 May 75, 928—930; Sullivan, NYT, 29 May 75, 10) The new space agency’s symbol was a rounded “e,” for European, on a globe representing earth, with fine lines suggesting both orbit and axis and a white dot representing a satellite in space. (ESRO—ESA Releases 20 May 75, 23 May 75, 2 June 75) 30 May—8 June: The 31st Annual Paris Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport in France. New restrictions on flight demonstrations by high-performance aircraft, imposed by the French government after the 1973 Air Show crash of the Soviet Tu —144 supersonic transport, had placed the show’s emphasis on displays of the latest aerospace hardware and technology from throughout the world. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the general turndown in the economy throughout the western world had caused a decline of 20% in exhibitors from the 1973 show. France emphasized the cooperative nature of its major programs, displaying the French—British Concorde SST, the French—German Alpha Jet trainer-attack aircraft, the French—British Jaguar close-air support aircraft, and the multinational A—300B twin-engine wide-body transport. The U.S. pavilion reflected the changing environment at the show, reserving 66% of its floor space for company exhibits restricted to industry visitors; the remaining 33% contained exhibits open to the general public. In 1973 60% was exhibitor space and 40% for the general public. Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. displayed aircraft that were potential replacements for the Boeing 707 and McDonnell DC— 8 on commercial airlines. The Boeing aircraft, a three-engine member of the 7X7 family, incorporated the NASA-developed supercritical wing. “Blue Planet” was the theme of the public section of the U.S. pavilion which emphasized technological fallout and practical uses on earth of space technology. Included were full-scale models of the Viking spacecraft scheduled for launch to Mars later in the year, and of Martin Marietta Corp.’s large space telescope. The 80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s capability in avionics and equipment and aerospace technology. Among the new aircraft exhibited by the British were the BN2 Islander, a floating aircraft for service between islands; the Lock-spieser LDA— 1, for cargo and agricultural uses; and a new version of the BAC 111 fighter aircraft. West Germany’s display stressed its participation in international consortiums as a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt— Boelkow—Blohm GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of its revenues in 1974 had been derived from multinational projects. (Av Wk, 2 June 75, 14-20; 9 June 75, 12-17)
The U.S. could land men on Mars in 10 yr if a commitment similar to President Kennedy’s pledge in 1961 to make a moon landing were made, Dr. Wernher von Braun, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech at the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Dr. von Braun, vice president for engineering and development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., said that nuclear-powered command ships could be sent to orbit the planet while a lander traveled to the Martian surface. The cost of the program would approximate the near-$25 billion cost of the Apollo program. (B Sun, 16 Feb 75, B16) '
A planet’s size and bulk might be more important than its location in the solar system in determining whether it can support life, Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said in a New York Times article. Conventional scientific thought had always been that the chance of life’s evolving on a planet was narrowly restricted by the planet’s distance from its parent star. However, planetology—the study of comparative geology of the planets, made possible by space probes such as Pioneer, Mariner, and Viking—provided evidence for the newer theory. The most important single factor in the geology of earth-like planets was the amount of internal heat left over from their birth. Planets as large as earth conserved heat, losing it very slowly through volcanic action over long periods of time. Molten volcanic material carried gases, including water vapor, that had been trapped below the planet’s surface; the vapors condensed into oceans, other gases formed an atmosphere, and life began. Mariner’s photos of Mars had confirmed the existence of volcanoes; but, because of the planet’s relatively small size, these exhausted their internal heat supply and died out rapidly about 100 million yr ago. During its active period, Mars must have had in its atmosphere large volumes of volcanic gases, including water vapor; Mariner photos had shown what were apparently dry river beds. When the volcanoes became extinct, the water and atmosphere leaked away into space and the small planet was left dry and nearly airless. Any life forms found on Mars by Viking or future space probes would probably be fossils. The study of lunar material added another example to the comparative geology of earth-like planets: The moon rocks brought back by Apollo astronauts had revealed volcanic activity on the moon; because the moon was smaller than Mars, this activity had stopped even earlier and the gases and moisture escaped even more quickly, leaving another dry, airless, and lifeless body. Scientists concluded that Mars was cold and lifeless not because it was farther from the sun than earth but because it was smaller and geologically inert. If the earth were moved out to the orbit of Mars, the average temperature of the earth would drop somewhat but its insulating atmosphere, continually replenished by volcanic gases for some billions of years longer, would maintain a livable temperature over large areas of the surface. (Jastrow, NYT, 24 Aug 75, E7)
The Federal Council for Science and Technology, a committee of officials representing major research and development agencies, released “Report on the Federal R&D Program—FY 1976,” a summary of 17 R&D agencies’ efforts in applying science and technology to national issues. The report stated that the FY 1976 budget included $21 billion for R&D programs, a 15% increase over the FY 1975 R&D budget of $18.8 billion. Of this, approximately $7.4 billion was planned for civilian programs including energy, health, education, agriculture, environment, urban problems, and transportation. Approximately one-fourth the civilian R&D budget was planned for energy, with the largest share of that—$1.55 million—going to the Energy Research and Development Administration. Nine other government agencies would receive increases in R&D budgets, with NASA’s FY 1976 budget estimate increasing to $3,539 billion, up from $3,231 billion in FY 1975, an increase of more than $300 million. Space R&D would continue with projects to explore Mars, Venus, and outer planets, as well as the sun. Satellites would continue to be used for earth resources assessment, weather prediction, and surveys of potential geothermal energy sources. The Federal Aviation Administration would receive increases for air traffic safety, and Dept, of Defense increases would support development of the B—1 manned strategic aircraft, Trident missile systems, and Navy and Air Force air combat fighters. (Text; OMB, Budget of the U.S. Govt., FY 1976)
First major inflight tests of the Viking 1 lander scheduled to touch down on Mars in July 1976 had shown the craft to be in excellent health, flight controllers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported. JPL engineers completed thorough checks of the nuclear power, propulsion, guidance, attitude control, computer, tape recorder, telemetry, heat control, and radar landing systems, as well as four of the scientific instruments, including two cameras to photograph the Martian surface in closeup. The second Viking lander, scheduled to reach Mars in Sept. 1976, would undergo similar checkout the following week. (Pasadena Star-News, 14 Nov 75, 1)
If NASA had unlimited funding, “I would mpve fairly quickly on a manned station because that will become an important outpost foy anything that we do in space,” Dr. Geprge M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an interview with the San Diego Union. Dr. Low added that he would move quicker in launching a space telescope and bringing back soil samples from Mars, “both enormously important from a scientific point of view.” Dr. Low expressed concern that “we really aren’t being inventive enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.” All NASA’s rockets so far, including the Space Shuttle, had Used conventional means of propulsion, and with it man was limited. Dr. Low said that the moon landing “was enormously difficult because we are tied to chemical propulsion systems.” NASA was experimenting with solar electric propulsion but to date no one had invented a fission or antigravity system. (San Diego Union, 8 June 75) On 14 June at 9:30 am local time (12:30 am EDT) Venera 10 was successfully launched toward Venus from Baykonur Cosmodroipe. Tass reported that “in design and purpose it is analogous to the ‘Venera-9’ station launched on June 8” and that all spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Venera 10 was also expected to reach Venus in October. In an interview 17 June with the Christian Science Monitor, Boris N. Petrov, chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of International Cooperation in the Study and Exploration of Outer Space, revealed that the Venera mission called for a landing rather than just a flyby. (GSFC SSR, 30 June 75;FBIS—Sov, 8—17 June 75; Pond, CSM, 17 June 75,1; W Post, 8—17 June 75; NYT, 8—17 June 75)
A Today editorial had commented on the planned Viking flight to Mars: “Success of the Viking flight could mean additional Congressional support for more sophisticated flights in the future. ... It will be almost another year before we will have the answers to the Viking experiments. . . .At that time, we will be celebrating the 200th birthday of our country—and what better way to celebrate the birth of one nation than with the discovery of another?” (Today, 20 Aug 75)
President Ford’s announcement that he intended to restore the White House Office of Science and Technology was discussed in a Washington Post editorial: most scientists were heartened by President Ford’s announcement. They had unanimously deplored President Nixon’s decision to abolish the office, believing that it was vital to the nation’s well-being for the President to get the most objective possible scientific assessment of new weaponry, as well as of medical, economic, and environmental policies. However, scientists also felt that the establishment of the office and the possible appointment of National Science Foundation Director Dr. H. Guyford Stever as its head would not solve the problem. A report drafted by a committee of 13 leading scientists had spelled out what was needed: establishment of a Council for Science and Technology that would carry the same weight as the Domestic and Economic Councils and could hold its own with the Office of Management and Budget and DOD. Any serious candidate for the top science job would want to consider whether the President “really intends to make constructive use of a science adviser. Past experience tells us that the best mechanism for advice from the scientific community is of no avail if the President isn’t listening.” (IF Post, 31 May 75, A12) During May: Preparations continued for late summer launches of the two Viking spacecraft to Mars. A Lander 1 plugs-out test was completed 8 May, 2 days later than planned, because of a grounding problem. By 26 May all flight equipment, except for the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, had been installed on Lander 1. Lander 2 was mated with its protective aeroshell on 28 May. Orbiter 1 was undergoing final mechanical assembly as the flight subsystems became available after individual reworking. By 31 May all temperature-control louvers, protective covers, and thermal blankets had been installed. Initial Orbiter 2 system testing was completed 5 May, and Orbiter block validation tests were begun. All solar panels for both Orbiters had been assembled and swing-tested, and were awaiting buildup of the low-pressure gas system. On 13 May a major hardware review of both landers was held at Kennedy Space Center with 100 NASA and industry participants. The review was the final chance to discuss modifications in the spacecraft before closure of the bottom plates and sterilization. Following the review, Langley Research Center’s Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said, “Everything is going just great and right on schedule.” (Viking launch and mission operations status bulletins 4, 5, 6; NASA Activities, June 75)
New members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, led by Committee Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), made an orientation tour of Kennedy Space Center. In addition to visits to Launch Complexes 36 and 39, the KSC industrial area, and the Visitors Information Center, the committee members viewed the Apollo spacecraft being readied for the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Viking lander being prepared for the August twin mission to Mars. The members also received special briefings on Center activities^ (KSC Release 11—75)
of Jupiter for the first time. Instrumentation at McDonald Observatory, the Univ. of Texas’s 27-m telescope facility in Austin, made the discovery by using high-resolution spectra. Dr. Reinhard Beer, JPL leader of the team, reported that the near-infrared spectra had been produced by a Connestype Fourier spectrometer in 1974; spectral lines—the “signatures” of various molecules—had disclosed that carbon monoxide molecules were present to a depth of at least 50 km into the lower atmosphere. Carbon monoxide had been previously found in minor amounts in the atmospheres of earth, Venus, and Mars. Although the spectra had shown no indication of carbon dioxide in the Jovian atmosphere, Dr. Beer reported, future telescope searches from higher altitudes might reveal its presence there. (NASA Release 75—269)
Technology will be available for manned flights well before the year 2000, allowing even better research of the planet’s [Mars’] composition,” Dr. George Sands, associate Viking Project scientist at Langley Research Center, stated in an interview with the Newport News Times Herald. “The Viking missions [scheduled for August launch] are just the prelude of things to come.” Dr. Sands continued, “The results of [the] probe to Mars this month will be very significant for the future of planetary exploration and additional trips to Mars.” (Biggins, Times Herald, 4 Aug 75)
The first radar probes of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede had been made by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA announced. Ganymede, at the time some 600 million km distant from earth, was found to have a rougher surface than the inner planets Mercury, Mars, or Venus. Dr. Goldstein scanned Ganymede three or four times on each of six nights in August 1974, using the 64-m antenna at JPL’s Goldstone station of the Deep Space Network; the radar employed a 400-kw microwave beam at a frequency of 12.6 cm. Writing in Science magazine, Dr. Goldstein and co-investigator George A. Morris said the most likely surface of Ganymede was rocky metallic material imbedded in a matrix of ice. Such a surface could be smooth with a top layer of ice rubble but would appear rough to the radar because the ice would be transparent to the microwave beam. The theory was particularly interesting in view of the finding by the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys (3 Dec. 1973 and 3 Dec. 1974) that Jupiter itself seemed totally gaseous, with no solid surface to produce a radar echo. The JPL scientists theorized that Ganymede was probably meteoritic in origin. (NASA Release 75 — 170; Goldstein et al., Science, 20 June 75, 1211-1212)
All four batteries on the Viking 2 lander had been fully charged, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory reported. The problem had been solved by using a backup charger system carried on the orbiter after the primary system failed earlier [see 2 Nov.]. Recharging took about 24 hr per battery. The voltage had to be replenished before the spacecraft entered Mars orbit and before the lander separated from the orbiter. The difficulty with the lander’s primary charger had been traced to failure of one of four resistors in the circuitry. To prevent unforeseen problems with the backup charger, Viking project officials had decided to keep at least one of the batteries charged throughout the remainder of cruise flight, to ensure activation of the switch shifting the lander from its solar-panel power to that from radioisotope thermoelectric generators. The two RTGs had not been used for primary power during flight to avoid thermal problems from the heat given off by the units. (LA Times, 6 Nov 75, 1; AvWk, 10 Nov 75, 6; SBD, 12 Nov 75, 64; Langley Researcher, 14 Nov 75, 1)
Space scientists and astronomers had been wrestling with a “cultural crisis” in putting names to features of distant worlds that had never been clearly seen before, as closeup views of several planets became available and more were on the way. Working through the Intemational Astronomical Union, the scientists had been forced to look beyond the names of scientists and explorers that had been used almost exclusively for objects on the moon and on Mars. A meeting on the problem in Moscow in July 1974 had agreed that objects on Venus would be called after women famous in mythology and history. New maps of the recently photographed surface of Mercury would bear the names of contributors to the arts and other humanities; the scientists had sought advice from scholars in the humanities to get the widest possible representation from past and present cultures. The Moscow meeting on new approaches to names for planetary features had been preceded by intense work on naming newly discovered configurations on the moon and on Mars. A complete scheme of names for more than 500 large formations on the far side of the moon—visible only to spacecraft because one side of the moon had always been turned toward earth—had been approved in 1970. Soviet scientists had rejected suggestions of names from the humanities for features on the moon and on Mars; they had urged a fresh start on Mercury, a new planet, with formations named not only for authors, as the Americans had originally suggested, but also for persons in other branches of the humanities. (NYT, 25 Dec 75, CIO)
Viking 1 was successfully launched at 5:22 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range’s Launch Pad 41 on a Titan Ill-Centaur launch vehicle. The launch, first scheduled for 11 Aug., had been postponed until 14 Aug. to replace a faulty thrust-vector control valve on the launch vehicle [see 11 Aug.]. A second delay had occurred when the spacecraft’s internal batteries had discharged to 9 volts, well below safe limits [see 13 Aug.]. The spacecraft, Viking A, had been removed from the launch vehicle and replaced by Viking B. The range safety officer had issued a waiver of standard procedures and permitted removal and installation of the spacecraft without detanking and depressurizing the launch vehicle, thus allowing the launch to be rescheduled for 20 Aug. Viking 1, consisting of a 2360-kg orbiter attached to an 1180-kg lander, was placed in a trajectory to Mars within the designed 3-sigma limits. Nearly 35 min after trajectory insertion, the Centaur stage separated from the spacecraft. The solar panels were deployed and oriented toward the sun, and the biocap—a container used to hermetically seal the lander while in earth’s atmosphere—was jettisoned. On 27 Aug. at 2:30 pm EDT a trajectory-correction maneuver targeted the spacecraft to its Mars orbital insertion point. By 28 Aug. all systems aboard the spacecraft were operating normally and in a cruise mode. Travel time to Mars was estimated at 10 mo, with a possible Mars landing on 4 July 1976, the height of the U.S. Bicentennial. A second spacecraft, Viking B, had been scheduled for a 1 Sept, launch to arrive at Mars in 12 mos. The Viking missions supported NASA’s planetary program goals of exploring the solar system and gaining knowledge of its origin and evolution, and of the origin and evolution of life and of the dynamic processes that shaped man’s terrestrial environment. Specific purpose of the two Viking missions was to increase knowledge of Mars by making observations from Mars orbit and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the surface, with particular emphasis on biological, chemical, and environmental data on past or present existence of life on the planet. Viking 1 was targeted to land in the Martian equatorial region, in a very low area resembling the fluvial plain of a dry river bed—an ideal site to search for organic material. Alternate sites for both Viking landers had been selected and there would be some flexibility until insertion into Mars orbit, after which the available band of landing sites would be narrowed by orbital geometry. Once in orbit, the orbiter would survey prospective landing sites; when the decision on where to land had been made, retrorockets would separate the lander from the orbiter and the lander would descend to the surface, sequentially braked by its aeroshell’s drag, by a parachute, and finally by its retrorockets. After landing, the science instrumentation would be activated and exploration would begin; data would be transmitted back to earth by the lander radio or through a radio-relay link with the orbiter. The orbiter’s main body, an octagonal ring 46 cm high with alternating 140- and 51-cm sides, consisted of 16 modular compartments. The entire structure was 10 m across the tips of the extended solar panels and 3.3 m high from the lander attachment points to the launch vehicle. Besides propulsion, navigation and control, communications, power, computer, and data-storage subsystems, the orbiter carried its science instrumentation mounted on a scan platform that could move with 2 degrees of freedom. The three science instruments were twin high-resolution, slow-scan TV cameras; an infrared atmospheric water detector; and a high-resolution infrared thermal mapper for detecting surface-temperature variations. The lander was a six-sided aluminum and titanium box 46.2 cm deep and enclosed top and bottom by cover plates; it measured 3 m wide and 2 m high from the footpads to the top of the S-band antenna. The six sides measured 109 cm and 56 cm alternately, with the three landing legs attached to the three narrower sides. The three retrorockets were mounted at 120° intervals on the lander; generating up to 2838 newtons (638 lbs) thrust, they would be ignited at an altitude of 1220 m to slow the lander’s descent from 222 kph to 9 kph at landing. Four small engines provided attitude control. In addition to subsystems for thermal control, power, and communications, the lander carried six instruments: twin scanning TV cameras, a sophisticated biology laboratory, a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer, a meteorology instrument, and a seismometer. Used with numerous temperature, pressure, and magnetic sensors, the instruments would perform entry, landed, and radio experiments. NASA’s investigation of Mars had begun in 1964 with the launch of Mariner 4. That spacecraft’s flyby on 15 July 1965 had revealed the planet to be moonlike with a dry, barren, cratered surface showing little evidence of wind or water erosion and no magnetic field. The better instrumented Mariners 6 and 7 that flew by the planet during the summer of 1969 reported a chaotic view of jumbled ridges and valleys unlike anything found on the earth or moon. The spacecraft also showed wide featureless expanses where craters had been somehow eroded, suggesting that Mars had been geologically active. Mariner 6 and 7 photographs showed a thin layer of snow—probably carbon dioxide—and instruments measured a thin atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide. High-quality photographs from Mariner 9, placed in Martian orbit on 13 Nov. 1971, provided evidence of fluid erosion, glacial action, and volcanoes. The Viking missions had continued the Mariner explorations of Mars. Viking was managed by Langley Research Center under overall direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science; LaRC also had management responsibility for the lander system designed and built by Martin Marietta Corp. Jet Propulsion Laboratory designed and built the orbiter system. The Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was the responsibility of Lewis Research Center; LaRC managed launch and flight operations executed by Martin Marietta, Kennedy Space Center, and JPL. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for tracking and data systems, and JPL managed the mission control and computing-center system. (NASA MORs S—815—75—01/02, 1 Aug 75, 28 Aug 75, 16 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—183; LaRC Launch and Mission Operations Status Bulletins Nos 9—11; Viking: Mission to Mars (NASA SP—334); W Post, 18-22 Aug 75; NYT, 18-22 Aug 75)
Preparations continued at Kennedy Space Center for the launch of two Viking spacecraft to Mars. Lander 1 was mated with its Orbiter on 8 March to test compatibility. The Lander and Orbiter were mated with the Centaur launch vehicle shroud and moved to Launch Complex 41 on 27 March to undergo a flight-events demonstration, Orbiter and Lander precountdown tests, and terminal countdown demonstration with the complete vehicle. During a complete 18-hr plugs-out test of Lander 2 on 13 March, data were transmitted to Jet Propulsion Laboratory to provide training for the Viking flight-control team. (KSC Spaceport News, 6 March 75, 6; 20 March 75, 5) April 1975
Viking 2 was successfully launched at 2:39 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range on a Titan-Centaur launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered on a trajectory toward Mars accurate to within the 3-sigma tolerance. If flown without midcourse correction, Viking 2 would reach Martian orbit 279 259 km from the target. The launch had been rescheduled from 1 Sept., after the launch crew during a 28 Aug. precountdown test discovered a degradation in the detection threshold of the orbiter’s S-band radio receiver. On 1 Sept., project officials decided to remove the spacecraft from the launch vehicle for additional evaluation. The launch was rescheduled for 9 Sept, after evaluation concluded that the anomaly had been caused by a faulty connector or conductor between the diplexer module and the high-gain antenna. Since the faulty part could not be isolated, the antenna and cabling were replaced, the orbiter and lander retested, encapsulated, and mated to the launch vehicle. After launch, all onboard systems and experiments were checked out. A trajectory correction maneuver on 19 Aug. targeted Viking 2 for a rendezvous with Mars on 7 Aug. 1976. Viking 2 was the second of two identical planetary probes [see 20 Aug.], each consisting of an orbiter and a lander, launched toward Mars in 1975 for rendezvous and orbital and surface exploration in 1976. (NASA MOR S-815-75—01—02, 16 Sept 75; Viking Science Activities rpt no. 89; Mission Operations Status Bulletins 10—14)
Launch of the Viking—A spacecraft to Mars was postponed because of a faulty thrust-vector control valve found in the solid booster stage of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle during countdown tests. The launch team decided to remove and replace the valve, rescheduling the launch for 14 Aug. (Viking Status Bulletin No 10, 20 Aug 75; O’Toole, W Post, 12 Aug 75; McElheny, NYT, 12 Aug 75)
Observations from NASA’s airborne Kuiper observatory by a group of Cornell University scientists reported the first occultation, or eclipse, of a star by a planet observed from above the lower layers of earth’s atmosphere. The occultation was observed from an altitude of 12.4 km over the Atlantic near Bermuda, using the 1 -m telescope to view the passage of Mars between the earth and the star Epsilon in the constellation Gemini. Light from the star passed through the Martian atmosphere before reaching earth; changes in the light after it passed through the planet’s atmosphere would give astronomers new information about the density and composition of that atmosphere, thought to consist of argon rather than water and carbon dioxide which had been frozen into the Martian polar caps. The two unmanned Viking spacecraft scheduled for Mars landing later this year would also measure the argon present in the Mars atmosphere. (NSF Release PR76-36)
Viking 2's lander dug a soil sample from beneath a rock on Mars and delivered it to the biological instrument package. All three experiments received a part of the sample; initial data from two of them—the labeled-release and the pyrolytic-release experiments—were sent to mission control at JPL. The third (gas-exchange) experiment was in a long incubation period that would continue through solar conjunction—a movement of the bodies which would put the sun between Mars and the earth— preventing communication with the Viking landers and orbiters. Conjunction would begin about 10 Nov. and continue through early Dec.; if the landers were revived successfully after the communications gap, more samples would be collected in mid-Jan. Leonard Clark, surface-sampler engineer, foresaw no problem in reactivating the arm mechanisms, adding that they had worked very well, “just the way they did during ground testing on earth before they left the manufacturer.” (Av Wk, 1 Nov 76, 15)
Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO—the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—had been responsible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972 noted IMCO’s interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’s Maritime Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study and recommend a program of experiments and development work that would be necessary to form a new organization. The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety committee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international conference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite system. IMCO’s secretary general was to invite all UN member states and interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agencies and other organizations. The conference set up two working committees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second working group would consider procurement and financial policy. The conference concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council, type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procurement policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters within national jurisdictions. As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organizational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The arrangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed, however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, maritime unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed” organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT. The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of governments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also developed a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31 countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on “the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions. The international conference resumed in London in February 1976 with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agencies and international organizations. Texts of two documents—a convention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)—were adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to a third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory committee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT. The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was attended by delegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia, as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the convention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the conference. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77) As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the NYT. The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking 2 lander, which Martin said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.” Meanwhile, two of Viking 1 ’s three biological instruments repeated their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting that the nutrient was being metabolized) as the first trial had. The photosynthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first sample, however. The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia, nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobiologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life, they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable. {NYT, 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A— 1; WPost, 5 Sept 76, An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled many problems. {NYT, 6 Sept 76, 14) Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept, that what had appeared to be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2 landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic disturbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity. He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less active than the earth.” {W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3) As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S. Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center for the Viking missions managed by LaRC for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21) The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temperatures on the Utopia plains—warmer than at Chryse, where the nights were longer—were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photographs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of 14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or sulfates with other minerals in the soil. (W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
The rate of production of radioactive gas from a Mars sample monitored by an instrument on Viking 1 had “plateaued,” said Dr. Gilbert V. Levin, who designed the instrument, and the slowdown in activity was puzzling from both a biological and a chemical standpoint. A biological response would generally evolve gas for a longer period, whereas the count—if recording a merely chemical reaction—“took place at a very rapid rate initially and then, uncharacteristically, slowed down and took a long time to plateau.” A special team of scientists from several fields was convened to consider all possible nonbiological explanations for the unusual readings from Viking 1, and various laboratories around the U.S. were being enlisted to help test the theories. (ATT, 3 Aug 76, 18; W Star, 3 Aug 76, A-7; 1VSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
An early burst of activity recorded by an instrument aboard Viking 1 on the surface of Mars had begun to slow down, said biologists at JPL who had been startled by the high rate of reaction indicated by the labeled-release experiment. The instrument used a sample of Martian surface, fed with a nutrient of amino acids, sugar, and vitamins, plus a radioactive-carbon tracer that would produce radioactive carbon dioxide if the sample used the nutrient to grow or metabolize. A geiger counter in the instrument had counted as many as 4500 radioactive molecules per minute being released from the sampler over 8 hr, going as high as 8000 per min over the period of a day. Dr. Harold P. Klein of Ames Research Center, head of the Viking biology team, said the origins of the activity were not clear, and scientists were not sure whether “something is metabolizing” or not. It would take a wk to reach any conclusion from these results or those of the other two biology experiments, team members said. (NYT', 1 Aug 76, 1; W Post, 1 Aug 76, 1; 2 Aug 76, C-5; W Star, 2 Aug 76, A—1; WSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
NASA Hq and LaRC announced that A. Thomas Young, former mission director for the Viking project, had been appointed Director for Lunar and Planetary Programs at NASA Hq and would begin his new duties 6 Dec. in the Office of Space Science. Young, who had worked with the Viking project since 1968 and helped develop Mars mission objectives, was most recently the mission operations manager and director of the 750-person Viking flight team at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. In his new job he would manage NASA’s unmanned planetary programs, including Viking, Pioneer, Mariner, and Helios, as well as studies in planetary astronomy, atmospheres, and geology; advanced scientific planning, programming, and technology; extraterrestrial materials research; and flight-program support. (LaRC Release 76-40; NASA Hq special anno., 5 Nov 76)
NASA announced plans for a seventh Lunar Science Conference to be held 15 to 19 March at JSC, bringing together scientists in geology, chemistry, physics, astronomy, engineering, and biology under joint sponsorship of JSC and the Lunar Science Institute of Houston. Discoveries about the moon would be applied to problems of the origin and early history of the solar system, for instance using lunar data to interpret craters and volcanoes photographed on the surfaces of Mercury and Mars. Other papers would discuss meteorites, satellites of Jupiter (about the size of earth’s moon), and use of earth-based telescopes to measure chemical composition of asteroids. Lunar science conferences had been held yearly since 1970, when the first such assembly heard scientific results from the Apollo 11 moon-landing mission. More than 700 scientists from as far away as Australia attended the 1975 conference. (NASA Release 76-25)
Venus—whose dense atmosphere had prevented observation of the surface, except by radar—might be as tectonically active as Mars, and possibly as active as the earth, researchers at JPL’s Goldstone tracking station announced. As reported in Science magazine, new high-resolution maps from 2 different radiotelescopes disclosed the planet’s surface with enough detail to permit a study of its geology. A series of 8 maps taken by the 64-m steerable dish at Goldstone revealed a 1500-km-long trough near Venus’s equator comparable to large earth rift systems such as the East African, giving “strong evidence of exten-sional tectonic activity” on Venus. Evidence of a fault movement seemed to appear in another Goldstone map showing a long arc-shaped mountain range crossed and bowed by another linear feature. A high-resolution image obtained at the Arecibo observatory in P.R. showed a large part of the Venus northern hemisphere including a basin-like feature about 1000 km across with a bright sharp rim; “the shape is wrong” for an impact basin, according to the Arecibo report. The new maps raised as many questions as they answered, Science commented. (Science, 30 Apr 76, 454)
Tests completed in flight on the two Mars-bound Viking spacecraft showed that each had 2 ovens of the organic chemistry experiment in good working order. JPL spokesmen said they were confident the instruments would carry out the investigations planned on the Mars surface later in the year. Earlier data indicated that one oven on each spacecraft might have failed, but investigators would not be certain until the Mars landings, scheduled for early July and Sept. The ovens—3 on each Viking lander—were designed to heat surface samples to 500°C to release organic matter in the soil for analysis by the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer on each lander. (NASA Release 76-43)
Something found by Viking 1 on the surface of Mars behaved as if it were alive, said 6 biologists on the science team at JPL, who nevertheless refused to confirm the presence of life on Mars until results from Viking 2 were in. Viking 2 was on its way to a landing scheduled for 3 Sept, on Utopia Planitia (the Utopian plains) above which the air was found by Viking 1 ’s orbiter to contain 5 to 10 times as much water as that over the Chryse area where Viking 1 landed. A surface sample of Chryse itself dug by a mechanical arm was found to contain a surprising amount of water that boiled off when it was heated by an instrument on the Viking 1 lander. Four other instruments, 3 built to look for life, received samples of the Mars soil: one to look for photosynthesis, the second to look for signs of metabolism, the third to detect “breathing” or “sweating” characteristic of earth-type life forms. All 3 instruments appeared to detect what they were looking for, but the biologists explained the results as an exotic chemistry not connected with biology. Having quoted odds of a million to 1 against finding life on Mars, the biologists now said they could never state with 100% certainty that Viking had found life until they could return a Mars sample to earth, which some were afraid to do: Nobel prizewinner Dr. Joshua K. Leder-berg of Stanford University had told associates that Martian life forms brought to earth might threaten the 2 million species of life here by competing in unknown ways for food, water, or air needed to survive. (Thomas O’Toole, W Post, 3 Sept 76, A-2)
NASA announced plans to launch a third maritime satellite, Marisat-C, for Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral on a Delta rocket 14 Oct. Marisat 1, launched 19 Feb., was in orbit over the Atlantic Ocean at 15°W; Marisat 2, launched 9 June, was in orbit over the mid-Pacific at 176.5°. The two Marisats currently provided communications services to the U.S. Navy as well as fulltime commercial voice and data communications to the maritime industry; Marisat-C, which would be in synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean, would be used initially only by the Navy, which planned to lease UHF capacity it found to be surplus, Comsat General would reimburse NASA for the cost of launch vehicle, launch, and other administrative expenses, and would supply all ground-station support. (NASA Release 76-156) 18-20 Sc jo (ember: The Viking 2 lander signaled to mission scientists at JPL that its sample-collecting arm was working and had moved toward the x-ray instrument that would analyze the mineral content of the Mars soil. If the collector had delivered its sample and the analysis was proceeding, the signal expected on the next relay would confirm that the arm was available for further sampling. The mission scientists said they planned to instruct the arm to turn over a rock on the surface and take a sample haler prise - Sparc Shuttle Orbiler 101—on public display for the first time at Rockwell's Palmdale, Calif., facility, 17 Sept. 1981. (NASA 70-H-854) from the underlying soil that had not been exposed to lethal ultraviolet rays. Geologists had characterized the appearance of nearby soil structure as resembling “caliche,” a calcium carbonate crust formed on earth surfaces by evaporation of water that deposited mineral salts on the soil particles and cemented them together. The cementing action might increase the difficulty of dislodging a rock with the lander arm, but scientists noted the ease with which the arm had taken the first sample. As the content of that first Viking 2 sample so closely resembled that from the Viking 1, scientists wanted to try for a sample with different properties, especially some trace of carbon-based chemicals that would indicate life processes. The caliche sample would be taken 25 Sept, and the attempt to move a rock would be made 8 Oct., a 3-hr strategy meeting decided 20 Sept. Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said the x-ray instrument had never received its sample for analysis, so a sample for it would be dug 3 Oct. An editorial in the New York Times asked whether, in the absence of carbon compounds, the mission scientists should consider the possibility of Martian life based on some chemical other than carbon. (Mission Status Bulletin 42; ATT, 19 Sept 76, 29; 20 Sept 76, 32; W Post, 19 Sept 76, A12; 20 Sept 76, A-5; W Star, 19 Sept 76, A-2)
Nine sites for the world’s first solar electric-power plant had been proposed by utility companies and government units in the U.S. in response to a request in July 1976, the Energy Research and Development Administration announced. Sites suggested were in Arizona, California, Florida, Mississippi, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, and Texas. The agency planned to complete an evaluation and negotiate a contract with the selected proposer early in 1977; the selected proposer would become a partner with ERDA in constructing and operating a plant to generate electric power from high-pressure steam produced by concentrated power from the sun. Power from this pilot plant would be distributed by the utility to its customers; the plant would produce 10 Mw (10 000 kw) under optimum full-sun conditions, enough to supply a community of 10 000 population. Construction of the plant would begin in 1978 and reach completion in 1980, at an estimated cost of $ 100 million. (ERDA Release 76-294) The Viking 2 lander’s pyrolytic-release instrument, which had been directed to look for evidence of photosynthesis activity in a dry Mars soil sample in the dark to avoid ambiguity, had returned an ambiguous reading, said Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of the Calif. Inst, of Technology, who designed the instrument. The count of radioactive molecules released during the analysis was 21 per minute, far less than the 96 per minute counted in the first similar assay by the Viking 1 lander, but more than the 15 counts per minute the instrument would show in the absence of photosynthesis. The puzzled scientists planned another sampling, this time with a moistened sample under a sun simulator, which had been omitted from the first run to prevent overheating the Viking 2 instrument, working in a location warmer than the Chryse area tested by Viking 1. Although neither of the Viking landers had turned up more than a suggestion of life, Viking 2 had confirmed the presence of water on Mars, and more than had been expected, project scientists announced at a JPL news conference 22 Sept. The permanent northern polar cap was found to be composed entirely of frozen water, not of frozen carbon dioxide as had been thought. A thin layer of dry ice covering the polar caps during most of the Martian year had suggested that both caps consisted of frozen carbon dioxide. Two Viking 2 orbiter measurements that led to the discovery were the unusually high water-vapor content in the atmosphere over the northern pole, and the average-surface-temperature readings on the icecap, which were too warm for frozen carbon dioxide to exist. Dr. Hugh Kieffer of UCLA predicted that a survey of the south polar cap would find it also made entirely of water ice. The new evidence suggested that, when first formed, Mars might have had twice as much water as the earth had at a similar period in its development; even now, scientists described Mars as “a planet-size iceberg.” Other Viking instruments had detected traces of krypton and xenon in the Mars atmosphere. This discovery was the first clue that the planet once had a considerably denser atmosphere that could have supported liquid water and even rainfall. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief Viking scientist, said that the krypton finding was a “major marker” that would permit deductions about the origin of the Mars atmosphere. On Saturday, 25 Sept., mission scientists at JPL were “relieved” to see photographs transmitted by Viking 2 showing that the lander had followed an order radioed from earth to dig a trench and dump the soil sample into the organic analyzer to screen it for 2 wk in a search for microorganisms. (Mission Status Bulletin 44; NYT, 21 Sept 76, 18; 26 Sept 76, 5; W Post, 23 Sept 76, A-2; 24 Sept 76, A-2; 26 Sept 76, A-6; W Star, 23 Sept 76, A-3; 26 Sept 76, A-14)
The U.S. Navy launched an experimental ocean-surveillance satellite—part of the Whitecloud system developed by the Naval Research Laboratory—on 30 April from Vandenberg AFB aboard an Atlas launch vehicle, reported Defense/Space Business Daily. The satellite was in a near-circular orbit of 1122-km apogee, 1100-km perigee, inclined 63.5°, with a period of 107.5 min. (SBD, 20 May 76, 21) NASA Hq conducted a news conference on the Viking mission to Mars, with Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science; Robert Kraemer, director of planetary programs; Walter Jakobowski, Viking program manager; James Martin, Jr., Viking project manager; and Dr. Gerald S. Soffen, Viking project scientist, to review the mission and answer questions. Dr. Anthony Calio, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science, opened the session by recalling the work done on Viking over the past 7 yr that would culminate in Viking’s reaching Mars within the next few weeks. The U.S. for the first time would be operating 4 spacecraft simultaneously, 2 in orbit and 2 on the planet’s surface. Kraemer mentioned Galileo’s sighting of Mars in 1609, the detection of “eanali” on the planet’s surface by Schiaparelli and others in the 1800s, and Percival Lowell’s founding of the Lowell Observatory in 1894 followed by his publication of reports on “Mars and Its Canals” and “Mars as the Abode of Life.” Edgar Rice Burroughs, author of the Tarzan stories and “grandfather of science fiction writers,” began writing stories about civilization on Mars that had kept the public “waiting ever since to get down to the surface and see what is there.” Although, as Kraemer pointed out, 4 Mariner missions had shown that civilization did not actually exist on Mars, nothing had ruled out the existence of life, and that was a purpose of the Viking mission. Jakobowski reviewed the history of Voyager, Surveyor, and Viking, especially the 1971 Mariner flyby that revealed Mars as a dynamic planet. Martin, Viking project manager at Langley Research Center, said the 2 Viking spacecraft had been flying for a long time and had turned in “exceptionally good” performance; this would be the first mission to use optical navigation to confirm radio-tracking data, and the first set of results had shown the spacecraft to be “right on course.” Martin added that—as an expression of confidence in his team—a quiet period had been declared the coming week when most of the flight team would be on vacation; “the team needs that time off to get ready for a pretty active and hectic summer,” he said. A.T. (Tom) Young, Viking mission director at LaRC, showed slides of mission operations and possible landing sites, reviewing the reasons for site selection and what NASA hoped to learn in both scientific and engineering areas, concluding with a summary of expected activities during the first 20 days on Mars. Viking-mission audio from JPL would be available starting about 15 June. Dr. Soffen noted that the scientific questions about Mars covered more than the presence of life there, which was only one of 13 investigations to be conducted by Viking, and suggested that the press representatives “ought to prepare yourselves from an educational point of view about all the experiments other than just the biology.” The first question raised by the press was on the indicators of a safe landing; Martin replied that there would be 5—telemetry from a footpad switch; startup of the lander computer, accompanied by turnoff of the descent-engine heaters; drop on equipment-power bus with shutoff of entry equipment; and switch in data rate from the orbiter-to-lander 4-kilobit rate to a 16-kb rate for sending pictures to the orbiter. A question about turning on the backup lander computer got a detailed response involving detectors and switches in a complex procedure that occur when “the second computer hollers for help,” as Young put it. Other questions concerned dust storms, camera resolution, and chances of success; Soffen concluded by noting “if we knew the answers, we wouldn’t have to do this mission.” (Text, 20 May 76; NASA Releases 76-90, 76-98)
Eight nations located on the equator had claimed sovereignty over the orbital locations of space satellites stationed above their territory, the Washington Star reported. The foreign ministry of Colombia listed the nations as Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Zaire, and Indonesia. (WStar, 11 Dec 76, A-4) , of the formation after an airlift to the site from the McMurdo Sound station. The body of rock in the Pensacola Mts., first reached by explorers in 1957 and first studied in the 1965-66 season, was a layered structure produced by eruptions from earth’s interior and “strikingly similar” to productive formations elsewhere in the world, such as the Bushveld complex of S. Africa, the Stillwater formation of Montana, and the Sudbury region of Ontario. A Soviet party in the Shackleton Range to the northeast, a similar area, reported findings which the leader of the USGS group, Dr. Arthur B. Ford, hoped to visit by air. Dr. Edward S. Grew of UCLA, who had spent the Antarctic winter at the Soviet Molodezhnaya base, had been working with the Russians from a temporary camp in the Lambert Glacier, near which “a mountain of iron” was reported recently. Meanwhile, a Natl. Science Foundation project that aimed at drilling a hole through the Ross Ice Shelf was proceeding with the participation of 10 nations, seeking to explore the depths below the ice for data on the Antarctic bottom water, indirectly responsible for much of the world’s oceanic food, and to learn whether the ice sheet might eventually slip into the sea, raising global sea levels by as much as 10 meters. Countries participating with the U.S. in the Ross Ice Shelf Project (RISP) were Australia, Britain, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, and West Germany. The NYT commented editorially that the Antarctic continent posed a number of scientific problems still unanswered in the age of space that had seen visits to and returns from the moon; close photographs of the moon and planets; and regular reports by man-made instruments on the surfaces of Mars and Venus. The RISP—an example of “continued, steady, quiet international cooperation” in Antarctic research—was “one of the great success stories of the post-1945 world,” encountering temporary setbacks that would be overcome in time as were those of the space program, the NYT added. {NYT, 12 Dec 76, 1-1; 19 Dec 76, 26; 20 Dec 76, A-22)
President Ford proclaimed 20 July as “Space Exploration Day” to coincide with the date 7 yr ago when U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to set foot on the moon. NASA’s Viking 1 lander was expected to touch down on the surface of Mars about 8 am 20 July,, reported nationally on network television; transmission of the first picture from the lander should be completed before 9 am. In his proclamation, the President said, “We begin our third century with ... the most ambitious of all deep space explorations . . . Wherever we reach, we will have come in peace for all mankind.” In an accompanying statement to NASA employees, Administrator James C. Fletcher said “the President has in effect commended all of you who work (for) the national space agency.” (Text; NASA Release 76-133; Fletcher anno, 20 July 76) First panoramic view of Mars surface from Viking 1, 20 July 1976: upper half of picture is Left half of view, lower photo joins it on the right. Upper view shows housing for Viking sampler arm; lower view shows (at right) high-gain antenna for direct communication with earth. (NASA 7§-H~557)
Radio links with the Viking landers on Mars were reestablished, ending a month of silent hibernation during which communications had been blocked by the passage of the sun between Mars and earth. Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena sent a “wake-up call” to the robot laboratories on Mars that had been collecting a month’s supply of data during the blackout period; these data, to be played back beginning 20 Dec., would include images of the area around the two landers, inorganic chemical analysis, additional biology data, and any records to support the (thus far unsuccessful) search for marsquakes, using the seismometer on the Viking 2 lander. Resumption of activity would begin Viking’s 18-mo “extended mission,” which would provide more images of the Mars surface and polar regions, as well as measurements of water vapor and temperature, some at twice the resolution of previous observations; process more samples of the surface for life-detection tests and inorganic chemical analysis; photograph Deimos and Phobos, the moons of Mars; and monitor daily and seasonal weather changes, origins of planetwide dust storms, and any seismic activity that might occur. As Mars entered its closest approach to the sun in the spring of 1977, scientists would be watching for signs of the dust storms thought to be triggered by perihelion; when Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in 1971, the entire planet was engulfed in the greatest dust storms in the history of Mars observations and surveys from orbit were limited for several months. Such storms could endanger the Vikings on the surface of Mars, besides impeding the view from orbit. (W Post, 15 Dec 76, 2; NASA Release 76-208; W Star, 16 Dec 76, A-7; NYT, 21 Dec 76, 21)
A 2-yr comparative study of data on dust storms on Mars and earth revealed that Martian dust storms were much like severe ones on earth, “only more so,” the Jet Propulsion Lab. announced. JPL investigator Peter M. Woiceshyn used Lowell Observatory data to conclude that a wall of dust more than 50 km high swept down the slopes of the Hellas area on Mars in July 1971 at speeds greater than 480 km per hr. Mariner 9 occultation data verified that winds of extreme velocity would be required to raise surface dust in the low atmospheric pressure of Mars, where the air density was only 1/100th that on earth. When Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in Nov. 1971, another dust storm had been raging for several weeks, and dust-cloud tops were estimated to be 50 to 70 km above the surface. The JPL report said the two 1971 storms and another detected by astronomers in 1956 began in the same location on the slopes of Hellas, triggered by a cold jet stream from the Martian north pole funneling down a long valley across the planet’s equator. Similar storms on earth in Russia, in Iran, and on the U.S. plains east of the Rockies caused great damage from soil erosion, similar to that on Mars revealed by Mariner 9. More storm data from Mars would be sought by the Viking spacecraft scheduled to land there in July and Sept. 76. (JPL release 13 Apr 76)
Moon rocks—prime celebrities 5 yr ago—had become has-beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astronauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg of lunar material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments returned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 51 U.S. governors; chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is. had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said, although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwindled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved. Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and 2, Sterba wrote. (ATT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
Enticing hints but no firm answers” to the question of life on Mars were the product of an increasing volume of scientific data from the Viking 1 lander; “practically faultless operation” for more than 5 wk had produced enough information to keep the Viking scientists busy, especially the data from the 3 bioexperiments and a related molecular analysis of Martian soil. Results were “certainly not what would be expected” if earth-type organisms were present, but they were not explainable in terms of “simple” nonbiological chemistry, said Nature magazine. The labeled-release (LR) instrument added a small amount of water containing nutrients “labeled” with carbon 14 to its Mars sample, and incubated it at 15°C, warmer than the surface temperature of Mars. “Totally unexpected” was a massive and rapid release of radioactivity into the gas phase—presumably carbon monoxide or dioxide—and the radioactive count reached 4500 in 10 hr, leveling off at about 8500 in 48 hr. A second dose of radioactive nutrient produced an initial burst followed by a drop in radioactivity, and the graph “almost” flattened out for the remaining 4 days of the experiment; however, scientists were surprised to discover a possible trend to very slowly accelerating release of radioactivity. “Unfortunately,” said Nature, “the experiment (was) stopped for performance of a control test...” A repetition of this experiment later would extend incubation over wk or mo rather than days; “results certainly do not look like anything one would expect” from an earth sample in the same situation. Most popular explanation for the initial burst of activity was oxidation of the labeled nutrients. The gas-exchange (GE) experiment used gas chromatography to monitor a Mars sample wetted with a “soup” of nutrients to detect any changes in the instrument’s content of gas. First dampening of the sample produced “a remarkable burst of oxygen” that leveled off after several hr but remained stable for days. The experiment would continue “for some time,” to see if further changes occurred. Viking scientists were trying to duplicate results of the LR and GE experiments in earth laboratories using simple catalysts and oxidizing agents. The pyrolytic-release (PR) experiment, most technologically complex, proved “least equivocal when it comes to interpretation” of the results, Nature reported. A Mars sample incubated in a “Martian atmosphere,” with added water vapor and irradiation from a xenon lamp to simulate solar radiation, was heated to 625°C to drive off and account for unreacted carbon monoxide and dioxide and to pyrolyze any organic compounds trapped as vapor. The vapor trap, heated to 700°C, would release and oxidize any remaining organic compounds. A sterile sample should provide a peak ratio of about 500 to 1; the results from the Mars sample were about 75 to 1, “several times more active” than non-sterilized soil from the dry valleys of Antarctica. Results from the control experiment with heat-sterilized soil would be “crucial” because a high peak ratio would indicate that biological, rather than chemical, processes were going on in the soil that could fix atmospheric carbon monoxide or dioxide in the presence of light. If life were present on Mars, science would expect a high peak ratio from a surface sample strongly illuminated in atmosphere of about 90% carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, the initial run of the organic-chemistry analysis was spoiled by a failure of the surface-sampling arm to deliver a full load to the gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer. A further analysis would be performed on a full load obtained subsequently. Lack of detectable organic compounds in this sample would further complicate interpretation of the 3 biology experiments. (Av Wk, 30 Aug 76, 22; Nature, 26 Aug 76, 734)
Johnson Space Center employees Herbert A. Zook and Richard W. High received a patent this week for invention of a “capture cell,” a device to capture meteoroids traveling through space and preserve them for scientific analysis. The cube-shaped cell had an open side covered by a thin membrane; a meteoroid striking the membrane would enter the cell and shatter, but the remnants and any vapor created by the heat of impact would remain inside the cell, which was constructed of a material like polyethylene. Large arrays of the cells would be exposed on a spacecraft for a long time, up to a year, to allow time for a number of strikes to occur. Interest in the composition of meteoroids springs from the possible information on larger bodies such as comets or asteroids on which they originated. (NYT, 31 July 76, 27) Daring July: Scientists at JPL completed a list of “purple pigeons”—bright birds of the future—as unmanned planetary missions considered feasible for the period 1980-1990. In hopes that Viking l’s successful landing on Mars might prompt wider support for such missions, JPL proposed 7 advanced missions that would probably be reduced to 3 or 4 to be forwarded to NASA Hq. The list includes: return to Mars with rover vehicles to extend exploration of the Martian surface; a lander for one of Jupiter’s moons, accompanied by a satellite around the planet; a similar mission to Saturn and its moon Titan; asteroid rendezvous and near-range photographic mission; a radar-mapper satellite for Venus; flight to Halley’s Comet with a solar-sailer satellite (propelled by solar radiation); and establishment of an automated station on the moon for extended study of the lunar environment, probably by an international scientific group. (Av Wk, 26 July 76, 16)
The Tass news agency reported the soft landing of “the automatic interplanetary station” Viking 1 on the surface of Mars, adding that the first pictures of the surface showed “a foot-pad of the craft on . . . dust-covered terrain strewn with small sharp stones . . . According to the preliminary assessments, the ground consists of basalt rocks and volcanic lava. It is believed to be comparatively soft.” Tass noted the postponement of the Viking landing, originally scheduled for 4 July, and the search for bacterial life on Mars which was “one of the aims of this exploration.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 July 76)
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
The $100 million spent by the U.S. on a search for life on Mars had produced only disagreement over the findings, Viking project scientists said at a JPL press conference. Four of six Viking scientists said they did not know whether life existed on Mars; one denied that Viking had found life; the sixth said he felt Viking had found “primitive microbes” in the Mars soil samples. All six agreed that Viking had found nothing at either the Chryse or the Utopia landing site representing fossils that would have confirmed a previous existence of life on Mars, Washington Post writer Thomas O’Toole reported. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, who designed the instrument to look for dead organic matter, noted that nothing had been detected, and explained readouts from other instruments as the result of an exotic chemistry catalyzed by some superoxidant in the surface of Mars and activated by solar ultraviolet rays that penetrated the Mars atmosphere all the way to the surface. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. disagreed, saying that the failure to find dead organisms did not outweigh the activity detected by the biology instruments, which produced readings at a lower temperature and lost them when the sample was heated. This result “smells more like biology than any chemistry I can think of,” Sagan added. Vance Oyama of ARC favored a chemical explanation; Dr. Gilbert V. Levin of Biospherics said he leaned toward a biological explanation. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of Calif. Inst, of Technology, who designed the photosynthesis experiment, favored the biology explanation but regretted the absence of fossils. Dr. Harold P. Klein of ARC said the Viking results “do not rigorously prove there is life on Mars, nor do they rigorously disprove it.” New York Times reporter John Noble Wilford described the failure to detect on Mars the organic compounds essential to life processes on earth as “a major surprise,” causing most of the confusion over interpretations of the data; a NYT editorial noted that the Mars findings had forced a new look at theories about the origins of life on earth, which “seems neither so certain nor so inevitable as it did before the Viking landings . . .” (IV Post, 10 Nov 76, A-9; NYT, 10 Nov 76, A— 16; 18 Nov 76, 42)
Viking 2 apparently touched down at about 6:39 EDT in a field of windswept sand dunes on the Utopian plains of Mars at the edge of its northern polar cap, after a communications breakdown that left JPL scientists without contact during the last 3 hr of the spacecraft’s journey of more than 650 million km through space. The stabilization system on the orbiter, which served as a relay link between the lander and the deep space tracking network on earth, lost power 26 sec after separation of the lander at 3:40 pm EDT, and the high-power antenna on the orbiter no longer pointed at the earth. The blackout lasted nearly an hr, while mission personnel tried to reestablish communications. A low-power transmitter on the orbiter, installed to provide limited 2-way communications with earth, finally sent engineering data at 6:59 pm indicating that the lander had touched down. Lander signals were strong for 17 min until the orbiting relay link passed out of range. First pictures from the lander would be relayed about 3 am EDT on 4 Sept, as the first step in a “recovery plan” to put the experiments and systems back on schedule. All pictures and data taken by the lander were being stored on tape in the orbiter for later playback. Except for the orbiter malfunction, the pictures would have been available within 2 hr of the touchdown. The landing date of Viking 1, originally 4 July, had been postponed for 2 wk in order to ensure a safe site; the spot for Viking 2 was chosen because indications of frost or fog in the area made it likely to encourage the presence of life, scientists said. Results from Viking 1 suggested either that chemical processes never observed in earth laboratories occurred on Mars, or that life forms existed on Mars that were unknown on earth. Life search by Viking 2 would not begin for a wk; the 2 landing craft were about 7400 km apart on the surface of Mars, Viking 1 at Chryse near the equator (at a latitude comparable to that of Mexico City) and Viking 2 in a warmer area (at a latitude comparable to that of Montreal) more than 1600 km northeast of the Viking 1 site. (IVStar, 4 Sept 76, A— 1; B Sun, 4 Sept 76, A-l; ATT, 4 Sept 76, 1; WPost, 4 Sept 76, A-l)
As Viking 2’s lander was preparing for its scoop-and-analyze sequence on the rocky Utopia site of Mars, the Viking 1 orbiter fired its engines to shift orbit around the planet in 40° longitude jumps each day for 9 days before taking over the relay of communications from the Viking 2 lander. Viking 2's orbiter would then begin a polar-orbital scan of Mars to search for traces of organic materials—carbon-based molecules found in all life forms on earth—not yet detected by Viking 1 experiments. Viking 1 ’s lander would remain in standby mode after its weeks of testing at the Chryse site. Project scientist Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, commenting on the confusing results of the Viking 1 experiments (which hinted at the existence of life but offered no evidence of organic chemicals), said he had been prepared for the discovery of organic chemicals without life, but the suggestion of Martian life without organics was totally unexpected. Just after 6 a.m. EDT on 12 Sept., the 3-meter arm of Viking 2 dug its first sample of Mars soil and dropped it into the hopper leading to three biology instruments. First cycle of the pyrolytic-release experiment began when the soil reached the test chamber, to be incubated in a carbon monoxide-carbon dioxide atmosphere containing a radioactive tracer; after 5 days, the atmosphere would be flushed out and the soil sample heated to vaporize any organic material. A detector would measure the radioactive carbon that had been ingested by any organisms. The gas-exchange detector—looking for signs of photosynthesis in the dark— would reveal the presence of organisms that might exhale gases Such as oxygen or carbon dioxide through the night as well as in the daytime. (The first results of the same experiment on Viking 1 at Chryse had showed the soil was releasing six times as much gas as it would have in the absence of photosynthesis; a second trial had produced a signal a third as strong as the first, but still twice what it would have been if no photosynthesis were going on. Neither the readings nor their differences had been explained to everyone’s satisfaction.) The third biological instrument—the labeled-release experiment—would add a nutrient liquid to the test chamber on Tuesday and monitor over 10 days the release of radioactive tracer from any metabolized nutrient. A second soil sample would be used beginning Monday, 13 Sept., for an organic-chemistry analysis to detect carbon molecules, and for an x-ray fluorescence experiment to learn the composition of inorganic chemicals in the Mars soil. Scientists believed chances of finding definite traces of life would be better at Utopia, where five times more water had been measured in the air than at Chryse. They also planned to reduce chances of ambiguity in the Utopia readings by conducting the photosynthesis search at night, and by moving a rock to take a sample of Mars soil that was shielded from the killing solar ultraviolet constantly impinging on the planet’s surface and that was deeper than the sample taken at Chryse. (WStar, 12 Sept 76, A-14; W Post, 13 Sept 76, A-5; C Trib, 13 Sept 76, 6-16)
President Ford would name Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of the National Science Foundation for the past 4 yr, to head the recently reestablished White House Office of Science and Technology, the New York Times reported. The post had been abolished by President Nixon 3 yr ago “amid reports that he did not like the advice he was getting from it, particularly concerning antiballistic missiles and supersonic planes,” the Times said. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine had reported earlier that 4 conservative Republican senators had warned President Ford that Stever’s nomination would be an “affront” to Congress; the NSF had been a target of some congressmen because of funding projects that Congress considered questionable, Av Wk said. Other candidates for the position had shied away because of a possible change in administration after the forthcoming elections. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) urged quick action on the nomination; the Senate Appropriations Committee had just cut $1 million from a $3.3-million budget estimate for the Office of Science and Technology. (NYT, 22 July 76, 37; Av Wk, 5 July 76, 13) with pleasure at the accomplishment,” when “it was commercial time . . . and the 9 a.m. programs.” Viewers were “left wondering whether there was really an event of such magnitude being televised or more science fiction,” the Star commented. (WStar, 21 July 76, B-l) Commentary on the Viking landing on Mars: The Chicago Tribune hailed the mission as “an epoch-making success . . . The achievement is the greater because the world has known from the beginning what we were attempting to do. There would have been no way to hide a failure.” (C Trib, 21 July 76, 1-7) The Phila. Inquirer called the landing “another giant leap for mankind” that “underscores the sophistication of unmanned spacecraft . . . Risks can be taken . . . that could not be justified with persons aboard ... Its performance in the first hours on Mars speaks more eloquently than words.” (P Inq, 21 July 76, 5-A) The NY Times said the TV networks were criticized for their coverage; Dr. J. Richard Keefe, former NASA scientist now at the Univ. of Louisville, said the coverage was “downright disgusting . . . Talk about being blase about space exploration, this was just incredible ... I think the population has become apathetic about the whole space program. It’s kind of sad, I think.” Spokesmen for the network told the Times they had given 20 to 25 min of coverage, showing the 2 pictures transmitted by Viking 1 and released by JPL where the transmission was received. NBC said its New York City switchboard had about 30 calls asking for more; ABC reported 25, and CBS reported 8 or 10. ABC said the number of calls was significant “for the time of day.” “What they may not have understood was that we showed whatever we had,” the spokesman said. “That was it.” (NYT, 21 July 76, 12) The Wall Street Journal said in an editorial that it could not “speculate with any confidence on why yesterday’s Viking / landing on Mars was important. And yet we are confident that it was.” The TV networks that “spent tedious hours broadcasting the dullest political convention on record” a wk ago “were preoccupied with game shows” while Viking was sending back its first pictures of the surface of another planet. However, those who said the $1 billion cost of the project was wasted unless Viking’s cameras pick up “ something interesting, like a local resident,” would be missing the point, WSJ added. The project demonstrated application of the most advanced technology to a single objective, advanced managerial skills as “a triumph of human organization,” and left mankind with the psychic effects of the visit to another planet. “ . . . After each leap deeper into space, nothing is quite the same again.” (WSJ, 21 July 76, 22) A Washington Star editorial said that Viking 1 may have “ended generations of fanciful imaginings” about life on Mars, and asked if it was worth 7 yr of effort and $1 billion “to get a rather sobering view of what our imaginations told us was a fascinating planet.” Although it was much too early to predict the “ultimate scientific harvest,” the Star said “we have no doubt that the ultimate payoff will be more than adequate in scientific if not in fictional terms.” (W Star, 22 July 76, A-14) The first color photograph of Mars, showing a dramatic blue sky against a rust-red soil surface, was in error, Viking project scientists announced. Astronomer Carl Sagan said that someone had given the wrong weighting to the color filters in reconstructing the electronic image on earth, and that corrected photos would show a pinker sky. The seismometer on the Viking lander had apparently jammed and would impair detection of “marsquakes” unless corrected; Lou Kingsland, deputy mission director, said the proper command might not have been issued or the problem might be in the electrical circuits. {WStar, 22 July 76, A—1) Having successfully set down the Viking 1 lander in a safe spot, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., announced that Viking 2 would be sent to a region likely to be more scientifically interesting even with less assurance of safe touchdown. Cydonia, a region halfway between the Mars equator and north pole, was considered because of a greater likelihood of water, required for the presence of life as we know it. Viking project scientists said they were eager to survey a site as different physically from the desert Chryse site as possible. Viking 2, still more than 1.6 million km from Mars, would arrive in orbit there early in Aug. and land about 4 Sept, if all went well. Debate on the second landing site focused on possible hazards in the northern region, out of range of the radar signals that led to choice of the first site. Astronomer Carl Sagan said the first landing was “reasonably lucky,” with chances of success calculated at only 60%, and the northern site would be less promising. However, he and the other scientists voted overwhelmingly for Cydonia because, as Sagan said, “it is not only the probability of success but the significance of success” that merited consideration. (WStar, 22 July 76, A-6) Asked about the role of luck in the successful Viking 1 landing on Mars, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., replied, “I don’t plan on luck .... I believe that most of what you call luck you make yourself. It’s people doing that extra job ...” Martin’s management approach during his 8 yr with the Viking project had been to “get into the details of everything .... I’ve never known any other way to be successful .... It inspires and motivates the next level of management to get involved.” (ATT, 22 July 76, 24) The “most electrifying new information” received from Mars since the Viking 1 landing was that the Martian atmosphere contained 3% nitrogen, an element essential to life as we know it, said the NY Times. Until this week, the absence of nitrogen on Mars had been the most compelling argument against existence of life “in any form” on Mars; now this argument had been removed. (ATT, 22 July 76, 30) JPL scientists were still hedging on the color of the Martian sky, after announcing that photographs released earlier showing a blue sky might have been processed wrongly. Astronomer Carl Sagan noted that the “boos given to (the) announcement about a pink sky reflect our wish for Mars to be just like the earth.” Dr. Thomas Mutch, leader of the Viking imaging team, said computer verification of the filtered signals for color reconstruction could take another wk or two. (WStar, 23 July 76, A-l) Viking Mission Director A. Thomas Young told a news conference that the problem with the lander’s soil-sampling arm was probably an error in the computer command that failed to drop a locking pin near the arm’s “wrist.” A new set of commands to extend the arm further and free the pin would be sent 24 or 25 July. The arm would scoop up soil and drop it in a hopper on the spacecraft that would distribute it to 3 biology experiments aimed at detecting signs of life on the planet. Other scoops would be used for chemical analysis. (ATT, 24 July 76, 1) Besides the trouble with its soil sampler, the Viking 1 lander was having radio problems, said Project Manager Martin. One of two receivers getting direct communications from earth was not working properly, and the radio for relaying data from the lander to its orbiter was operating in a low-power mode. Also, the instrument for detecting “mars-quakes” had not been released from its “caged” position on the lander despite repeated commands. A special scientific team was checking to see if all the problems were related, perhaps in the computer signals to the electrical circuitry. ( W Star, 23 July 76, A-3) Mars was a very much richer and larger planet than the airless and waterless moon, said a NY Times editorial, with a firm surface and virtually every essential required for life. Barring the catastrophe of a nuclear war, Mars could be sustaining a human population “by the time of this nation’s Tricentennial,” the paper said. (NYT, 25 July 76, A— 16) “I really do not know what the fuss is all about—landing on Mars, I mean. I landed there 40 years ago,” said Buster Crabbe, who played both Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers in movies of the 1930s. Crabbe, who won the 400-m freestyle swimming gold medal in the 1932 Olympic games, was hired by Paramount Pictures to do a Tarzan film, and wentron to star in space pictures. “People still remember old Flash,” the 68-yr-old Crabbe said. “Here I am still around, no ill effects from my space travel .... I do feel sorry for our space people though, having to go through all the things we did years ago. I don’t think they know what’s in store for them. Just wait till they run into the clay men and the hawk men and the shark men.” (NYT, 25 July 76, E17; Tucson Ariz. Daily Star, 30 July 76, A-19) Viking 1 did not relay any picture of life-sized Martians to earth because it landed in the wrong place, charged columnist Art Buchwald in the Wash. Post. Buchwald reported his friend, a science-fiction buff, as saying the scientists were interested only in finding “a smooth place to set down the camera.” If the/Martians sent a camera to earth, the smoothest place to land it would be the Sahara desert. “If you lived on Mars you wouldn’t pitch a tent on some barren spot where nothing was happening,” argued the friend. “If Viking had landed next to one of their canals, the Martians would have sailed their tall ships up to it and given us the greatest show ever seen on television.” (WPost, 25 July 76, H-l) A series of simple commands from earth freed the mechanical arm on the Viking 1 spacecraft reported to have jammed 22 July. The extendable arm would be able to dig into the Martian soil as planned, and the second Viking spacecraft would be able to land in Cydonia now that the Chryse area could be explored. The Viking was commanded to extend its arm twice as far as previously and to rotate it several times to free a locking pin inserted to protect the arm from vibration during its flight in space and landing on Mars. The command was timed to precede transmission of a spacecraft camera image taken soon after receipt of the command; the boom would not be in the picture if it had not responded to the order to extend itself in front of the camera eye. When the picture came in a half hour later, the mechanical arm was in clear view, and a surface shot clearly showed the locking pin had fallen free. Flight directors had not succeeded in uncaging a seismometer, composed of 3 delicate balancing beams to detect movements in the planet’s crust, that had been wired together for protection from vibrations. Spacecraft computer signals to electrify and burn the wire were not received, and a second command bypassing the computer apparently failed also. Detection of marsquakes might have to depend on Viking 2, scheduled to land in the Cydonia basin about 4 Sept. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) The atmosphere of Mars was once 10 times thicker and richer in gas than it is today, and “we could breathe that atmosphere” if it were richer in oxygen, said Dr. Tobias Owen of the State Univ. of N.Y., a member of the project science team at JPL, where the first samplings by the Viking 1 mass spectrometer were analyzed. Mars’s atmosphere was now 95% carbon dioxide, 2 to 3% nitrogen, 1 to 2% argon, 0.3% oxygen; earth’s atmosphere is 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9% argon-40, and 0.03% carbon dioxide. “Mars is an intermediate planet between the earth and the moon,” said Dr. Owen. “We do not see a hugely abundant biology, but that doesn’t say there’s none at all.” Color pictures of the Martian surface near the Viking lander revealed a soil even redder than in the original picture received last week. Rocks strewn over the desert sands exhibited a red coating laid down years ago when Mars’s atmosphere was richer in oxygen and water, “through oxidation of the iron and hydration of the minerals,” said Viking geologist Alan S. Hinder. “We propose to test the hypothesis by cracking open one of the red rocks ... to see if there is any rust inside.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-l; W Star, 27 July 76, A-3; C Trib, 27 July 76, 5) Viking 1 ’s mechanical arm scooped its first sample of the Mars surface 28 July, leaving a sharp-edged trench clearly visible in a picture transmitted afterward by the unmanned lander. The 3-m arm, a tube about 38 mm in diameter, ended in a sharp-edged scoop that could dig into the surface with a force of about 13 kg if necessary. When the cover snapped shut on the sample, the arm retracted and swiveled to sift the sample into a funnel feeding into the “biology box.” This container, about the size of a large milk carton, encased the 3 experiments designed to detect life. Two other experiments, also located under funnels, were the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to detect organic molecules and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer to identify inorganic materials, Sensors inside the funnels would tell whether the samples were sufficient. The 3 biology experiments were the “pyrolytic release” experiment of Dr. Norman Horowitz, to look for microorganisms that used the sun as a source of energy like photosynthesis on earth to build organic compounds, through exposure of the sample to radioactive carbon dioxide under artificial sunlight; a “labeled release” experiment by Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., to look for signs of microbial metabolism by tracing radioactive organic compounds injected into the Mars sample to see if they were consumed, releasing gaseous wastes that could be detected; and a “gas exchange” experiment by Vance Oyama of NASA’s Ames Research Center to provide a rich variety of foods in a liquid form—“chicken soup”—to the Mars sample and iook for changes in gas composition inside the experiment chamber that would indicate the food was being used. The biology-box samples would incubate for from 5 to 12 days before results were announced, and a positive finding would be confirmed by subsequent control experiments. The science team anticipated a long wait for any kind of answer, as well as the possibility that the answers might be contradictory. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief scientist for Viking, pointed out that results would be difficult to interpret: “you have to put yourself on the level of a microbe,” he added. The microbes might drown in the liquid, ingest the wrong food, or burn up in the warm experiment chambers. (W Star, 28 July, A-l, A-5) One of the five soil-testing experiments on Viking 1 did not receive enough soil to actuate it, project officials announced, and two attempts to start the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer working on a sample apparently failed. Project Manager Martin said the flight engineers were not yet able to determine what went wrong, because the sampling arm apparently worked as planned but the sample never got into the instrument. The motor driving a stirring rod to brush particles through a strainer did not come on, and scientists speculated the sample might still be sitting on the strainer. A photograph of the trench dug to obtain the sample had shown that the soil was surprisingly cohesive, “like wet sand,” according to Princeton Univ. scientist Dr. Robert B. Hargraves. After delivering soil to the experiments in the biology box, the mechanical arm made 2 attempts to dig and deliver a sample to the mass spectrometer but the instrument did not signal receipt of the sample either time. It was not clear, Martin said, whether the arm lost the soil on the swing back or was off the mark when it deposited the soil, or the soil in the hopper never filtered down to the instrument. The arm responded properly to the following command and delivered a spoonful of soil to the x-ray spectrometer with no difficulty. (ATT, 29 July 76, 1; W Post, 29 July 76, A-3; W Star, 29 July 76, A-3; WSJ, 29 July 76, 1) Viking project scientists debated the makeup of the Mars soil sample that might have been too thick to filter into an instrument opening. Dr. Ronald Scott said that, although the material was somewhat cohesive, “certainly something must have gotten through.” Deputy Mission Director Kingsland said the most likely causes of the apparent malfunction were failure of the mechanical scoop to obtain a full sample, or failure of the “level full” indicator in the instrument to signal properly. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, chief of the gas chromatograph experiment, said the arm might have come up empty from the trench after scooping for the biology experiments, and that a repeat attempt next week would take both possible explanations of the problem into account. Kingsland said the material seemed to have a consistency “something like wet clay.” Dr. Scott emphasized that this did not indicate water in the soil. The other instruments seemed to be processing their samples normally, and results from the inorganic-chemistry sampling in the x-ray spectrometer should provide the first assay of Martian soil as early as tomorrow. (ATT, 30 July 76, A-22; WStar, 30 July 76, A-5; CTrib, 31 July 76, 2) The first experimental results from Mars, returned 30 July by Viking 1 ’s lander, showed that the surface consisted of iron, calcium, silicon, titanium, and aluminum, in amounts that would be determined within a few days. The entire surface around the lander was covered with a very thin coating of vivid orange-red iron oxides that gave the plant its red or rusty appearance. “Mars is a painted desert,” said Dr. Gerald Soffen, one of the project scientists. Dr. Priestly Toulmin, leader of the inorganic-chemistry team, noted that Mars soil up to now could be analyzed only by long-distance methods such as light reflections from the surface; Viking had “picked up a piece of Mars and put it into an analytical instrument.” Dr. Benton Clark, also of the inorganic-chemistry team, said that Viking had not detected trace elements like vanadium or molybdenum considered essential for plant growth on earth; this did not mean the elements were not present, nor had elements like arsenic been detected that would make earth soil sterile. The results “do not rule out the possibility of some form of life,” Dr. Clark added. Results from the 3 biology experiments would be transmitted to earth within a few days. (NYT, 31 July 76, A—1)
Alternative “super safe” landing sites for the second Viking spacecraft scheduled to arrive on Mars were being investigated by NASA, Dr. Harold Masursky told the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington. Masursky, an astrogeologist with the U.S. Geological Survey, said the prime landing sites had been carefully selected and should present no problem. However, in case of trouble with the first lander, scheduled to touch down early in July, the second lander now scheduled to descend in a less well known area would proceed to a less challenging site to ensure salvaging the mission. The prime site, in the Chryse region at the mouth of the largest channel system identified on Mars, was of special interest because scientists thought areas with highest probabilities of water would be most likely to harbor life as known by man. The scheduled second landing area, called Cydonia, had the highest recorded atmospheric water content during the season when the Viking would land, but was in an area not accessible by radar from earth and was therefore not as well known. Giant radar telescopes in the U.S. and at Arecibo, P.R., were scanning areas near the Mars equator that would be safer than the prime sites, even if not as scientifically productive. (NYT, 18 Apr 76, 25)
Three products developed by Lewis Research Center had appeared in a list of the 100 most significant products developed during the year, published by Industrial Research magazine, said the Lewis News. The magazine yearly considers about 1000 entries from industries throughout the U.S., and presents the IR-100 award for the products selected by a panel of nationally known technical judges. The 1976 award brings to 16 the number won by LeRC since it entered the competition 11 yr ago. Products cited were: a continuous-production cyclotron target, used in producing radioactive isotopes for diagnostic nuclear medicine; a thickness-measuring radar that could measure lake-ice thickness direcdy beneath an overflying aircraft, used by the Coast Guard to help extend the shipping season on the Great Lakes; and a ceramic thermal-barrier coating that would increase the life of metal parts by protecting them from very high-temperature erosive and corrosive gases, used to prolong the usefulness of turbine blades ten times beyond that of uncoated blades. (Lewis News, 1 Oct 76, 1) A letter to the IVY Times had emphasized that the absence not of carbon but of “the extremely complex molecules of carbon that are characteristic of earth life” was the puzzling factor in the Viking findings at Mars. (ATT, 2 Oct 76, 24) Project scientists had offered three possible explanations for the negative results of the attempts to identify organic compounds. First, any organic compounds left on Mars by the solar wind, by meteor fall, or by past life processes could have been destroyed by agents such as ultraviolet radiation, oxygen, or oxidants such as nitrates or metal oxides acting independently or synergistically; “certainly,” the project report published in the Oct. issue of Science said, “continuous exposure to short-wave ultraviolet light in the presence of oxygen will cause rapid chemical decomposition of most organic compounds.” Second, organic compounds might exist in Mars soil in amounts too dilute to be detected by the Viking instruments. Third, organic compounds might be forming on Mars and undergoing rapid destruction. The traces of organic molecules seen in a second Viking 2 lander chemistry test could well have resulted from contaminants known to have been in the test chamber before the spacecraft left earth, Dr. Biemann said. (ATT, 2 Oct 76, 28) The Viking 2 lander pushed at a rock on the surface of Mars but was unable to move it, JPL scientists reported. The shove was preliminary to an attempt to sample soil shielded from solar radiation and more likely to contain organic material. Dr. Louis Kingsland, deputy mission director, announced the lander would be ordered to try again and to turn over a smaller rock if the first choice failed to move. Dr. Priestley Toulmin, director of the inorganic analysis experiments, said the iron-rich topsoil tested by the Viking 2 lander had a striking resemblance to that tested at the Viking 1 site; results of the assay were almost a duplicate of those sent to earth 2 mo ago. The similarity lead scientists to think the soil had been affected by ancient weather conditions that swept over large portions of the planet; however, the results could not show whether the material below the surface was likewise uniform around the planet, (iWStar, 6 Oct 76, A-5; NYT, 8 Oct 76, A26) The third of three Viking 2 lander tests for dead organic matter in the soil of Mars had shown no sign of fossilized life, Dr. Biemann said at JPL. The last test would use soil exposed by turning oveT a rock on the Mars surface that scientists said might have been undisturbed for as long as a million yr. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of Caltech, who supervised experiments on both Viking 1 and Viking 2 sites that looked for signs of biological activity, said that the results he had obtained “would be convincing for life on Mars if we had found the dead organic matter.” The sample from under the rock would be held for chemical analysis until scientists could examine photographs of the trench where it was dug to make sure the sample was taken from the proper protected place. Another under-rock sample would be dug for biological analysis later, the second Viking 2 test for synthesis of organic matter to be conducted at the Utopia site. (WPost, 12 Oct 76, A-8; NYT, 12 Oct 76, 18) Meanwhile, the seismology instrument on the Viking 2 lander had recorded no marsquake activity in the 2 wk it had been monitoring the planet’s surface, said Dr. Don L. Anderson, seismology team director. The detector, turned up to full sensitivity, could detect a quake as small as a 3 on the Richter scale (enough to cause only slight damage on earth) as far away as 200 km from the lander; Dr. Anderson said it was working well, recording breezes and even picking up vibrations from tape recorders on board the lander. A similar instrument on the Viking 1 lander never was freed from its packaging. (W Star, 15 Oct 76, A-3) The scoop of soil taken from under a rock on the Mars surface also failed to yield a trace of organic molecules, Dr. Biemann announced. However, mission officials planned to go ahead with biological experiments using a sample from under another rock later in the week; the sample would be tested for signs of life processes—growth, metabolism, and respiration. (C Trib, 21 Oct 76, 4-22)
The Great Galactic Ghoul struck again, reported Washington Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole, when one of the unmanned Viking spacecraft (Viking 2) approached the orbit of Mars and lost one of its three ovens designed to heat samples of the Martian surface and look in the gases for signs of Martian life. Space scientists found that almost all the accidents with Mars-bound spacecraft—three failures and four nearfailures—had occurred in the same region, which had no unusual features such as extra cosmic dust or increased solar wind, magnetic field, or background radiation. First “victims of the Ghoul” were Soviet spacecraft—Zond 2 in 1964, and Mars 1 a year later—whose batteries died when they crossed the area and never came on again. One Mariner lost its radio in the Ghoul’s orbit but came back on when it reached Mars; another lost one or two instruments to cosmic dust; two others lost their guidance stars when they reached the Ghoul’s orbit, but locked on them again when they left it. Most costly casualty of the Ghoul was Mariner 7, whose battery exploded the day in 1969 when it crossed the Ghoul’s orbit, damaging the rest of the spacecraft so that it was useless by the time it flew past Mars. The area was about 56 million km from earth and 209 million km from the sun, and Viking 2 would not leave it until some time in February; scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory were hoping for no further damage to it or to the other Viking, which was coming along a month behind the first. (W Post, 25 Jan 76, A-3)
Blueprints for future Mars explorations, triggered by the Viking 1 landing on Mars, included not only the dispatch of roving robot vehicles to the surface of Mars but also collection and return of Mars samples by a “sailing ship”—a spacecraft carrying an onionskin-thin sail of aluminum-coated plastic measuring more than 185 m' and powered by the pressure of solar electromagnetic radiation. Space flight would become possible with less reliance on heavy and expensive rockets, said John Noble Wilford in the New York Times; a space-sailer could be launched from an earth-orbiting Shuttle, deploy landers to collect and return samples, and return to earth with larger amounts of Martian samples than possible by other methods. JPL’s plans for future missions might include a fleet of the sailers (to be called Yankee Clippers) “flying the routes from earth orbit to the vicinity of Mars, hauling supplies and portable habitats, and finally explorers, to a Mars base.” (NYT, 25 July 76, 44)
First microwave observations of carbon monoxide in the upper atmospheres of earth, Venus, and Mars were reported by a team of scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena. Establishment of carbon monoxide as a common component of the upper atmospheres of the planets should lead to a better understanding of the delicate balances in earth’s atmosphere, said Dr. Joe W. Waters, who headed the team. Carbon monoxide at lower altitudes on Venus and Mars, as well as on earth, had previously been measured by infrared techniques that had also detected CO on Jupiter last year, according to JPL’s Dr. Reinhold Beer. JPL microwave observations used a radiotelescope at Aerospace Corp.’s electronic research laboratory to detect the carbon-monoxide absorption frequency at high altitudes, well above the smog layer over Los Angeles; calculations indicated that the same technique could measure CO in the upper atmospheres of the other planets. The Mars experiment used the larger radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., to record the identifying signal. CO occurred in 20 parts per million at 80 km altitude on earth, and about 1000 parts per million at 100 km above Venus; the Mars readings were still being analyzed. (NASA Release 76-40)
The Viking 1 on its way toward Mars might have lost the use of one of its ovens just as Viking 2 was reported last week to have done, project officials said. Each of the Mars landers carried three ovens to heat surface samples for analysis by a gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer that would determine atmosphere elements and search for organic material that would indicate biological or nonbiological activity. Loss of one oven on each craft would not affect the operation of the instruments, but would mean that only two instead of three soil analyses would be done. A separate biology instrument on each lander would search directly for life forms in soil samples. A monitoring device on the ovens was suspected as the cause of the test-data anomaly. (NASA Releases 76-14, 76-15)
A lunar scientist in Johnson Space Center’s Division of Lunar and Planetary Sciences had suggested that low-viscosity lava rather than water could have caused the large channels seen on Mars, JSC announced. Ernest Schonfeld, in a paper to be presented at the annual meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union, said that the abundant large channels—one of the most puzzling landforms on Mars—were more easily explained by lava than by water; scientists had not been able to identify thick deposits of sediment that should have resulted from channel formation by water. Viking 1 had landed near the mouth of a large channel where thick sediments should have been deposited, but rocks at that site appeared to be volcanic. Schonfeld proposed that thin basaltic liquid melted below the Mars surface had flowed freely to erode the surface, and said that the coincidence of the age of volcanic activity on Mars and the erosion of the channels supported his idea. (JSC Release 76-72)
Scientists at JPL, where the Viking 1 mission was being directed, were startled at responses from 2 of 3 instruments reporting on the first Mars surface samplings. The labeled-release instrument, designed to count radioactive molecules released by a process feeding tagged nutrients to a soil sample, had counted 4 times as many radioactive releases as would have resulted from a similar earth sample: 4537 per min for the first 9 hr 20 min it counted, compared to about 100 counts per min from Calif, soil sampled in a prelaunch test, and no more than 750 per min from soil gathered in the dry valleys of Antarctica. The rapidity and magnitude of the response were “quite surprising,” said Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., which built the instrument. Another Viking instrument, the gas-exchange experiment that dampened a surface sample with nutrients and monitored the resultant release of gas, detected an increase in oxygen released by the sample 15 times greater than was explainable by the Mars atmosphere or by oxidation of minerals similar to earth soils. The same instrument 24 hr later reported an increase in oxygen release 30% greater than that detected the first day. Scientists said the results might be attributed to superoxides, produced by intense ultraviolet solar radiation on the Mars surface, reacting with the extemely iron-rich Martian soil, not shielded by atmosphere as earth’s surface is. Further information would be needed to reach firm conclusions, said Dr. Harold Klein of Ames Research Center, chief Viking biologist. (WPost, 1 Aug 76, A-l; NYT, 1 Aug 76, 4-8)
A press briefing following the 7th lunar science conference at Johnson Space Center [see 22 Feb.] featured the cochairmen, Dr. Larry Haskins, chief of planetary and earth sciences at JSC, and Dr. Robert Pepin, director of the Lunar Science Institute, and Dr. Deter Hayman of Rice Univ. Dr. Haskins said the conference aimed at broadening the planetary view of people working with lunar samples and data; a substantial interest was developing in the lunar polar-orbiter mission among people more interested than before in planetology, and aware that orbiting and remote-sensing missions would be the principal source for studying geoscientific evolution of these bodies. As an example, long-range operation of the lunar-surface packages had produced information that resulted in a lowered value for lunar heatflow; this in turn “constrained” the composition of the moon and its evolutionary history—“Whatever history it has, the amount of heat in the interior has to match the present heat loss from the body.” Also, said Dr. Haskins, lunar data were being used widely by scientists not previously concerned with lunar research: for example, archived data would be used to tell whether the moon was differentiated only in its outer extent, or more than 50% of it had undergone chemical separation or even developed a core. Another example would be the matching of seismic with magnetic data to get a better overall picture of lunar evolution. Dr. Pepin noted that 740 people had attended the conference, many more than the previous year; the program committee had purposely included discussions of other planetary and meteorite investigations that revealed much about the first 500 million yr of solar-system history, whose clues still exist in the moon (although hard to interpret) but no longer exist on earth. Experience with other planets had been insufficient to say if they had preserved early solar-system records; “best chances are not,” he added. Early solar-system history, especially of the inner planets, was characterized by enormous bombardment of all solid surfaces by objects now referred to as meteorites, but on a scale in those days “that almost suggests we should call them something else.” These huge objects clearly left their mark, with evidence that the bombardment took place more than 4 billion yr ago, then rapidly tapered off. Data from Mercury, Mars, and Venus would be expected to show that the historical record had been erased by time, constant impact, and geological activity in which the surface was pounded, dispersed, or remelted. The intense bombardment had wiped out earth’s early geological record too; terrestrial geologists had tried to put the age of the oldest earth rocks farther and farther back, getting in gradual stages as far back as 3.7 billion yr in a large anorthosite deposit in Greenland.This boundary condition for earth geology was one reason for the growing interest in lunar and general planetary studies: the flow of information had been not only from planetary to terrestrial scientists, but also in the other direction. Lunar scientists had begun to examine terrestrial craters such as the 60-km impact phenomenon called Manicouagan: what would have been referred to 5 yr ago as remnants of a Manicouagan volcano had now been established as an impact, mainly because the ease of sampling (greater there than on the moon) had permitted study of energy partition and formation of rock, glass, and melt material in a large-scale impact. Comparative planetology means applying results of studying one planetary surface to explain phenomena on other planetary surfaces. Earth, unlike other planets we know about, continued as a thermally active planet with volcanism, mountain upheaval and wearing down, and had obliterated much of its earlier record. The early stages of the lunar and planetary program focused attention outward; now these studies had provided knowledge applicable to earth, and the generation and development of lunar-surface morphology as a result of external bombardment was only one example of this application. Over the next 2 to 3 yr, a group of 50 to 100 scientists would be studying in detail the phenomenon of volcanism on all the terrestrial planets as a fundamental stage of planetary development, in a pilot project to define comparative planetology and relate it to a specific aspect. Mercury apparently had basalt flows; Venera pictures suggest recent activity on the surface of Venus that produced what seem to be basalts. Mars clearly had basalts: it had the largest volcano in the solar system, “an enormous structure that would . . . cover the state of Kansas if . . . plunked down there.” In 2 or 3 yr, Dr. Pepin said, we should be able to give an integrated picture of the issuing of basalts from the interior onto the surface, an extremely important process in the development and evolution of a planet. Life in the solar system was an exciting subject now, said Dr. Hayman, and discoveries were coming in at a pace that would make today’s theories outmoded by the time they got into print 6 mo from now. The task of scientists, he said, was to include the general public in the excitement, and to make it filter through to the colleges and universities, to high schools, and even to grade-school levels. One thing that had changed in the past 20 yr since the days of Harold Urey and Hans Seuss was the concept of the solar nebula and the formation of planets and satellites by accretion. The problem was the noncondensable material in the nebula, and where it went: the solar physicists explained its absence by the theory of a solar upheaval that cleaned out the inner parts of the solar system by a superstorm of ions. Applying thermodynamics to this theory made it possible to calculate which compounds would condense out at what temperature. The Allende meteorite that fell in Mexico in 1969 contained compounds similar to what had been predicted as a result of condensation of the solar nebula at high temperatures. Then, 2 or 3 yr ago the idea arose that the sun and planets had formed not only from gases but also from so-called presolar grains, which had not been specifically identified; their identity on the earth and moon would have been lost over time because of geological processes. So the search shifted to meteorites. Although none of the grains had been definitely identified, the conference had heard 2 reports that might be interpreted as finding presolar grains. Metallic nuggets in the Allende meteorite were found to consist of platinum-group metals in extraordinarily small fragments, a millionth of a meter, that did not vaporize or melt readily and might be presolar grains (although it would take a lot of work to settle the question, Dr. Hayman said). Also, a group from Berkeley had dissolved carbonaceous meteorites in hydrofluoric acid to get rid of the silicates; the carbon residue was found to be full of gas called “planetary” because its composition differed from that of the sun and was much more like that of earth. The question was how carbon material could have been of planetary origin under the solar-nebula theory: speculation was that the carbonaceous material might predate the formation of the sun and have originated elsewhere. It could not have undergone great heat without being destroyed, so the objects containing the material must have been created farther out, not in the inner region of the sun and terrestrial planets but in the region of the giant planets. If the heavier elements were synthesized in the stars by nuclear processes, especially in explosions of novas and supernovas that produced all sorts of elements as they blew away their outer envelopes, all the elements are probably represented in this expanding envelope. With rapidly dropping temperatures, the condensation of presolar grains would occur within 10 yr. It would be possible to look at the product of a single event to extrapolate the total of many such events of which all the elements around us would be the product. Dr. Haskins said in summary that developments in methodology and the availability of more precise measurements would make it possible to supplant earlier measurements. Geophysicists were learning to extract information from bits of material instead of bucketsful or large chunks as they had done in the past. The Apollo program had been responsible for a steady progress in the field of measurements: “there simply was not the funding and interest correlated together to do it prior to that time.” Asked what the scientific community had learned about the moon in the 3 yr 3 mo since the last moon mission, Haskins said they were beginning to understand the major stages in the evolution of every planetary body composed of rocky material; the moon had passed through stages that the earth had not reached, and had preserved a record of what had happened—for example, a preview of the kind of rock that would be formed later in earth history. The findings provided a broad framework in which more and different questions could be asked, not just investigation of the more obvious characteristics of the many materials brought back. Queried on the lunar-sample curatorial facility, Dr. Haskins said that moon rocks from the Apollo expeditions were housed in a leaky, flimsy facility that would not protect them for use of future generations of scientists. A new facility was desperately needed, because the present building was not fireproof and the roof leaked; within the building, the rocks had been kept in nitrogen-filled cabinets and handled only in clean-room conditions, to prevent contamination. However, moisture in the surroundings might have led to erroneous deductions regarding the moon environment when scientists analyzed the lunar samples. (Transcript, 7th lunar science conf. press briefing, 19 Mar 76; NASA Release 76-25; JSC Release 76-15; Science, vol. 185, 346; W Post, 21 Mar 76, A-3)
Dr. Bruce T. Lundin, director of Lewis Research Center, received the 1976 Astronautics Engineer Award from the National Space Club at its 19th annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard memorial dinner in Washington. The award, made by a group of judges including former NASA scientist Dr. Wernher von Braun, was for outstanding leadership in development and operation of the Centaur high-energy rocket stage, and the Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur launch vehicles. The Atlas-Centaur launched all NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft in the 1960s and many others such as OAOs, the recent Intelsats, Mariners, and Pioneers. The Titan-Centaur, largest U.S. rocket, launched West Germany’s Helios spacecraft toward the sun and the Viking spacecraft to Mars. A NASA employee since 1943, Dr. Lundin became director of LeRC in 1969 after a year and a half at NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator and Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. As leader in the development and operation of the Centaur vehicle, he built the Centaur staff at Lewis and made the decisions that set the character and style of the whole project. (Lewis News, 19 Mar 76, 1; LeRC Release 76-11)
The boost given by the Viking Mars missions, now nearing an end, to those concerned with the space program might persuade Congress of the virtues of possible future projects, Science magazine reported. Describing 15 Sept, testimony of Dr. John E. Naugle, acting associate administrator of NASA, before a House subcommittee, the magazine said “some of the juicier projects the agency has in mind for the 1980s” might include a roving-vehicle mission to Mars, shipped aboard a Solar Sailor, “the closest thing the agency has ever proposed to a genuine space ship.” The Solar Sailor would be driven by solar pressure—light reflected from the sun, collected by huge lightweight sails—and was referred to as “a reusable interplanetary spacecraft,” Other future projects would be a Global Information Services satellite system to combine earth sensing, meteorological and pollution observation, data transmission, and navigation uses, all such information to be available to the public at receiving stations or home terminals; some sort of solar-energy collection system, either on the ground or in space; and moving “a segment of our industrial society into space . . . where there is abundant solar energy and an almost inexhaustible vacuum to act as a sink for thermal and chemical pollution.” Naugle and other agency spokesmen had noted that such plans were still in the design stage and the agency was not ready to discuss them in detail; however, Science commented, the Viking success might mean that for NASA “perhaps the sky will be the limit, after all,” (Science, 1 Oct 76, 39)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, who had retired in 1972 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Long-Range Planning at NASA Hq, said in a Washington Star interview that he had been brought to Washington in 1970. to “lend clout to NASA’s ability to get its appropriations.” His assignment had been to present to Congress the program of a manned expedition to Mars; “so many national problems” had arisen that Congress would not commit itself to another multibillion-dollar space program, and the reusable space shuttle was the only element of the concept that survived. Dr. von Braun recalled that NASA’s resources were cut to about a third during his last 2 yr at NASA, and the new organization with which he was associated—the National Space Institute—was created to “reach large numbers of people” and broaden public support of basic science, “where it is much more difficult to predict the payoff.” “Remember,” he added, “nuclear energy, which ultimately was used in the hydrogen bomb, was discovered because some astrophysicists were interested in what keeps the sun hot.” (W Star, 20 Jan 76, A—1)
The Viking 1 orbiter photographed a tiny moon of Mars called Phobos at a distance of just over 8000 km, providing a picture so clear that more than 100 craters were visible on the surface only 22.5 km across. At least 6 craters measured nearly 2 km across, meaning that meteorites the size of small towns had crashed into Phobos during the last 3 or 4 billion yr. The face of Phobos in the picture released by JPL was the same one photographed in 1971 and 1972 Mariner 9, first spacecraft to orbit Mars. “This means that Phobos always shows its same side to Mars,” said Dr. Thomas C. Duxbury of JPL, as earth’s moon always shows the same side because of the pull of earth’s gravity. Another Viking 1 picture showed small channels in the Argyre basin of Mars’s southern highland that were the best evidence yet for heavy rainfall on the planet in past ages. Present atmospheric pressure on Mars was only about 7.7 millibars, 1/200th of that on earth and insufficient for liquid water to form or rain to fall. (W Post, 28 July 76, A-8)
The Viking 1 lander touched down safely on a plain at the western edge of the Chryse region of Mars at 7:53 am EDT, 11 mo to the day after its journey of more than 700 million km through space began at KSC Launch Complex 41. Landing was within 17 sec of the predicted time; velocity at impact, predicted to be 2.4 ± 0.9 kps, was actually 2.49 kps. Within minutes of the landing, the Viking began relaying a photograph of one of its footpads on the nearby surface up to the Viking orbiter for transmission to earth; a panoramic view of the landing site followed. Distance from earth to Mars at landing time was more than 322 million km, and radio waves took 19 additional minutes to travel back to earth to signal touchdown. Spacecraft controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory broke into applause and cheers when the data arrived showing a successful landing; telemetry showed the descent curve fitting preplanned values as the lander’s aeroshell, supersonic parachute, and terminal descent engines braked the descent to the surface of Mars. The site at Chryse Planitia was chosen for the landing after Viking orbiter data and the giant telescope at Arecibo, P.R., showed that the primary landing site and the first alternative were too hazardous. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, who was at JPL for the landing, said that the intensive search for a safe landing site “really paid off.” The Mars landing came on the 7th anniversary of man’s first landing on the moon 20 July 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. President Ford, who telephoned JPL with congratulations after the landing, asked Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC if there were plans for a Viking 3. Martin replied that there were not, but that his team was “ready to take on Viking 3 plus Viking 4, 5, and 6.” The Viking 2 was expected to go into orbit around Mars about 7 Aug. (Mission Status Bulletin 35, 20 July 76; Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 1)
NASA announced that its Viking Undergraduate Intern Program, permitting U.S. college students to participate in the Viking mission to Mars, was under way at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. Fifty-eight students from about 600 applicants had been selected to spend 30 days during the summer working with Viking scientists in a number of scientific areas at JPL, where more than 72 science teams were conducting a detailed examination of the planet, including a search for life. The program was the idea of Prof. Thomas Mutch of Brown Univ., leader of the Viking imaging team, who was assisted by a teammate, Prof. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ.; the 2 professors reviewed each of the applicants’ qualifications and selected the 58 students for the summer’s work. The program, designed to directly involve undergraduates with a strong interest in planetary science, was funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and by NASA’s Planetary Geology Office. (NASA Release 76-139)
Study of earth’s climate to permit predictions of global climatic changes by the end of the century should be the top space priority, said a study group formed by NASA last year to assess U.S. progress in space and where it should go next. The 3-vol report of the study group did not mention manned exploration of Mars, which had been the prime recommendation of a forerunner study 7 yr ago. Citing the dependence of the world’s population on a complex system producing food and fiber where climate is favorable, the report said the entire system was predicated on a constant climate. Understanding of climatic processes would help solve earth’s most pressing problems: food shortages, and worldwide weather changes caused by pollution. The report estimated that a 1-degree cooling of earth’s annual temperature would mean loss of $1 billion in grain production, $2.2 billion in timber and fiber output, and $1.4 billion in fish catches; the drop would also increase the demand for electrical energy by $700 million, with a $2.4 billion rise in health costs other than treating skin cancers caused by alterations in earth’s atmosphere. The group recommended development of 6 satellites to identify and assess worldwide crop conditions; other satellites to study chemical changes in the atmosphere and to watch for solar changes affecting earth’s weather; and a network of 4 to 6 large geostationary satellites to observe ice and ocean conditions and keep tabs on the earth’s radiation balance. Manned flight should develop along the lines of Space Shuttle and space station— to be used partially for climate study—and instrumented craft should be sent to explore every solar-system planet except Pluto, the report said. Cost of the weather-satellite program was set at $1.7 billion, with operating costs over 20 yr estimated at $4.6 billion; the planetary exploration program would cost a total of $5.1 billion to the year 2000. (WPost, 22 Feb 76, A-3)
A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences, named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a 2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regulate fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15% a year, about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal. An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone, meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the Univ. of Mich, report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr. The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone reduction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the Univ. of Mich, had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons. Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Lawrence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H. Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the chemistry were pinned down, the effect of SST operations could not be determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratospheric processes, the team said. (NYT14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14; W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-l; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49) The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity. Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms. After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated 180° instead of 45° as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday, 17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument. At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33% more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20 times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample, apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber. Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accompanied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, considered the least ambiguous of the detectors. Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest, earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher, therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother, considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared on the moon and on earth. {WStar, 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2; WPost, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-l; 17 Sept 76, A-4; ATT, 17 Sept 76, A14; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
Return of the USSR’s Luna 24 to earth with a load of material drilled from nearly 2 m below the surface of the moon might be a dress rehearsal for a round-trip Mars probe to offset world headlines gained by Viking 1, said the Christian Science Monitor. The question why the Soviets would expend more effort on moon samples when they already had three sets (two from previous probes, Luna 16 and Luna 20, and one from the U.S. Apollo program) would be answered if the Luna 24 mission were being used to perfect techniques for obtaining Mars samples, a move “which would vault the Soviet Union back into the lead in planetary research,” said the CSM. The USSR had landed unmanned spacecraft on the surface of Venus and obtained information for a short period, and had sent to the moon in 1973 an unmanned vehicle Lunokhod 2 that crisscrossed the Lemonnier crater for 6 mo, reporting back data on magnetic fields and laser direction-finding. The CSM noted that, although the USSR automated machines worked well, the Soviets still lacked boosters to propel cosmonauts to the moon. (CSM, 30 Aug 76)
A mysterious radio signal apparently emanating from the Soviet Union had been so powerful that it had disrupted maritime, aeronautical, telecommunications, and amateur radio operations throughout the world for months, the New York Times reported. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission had forwarded four complaints to the USSR Ministry of Post and Telecommunications since 25 Aug., but had not received an answer. Colin Thomas of Leeds, England, worldwide coordinator of interference reports for the Inti. Amateur Radio Union, said that amateurs in Sweden, Norway, West Germany, the U.S., and Australia had complained of the interference; protests by the British Home Office to the USSR had not received a reply, he said. The Inti. Telecommunications Union in Geneva, Switzerland, to which the matter was referred, said it had no power to enforce treaties against interference but tried to mediate such situations. An FCC spokesman said complaints had been received almost daily since early July; direction-finding equipment had confirmed the source of the signals as the eastern side of the Baltic Sea. An extremely wideband signal pulsing 10 times per second was causing the interference, which had generated complaints from every type of shortwave user. What generated the signals, what type of intelligence they might be carrying, and what the purpose was, remained unanswered questions, the ATT said. (NYT, 30 Oct 76, 5) During October: Numbers of ham radio operators had received pictures transmitted by the Viking lander from the surface of Mars more than 370 million km away, the Associated Press reported in a story reprinted by the New York Times. Retired printing foreman Bob Walton of Des Moines, la., said that a third of the 260 000 hams in the U.S. might be capable of receiving the pictures if they spent about $700 on equipment. Last July the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena broadcast on its 20m band that off-duty personnel would relay Mars pictures through their amateur radio station; Walton found a junked TV set, replaced some parts, and began receiving the Mars pictures. The JPL signals, tape-recorded and put through a converter, turned the sound into pictures when played back. Vocal explanations of the pictures could also be taped for playback. Storms in Iowa had prevented Walton from receiving some of the Mars pictures, but ham operators in Tex. and Fla. sent him the ones he had missed, he reported. (NYT, 7 Oct 76, 10 C) Video transmissions of Viking lander pictures from the JPL ham radio station N6V (NASA 1976 Viking) at Pasadena had bypassed ham radio operators in San Diego County nearby, wrote Cliff Smith, science writer for the San Diego Union. The shortwave radio signals, good for longdistance communications, had been received by “about 13 000 hams around the world equipped to receive the pictures,” but not by the score of ham operators around San Diego. The locals pointed out that special converter devices N6V used for picture transmission and reception had been made by a company in San Diego, and that the local ham organization had donated to N6V the converter used by the station for its Viking transmissions. After a representative of the San Diego Reporter Assn, called the situation to the attention of the N6V broadcasters—all hams employed as technicians at JPL, the Viking control center—N6V corrected the omission by beaming its broadcasts to a repeater station on Otay Mt. that most area hams could receive. Pictures received since the change had included shots of the Viking 2 mechanical arm trying to turn over a rock; closeups of the Martian moons, Deimos and Phobos; and a weird-looking alien whose image the JPL station transmitted as a joke. (San Diego Union, 8 Oct 76)
The board of governors of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that, at its recent meeting in The Hague 19—27 May, it adopted a 10-m class Standard B ground station to supplement the Standard A station long the foundation of INTELSAT’s global system. Currently, 114 Standard A ground stations with 30-m antennas were operating throughout the world, as well as 29 smaller stations used for domestic service, telemetry, tracking and control, monitoring, and limited telecommunications between 2 or 3 destinations. Broadest use of the Standard B station would be in developing countries that had limited telecommunications requirements. Under study for some years, the Standard B.station would use single-channel-per-carrier (SCPC) equipment that allowed routing of traffic on a circuit-by-circuit basis instead of in large groups or bundles, minimizing the capacity loss associated with smaller antennas; it also worked with voice activation, which would be mandatory, using satellite capacity for telephone service only when activated by voice signals. Adoption of the second standard for international service would mean a 40% drop in rates paid for use of the satellites, plus ability to route traffic to any ground stations equipped to receive the user’s signals, with no restriction on the total amount of traffic. Previously, the drain on satellite power limited small ground stations to providing service to only 1 or 2 other points. (INTELSAT Release 76-17-1) Viking 1 would scan and map the surface for 2 wk; its cameras would photograph the prime landing site near an ancient rift valley, and other instruments would measure surface temperatures and search the Mars atmosphere for signs of water. The new orbit would bring Viking over the planned landing site once each 24.6-hr Mars day (called a sol). The 2 wk of photographs and measurements were needed so that scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where the flight had been directed since launch in April 1975, could choose the safest and most interesting spot for their 4-ton bird to alight. The landing attempt would be the first U.S. try at putting a spacecraft down on another planet; the USSR had made 5 unmanned attempts, 3 on Venus and 2 on Mars. The 2 Venera spacecraft had survived on the surface long enough to send back 1 picture each; the third crashed. One Mars spacecraft had crashed, and the other was blown over after it landed by winds clocked at more than 300 kph. After Viking’s braking engine was fired, the main job of flight directors would be to navigate it into a path where its orbit would be lowered again, with apogee reduced from about 19 000 km to 12 500 km. The firing was successful 19 June, and the Viking neared the end of a 690-million-km voyage that began 10 mo ago. William J. O’Neill of JPL said the precision of the flight could be likened to “shooting a basketball in Los Angeles and putting it through a hoop in Madison Square Garden in New York City.” Viking was following a northeasterly path around Mars that would bring it within 1450 km of the planet’s surface; flight directors planned a second maneuver to bring it still closer over an area 20°N of the equator, called Chryse, where Viking would attempt to land 4 July, selected as a good place to search for signs of life or fossilized life that thrived when a river flowed there a billion years ago. Harold S. Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey, chief geologist for Viking, said that Chryse resembled California’s Death Valley or the water-worn dry valleys of Nevada or Wyoming, where ancient rivers overflowed their banks millions of years ago to deposit alluvial soils on the valley floors. Rock and soil in the Chryse valley appeared red from millions of years of iron oxide deposits brought down by the river overflow; Masursky and his colleagues hoped that the red soils would contain organic molecules, signs of a once-existent life on Mars. A photograph taken 19 June and released by JPL on Sunday, 20 June, showed the “awesome” Valles Marineris from about 360 000 km up— parallel canyons south of the Mars equator that, if extended together on earth, would reach from Calif, to Penna. The smaller was about 3 km deep, 64 km wide, and 645 km long; the larger was 6 km deep, 96 km wide, and more than 3200 km long. (Arizona’s Grand Canyon, largest on earth, is about 2 km deep, 21 km wide at its greatest breadth, and only 350 km long.) The northern hemisphere of Mars appeared covered with haze, which scientists said was probably from water vapor misting out of the cold surface as the sun warmed it during the longer summer days. Successful firing of the braking engine at 1:25 pm EDT Monday, 21 June, put Viking 1 into a lower orbit so that its cameras could begin to photograph steep slopes, craters, boulder fields, and other potential obstacles. On 27 June, Viking project manager James S. Martin announced that the 4 July landing was off; pictures of the primary landing area showed “too many unknowns,” and the site appeared too hazardous to risk landing without investigating other sites. As the Viking 1 cameras could not distinguish objects “smaller than a football field,” objects as yet invisible could endanger the landing. However, as there was no assurance of any hazard-free area roughly 20 km by 100 km anywhere on Mars, some scientists had wanted to go ahead with the planned landing. Previous closeups taken by Mariner 9 were not as detailed as those from Viking, and dangerous details of the primary landing site became more obvious with photos from Viking 1 coming in more clearly. The New York Times reported that the first alternative site was an area called Chryse Phoenicia, a basin about 30 km northwest of the original site; if that site appeared too rough, scientists would look at Tritonis Lacus, about 6400 km east of Chryse, although if this happened, the landing might be delayed until as late as the first wk of August. Project Manager Martin suggested delaying the Viking 1 landing, if it were not down by 25 July, until the Viking 2 (now 8 million km away) arrived in Mars orbit; possibly 2 Viking spacecraft might be orbiting simultaneously. JPL said flight tracking and control facilities there were insufficient to handle full operations of both spacecraft simultaneously, and a number of preorbital maneuvers for Viking 2 would be required starting about 27 July. John Noble Wilford said in the New York Times that the earliest possible Viking 1 landing would be 9 July, and other alternatives would take longer. Scientists, he said, were “dismayed by the rugged Martian terrain”—the primary landing area being heavily pocked with craters, steep escarpments, and a sprinkling of knoblike features probably remnants of erosion like that in the Grand Canyon. On 28 June, Viking 1 photographed a site about 300 km northwest of Chryse—the “northwest territory”—after pictures of the prime site showed it to be far more rugged than expected; the scientists wanted a landing as close as possible to the original site because they thought it offered the best chance of finding signs of existing or fossil life. The alternate site would be somewhat flatter and safer, but less interesting scientifically, O’Toole said in the Post 29 June. Photographs released 29 June at JPL showed a plateau in the Chryse valley originally picked as the Viking 1 landing site, where a curving and rugged coastline at the plateau’s base could have been formed only by an ocean-like surf. Pictures taken from an altitude of about 1450 km showed a crater with lava-flow traces more than 30 km wide, “a truly enormous scale” according to chief geologist Masursky. “The biggest lava flooding ... on earth are the basalt floods on Iceland, which are no bigger than a few kilometers across.” Temperature changes mapped by Viking were also dramatic: instruments on Viking registered differences of more than 60°C (140°F) between day and night in the same parts of the planet. Dr. Hugh H. Kieffer, atmospheric scientist on the Viking team, said that the atmosphere on Mars was almost perfectly transparent to sunlight, as little water was present to absorb it; “whatever sunlight reaches the planet gets right to the surface, which then radiates the heat back to the atmosphere to warm it up.” An instrument aboard Viking could tell when day broke on the Mars surface although it had no way of “seeing”; it measured water vapor in the atmosphere, and registered its presence when the sun warmed the permafrost that “literally pops [water] into the atmosphere when that sun hits the surface first thing in the morning,” according to Dr. Barney Farmer of JPL. Besides surveying possibilities for its own landing, Viking 1 was photographing potential landing sites for Viking 2 to give scientists an idea whether they might have to shift sites for that spacecraft also. (W Post, 12 June 76, A-12; 19 June, A-3; 20 June, A—1; 21 June, A-9; 22 June, A—17; 28 June, A-3; 29 June, C-4; 30 June, A-27; ATT, 21 June, 10; 28 June, 17; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 14)
plane that flew around the global poles had previously been carried around the world on a balloon that came down in Central Africa, where a French member of the World Health Organization found it hanging in a tree and returned it to NASA; after the airplane trip, the unit served another year on a buoy before being retired from service. A 1914 Model T Ford originally scheduled to carry the tracking device [see 15 Feb.] was withdrawn from the race by its owner. (NASA Release 76-126) 17-19 July: Project scientists said the high proportion of argon in the Mars atmosphere might damage the life-detection instruments on Viking 1. In March 1974, a spectrometer pump on a Mars-bound spacecraft failed to work properly and Russian scientists concluded the problem was caused by argon, an element reluctant to form chemical compounds; the Russian pump apparently could not handle the high argon content of the Mars atmosphere. Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer contained filter material to screen out carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide in the search for organic compounds in Mars air and soil samples, which would be heated in the instrument to produce gas for analysis by the chromatograph; the high argon content might interfere with the readings. (NYT, 17 July 76, 24) JPL flight directors were checking out the instruments on Viking 1 for its Mars landing scheduled for 20 July. Immediately upon landing, the spacecraft would measure air temperature and pressure and wind speed and direction, and would detect any interior motions of the planet such as moving lava or shaking of the crust. It was also scheduled to take 2 photographs, one downward to record the terrain of the landing site and the other a panorama shot to show the general surface of Mars. Life-detection experiments would not begin until about a wk after the landing. (W Post, 18 July 76, A-10) Commands from JPL to turn on the $ 153-million instrument package to be landed by Viking 1 on the Plains of Chryse took between 17 and 18 min to reach the spacecraft nearly 346 million km away from earth. First spacecraft responses to the signals indicated the instruments and navigational equipment were in working condition. Landing was scheduled for 8 am EDT on 20 July; Viking 1 would separate early in the morning into 2 components, 2300-kg orbiter and 590-kg lander. The orbiter, powered by purple solar cells on panels, would remain in orbit to serve as a radio relay for the lander and to photograph nearly half the Martian surface over the next 12 mo. The lander, powered by an atomic battery, would coast for about 3 hr, slowed by a parachute and braking engines, and land on 3 aluminum legs at about 8 kph, more gently than most parachutists land on earth. (W Post, 19 July 76, A-3) Odds were heavily against existence of any form of life on Mars, said a Washington Post editorial, and against Viking 1 ’s finding evidence of it even if it were there. The Viking flights were “in some ways more remarkable an undertaking” than the Apollo flights because the spacecraft was on its own with no humans to correct errors and a sizable time lapse between sending and receipt of radioed instructions. The mission, said the Post, was “already a stunning accomplishment.” (W Post, 20 July. 76, A-16) The Viking spacecraft was “a breed apart,” the Wash. Post reported, as different from previous spacecraft “as a Cadillac from a Pinto.” Almost nothing on the lander had flown in space before; almost everything had to be built super-small to save weight. As the first tl.S. spacecraft to land on another planet, the Viking had to be designed to withstand chemical and heat sterilization to avoid contaminating Mars with earth organisms. The tape recorder, for instance, had to be made of bronze coated with phosphor, because no plastic tape could have survived the heat. (W Post, 20 July 76, A-2)
An all-systems simulation of landing Vikings 1 and 2 on the surface of Mars, to exercise the entire 750-person Viking flight team so that everyone knew exactly what to do when the time came later this year, began 20 Feb. and built up to a “Mars landing” 22 Feb., concluding today as a “fantastic success” according to James S. Martin, Jr., project manager at Viking Control in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory installation in the San Gabriel Mts. near Pasadena. The computer program had to be redesigned to facilitate uplink command to the spacecraft cameras, and more time had to be allowed for certain ground-control and data-processing procedures, but no major problems developed. In the room where a full-scale model of the Viking lander complete with operational cameras stood on a simulated Martian surface, prankish team members had put three tiny marine fossils from earth’s Paleozoic period on the sand within the camera field-of-view. When the camera came on to transmit after the simulated landing, the first picture was startling, but the fossils were immediately recognized, and the joke demonstrated that even tiny objects near the landing site would appear in the pictures transmitted from Mars. (NYT, 4 Mar 76, 32)
MSFC announced development of a new system of vehicle mobility that could greatly extend unmanned explorations on the surface of Mars and other planets. The concept grew out of work on the successful lunar roving vehicle that carried astronauts and equipment on extended exploration of the moon, far from the lunar module’s landing site. Scientists had regretted the lack of mobility of the Viking landers on the surface of Mars, because the data on atmosphere and terrain had been limited to the landing site. The new idea, called Elastic Loop Mobility System (ELMS), would use a continuous elastic-loop track in place of the landing pads; the track would distribute lander weight uniformly over a relatively large area, with suspension and drive systems on the spacecraft combined into a single lightweight package. The geometry of the loop would serve to provide “excellent mobility” on soft soils and smooth rides over hard and rough terrain. Tests on models revealed slope-climbing capability, high maneuverability, and power to surmount obstacles and cross crevasses. Combining the ELMS with existing Viking hardware would produce a mobile laboratory that could conduct scientific missions on the Mars surface for 6 mo along traverses up to 150 km. Recent reviews of a possible mobile-Viking mission to Mars, using the ELMS concept, considered extending the mission to 2 yr along traverses up to 500 km. The low ground clearance of the Viking spacecraft, together with the low ground-pressure tolerances on soft Martian soil, ruled out the use of wheels for mobility, as well as the use of conventional tracks because of high energy consumption and low operational reliability. Besides use of the MSFC-developed ELMS for planetary exploration, the U.S. Marine Corps had considered the system for a new generation of amphibious landing vehicles for the 1980s, a MSFC spokesman said. (MSFC Release 76-191)
President Carter’s first budget proposal contained additional funds for NASA, Nature magazine noted. The new administration had recommended $13 million for studies of potential missions to Mars after Viking; the previous administration had requested $5 million. Planetary scientists, pleased with the increased budget request as well as with Carter’s recent remarks on the Space Shuttle, viewed these actions as presidential support of the space program. (Nature, Mar 3/77, 5; Spaceflight, Mar 77, 8)
The rapid approach of the Martian winter, whose temperatures would fall below - 123°C, had halted science experiments using the Viking 2 lander, NASA announced. Problems with the lander’s sample arm had forced controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to cancel a final biology experiment. The meteorology station and the seismic instrument would use power to gather data during the winter; all other power would go toward maintaining survivable heat levels inside the lander. (NASA Release 77-69)
NASA’s upcoming 5yr plan (1978-1982) had projected annual budgets for fiscal yrs 1980-1982 in excess of $4.7 billion, Aviation Week reported. The plan, an internal document used to guide the agency, would allow NASA as many as 7 major new mission starts in FY 1979, including a Mars rover and a Halley’s Comet rendezvous. (A v Wk, Mar 7/77, 47)	•
AvWk reported that the seismometer carried on the Viking 2 lander might have recorded the first seismic event since the spacecraft touched down Sept. 3, 1976, on the Utopia Planitia area of the planet Mars. Beginning about 7pm local time for the lander, on Sol 60 (Nov. 7, 1976), the activity continued for about 30min. Viking project observers said the data seemed to have the “proper signature” of a seismic event, similar to data recorded on the lunar surface during seismic events. Donald Anderson, leader of the Viking seismology team, said rough estimates put the center of the activity several thousand km from the lander, but cautioned against labeling the activity a “marsquake” until further studies were done. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 21)
NASA planned to send a roving laboratory over the Martian surface during the next Mars landings, Nature reported. Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, chief Viking project scientist, said that, although no future Mars missions were officially scheduled, the outlook was favorable given the scientific success of, and public enthusiasm for, the two Viking landers. Speaking at a Paris conference to disseminate Viking information, Soffen invited U.S. and foreign scientists to participate in examining Viking data and in developing experiments for the next generation of Mars missions. (Nature, Mar 10/77, 112)
NASA announced it had commanded the Viking 1 lander on Mars to dig a ft-deep trench in the surface and bring up soil samples to use in finding out more about the complex chemistry of the planet. The sequence, which would continue through March 15, would include pictures taken by the lander to show mission controllers how the digging progressed. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory had sent commands to the Viking 1 lander Feb. 10 and would start the Viking 2 lander’s digging sequence about Feb. 16. Viking 7’s orbiter would make a series of close passes near Mars’s satellite Phobos to take pictures and measure its temperature, while observing the effect of its gravity on the course of the spacecraft. Afterward, mission controllers would drop the orbiter to about 300km altitude over Mars from the current close-approach altitude of 1500km. (NASA Release 77-24; JPL Release Feb 10/77)
NASA announced that Pioneer 11 would fly just outside the rings of Saturn during its first encounter with the giant planet in 1979. The spacecraft would pass 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the edge of the outermost ring and would swing in under the plane of the rings to a distance of 25 000km (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, and A. Thomas Young, director of planetary programs, had made the decision to fly the Pioneer outside rather than inside the rings mainly because NASA wanted to use it as a pathfinder for the two Voyager spacecraft headed for Saturn encounter in 1980-81. The Pioneer would cross the ring plane at about the same distance as the trajectory that would use Saturn’s gravity to propel Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The uncertainties regarding a ring crossing even at 30 000km (18 OOOmi) from the outer edge of the rings called for NASA “to do everything we reasonably can to ensure Voyager’s success,” said Young. Should the Pioneer not survive the rings, NASA would have to revise its plan of sending Voyager 2 on to Uranus; however, a successful pass by Pioneer 11 would increase confidence in committing Voyager 2 to the Uranus option even if Voyager 1 had not achieved all its objectives at Saturn. An outside pass offered much better odds for success than an inner one, which would bring the spacecraft as close as 6000km (3700mi) to Saturn’s surface. The 1979 flyby by Pioneer 11 would be the first close encounter with Saturn; until the rings of Uranus were discovered, Saturn was considered the only ringed planet in earth’s solar system. The origin of the rings remained unknown, but their composition was defined by astronomers in 1970 as ordinary water ice, and radar readings in 1973 detected snowball-size chunks of solid material. (NASA Release 77-250)
The NY Times reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, testifying at the Senate hearing on confirmation of his nomination as NASA administrator, had told the committee that no U.S. manned landing on Mars could occur before 1990. If NASA had an operating Space Shuttle by 1980 that could be used to assemble a vehicle in space and to store the fuel needed for a trip to Mars, work on a manned Mars ship could begin in 1984 or 1985 at the earliest, Frosch said, with completion a year or two later. (NYT, June 7/77, 13)
Recent photographs of the inner Martian satellite Phobos, obtained by the Viking 1 orbiter in Feb., had revealed “the nature of that satellite in unprecedented detail,” said Scientific American. Earlier pictures by Mariner 9 or the Viking 2 orbiter were at a distance of 880km; the new pictures were taken at a distance of 660km to as little as 100km, with resolution that permitted distinguishing objects smaller than 10m across. The surface of Phobos was known to be pitted with craters from the impact of meteorites; the new images showed chains of irregular craters like those seen on the surface of the moon, although Phobos’s crater chains paralleled the plane of its orbit around Mars. Pictures from Viking 2 had shown grooves on Phobos concentrated near its northern pole; the new pictures defined the grooves as crater chains possibly caused by objects hundreds of meters across. Further study of the images should reveal more about the nature of Phobos, the magazine said. (SciAm, Apr 77, 57)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
Despite NASA’s failure to win FY 1979 funding for a new Mars mission, such a mission remained the major planning element in the agency’s planetary programs office, Aviation Week reported. A Mars rover/orbiter mission had strong support from the Natl. Academy of Sciences, to lay the groundwork for a sample-return mission using either Martian-orbit rendezvous or direct ascent from earth to Mars. At a KSC briefing, A. Thomas Young, NASA’s director of planetary programs, said the highest priority missions NASA might implement “in the near term” would include the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR), a lunar-polar orbiter, a Saturn orbiter probe, and a rendezvous with comet Halley or Encke, or both, or possibly with an asteroid. “As we go through the budgetary process, on one side I wish Mars would go away,” Young said. “But when you stop and think about rivers, volcanoes, enormous Mars icecaps, the chemistry potential for life, and the atmosphere, you realize that understanding Mars is so important toward understanding where earth has been and is going that you’ve got to treat it in a responsible manner.” He said NASA planning should benefit from the 2.4m-diameter space telescope, aimed primarily at bodies outside the solar system but sure to provide significant data on objects nearer earth. {AvWk, Nov 14/77, 55)
The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade: a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had proved far superior to solar cells. Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications, weather, and navigation satellites had all used solaT cells. But in 1959 President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life. Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo 12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitoring them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article said. The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a $30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 1982, and a system generating between 1000 and 2000 watts being developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45) During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif, effective Sept. 1 as assistant for science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act. Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May 1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept. 1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion, Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)
JSC and the Lunar Science Institute announced plans for the 8th annual lunar science conference in Flouston, March 14-18. More than 600 scientists from around the world would discuss new data about the moon, derived from studies of lunar samples and from Apollo surface and orbital experiments, as well as new interpretations of previous models of lunar origin and history. Several Soviet scientists would attend, to give NASA materials from the Luna 24 mission for analysis. Dr. Michael G. Duke, acting chief of JSC’s Lunar and Planetary Sciences Division, and Dr. Robert Pepin, outgoing director of the Lunar Science Institute, would cochair the conference. The conference would also be the second meeting on “planetary” science, continuing the practice of the 1976 conference, where planetary interests were discussed for the first time as a result of the accumulation of data from NASA and USSR missions to Venus, Mercury, Mars, and the outer planets. The assembled data on planetary origin and evolution had proved of primary interest to lunar scientists. (JSC Release 77-09)
AvWk reported that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project, would receive the Goddard award for “brilliant leadership of the Viking project to land an instrumented, automated spacecraft on the planet Mars.” (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that President Carter had declared July 16-24 as a U.S. Space Observance, the dates chosen by Congress to coincide with the anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing as well as Apollo-Soyuz and the Viking 1 landing on Mars. Dr. Frosch said that the president’s recognition of NASA achievements “should serve as inspiration and encouragement to all of us.” (NASA anno July 14/77)
NASA revealed the contents of the space and aeronautics exhibit that would appear in the U.S. pavilion at the 32nd Paris Air Show, under the theme “The Continuous Challenge: 50 Years Since Lindbergh.” NASA planned to display concepts of space communities and their construction; living, farming, and manufacturing in space; and solar-power stations in space, together with a 3-screen presentation of the 50yr of flight since Lindbergh. A 2.4m Shuttle model would include the European Space Agency’s Spacelab, part of a major international cooperative space program, in its cargo bay. Also on display would be the Galileo 2 flying laboratory, its interior configured to simulate the reusable Spacelab with facilities for space experiments in medicine, manufacturing, astronomy, and production of pharmaceuticals. A life-size model of Mars landscape viewed by the Viking lander would demonstrate space exploration, and Landsat stereo photographs of earth would show the increasingly routine use of space to survey crops and natural resources, monitor pollution and weather, and collect global weather data. Other models and presentations would show the scope of NASA programs such as government-industry work to halve fuel consumption by transport aircraft and to develop safer, more efficient, and more environmentally acceptable civil aircraft. (NASA Release 77-20)
Defense had been at odds over the Mojave desert airspace, and “the military is winning,” the paper said. Twice in the past 6mo a B-l bomber had narrowly missed the multimillion-dollar tracking antennas, and over the past yr USAF planes with electronic devices had been jamming space signals to and from Goldstone. In the July 8 incident, all bombs from the USAF planes had fallen no more than half a mile from the 5 big-dish antennas serving as the sole links to satellites in orbit around the earth, the sun, and the planet Mars and to one spacecraft headed for the planet Saturn. The commandant of the Marine base at El Toro, where the planes came from, had grounded the pilots for 2wk, blaming the incident on “navigation error” and misreading of the target. However, on July 22, the B-l bomber that had previously buzzed the Goldstone station flew with its chase plane low over the heads of station technicians to check the sky for radio interference from other military craft. According to JPL officials, the B-l was “far off the course it normally flies on a test run.” Fighter planes from the Georgia air force base had interfered “no fewer than 60 times” with Goldstone radio links to its space vehicles. Last Oct. a fighter pilot had “accidentally” turned on an electronic device and disrupted contact with the Viking orbiter at Mars for more than an hour. Had the spacecraft been in a maneuver or an emergency, the mission would have been lost, the Viking scientists said. {Today, Aug 20/77, 1A) NASA later reported the gyro was working and data transmission was satisfactory. The boom, which was supposed to deploy 53min into the flight, had not extended and locked. To determine its position, controllers 12hr after launch had activated a plasma instrument on the scan platform and combined its readings relative to a known axis and the direction of the solar wind (data supplied by GSFC) to show that the boom had extended to within 2° of full deployment. JPL reported Aug. 22 that the spacecraft had been stable since 3pm EDT Aug. 20, except for a pitch and yaw disturbance at 5am Aug. 21; flight controllers were investigating. It reported Aug. 25 that the craft had undergone another disturbance like that of Aug. 21; controllers had ruled out the propulsion module’s having bumped the spacecraft. On the morning of Aug. 29, JPL calibrated the sun sensors and removed the dust cover on the infrared interferometer spectrometer. It had tried Aug. 26 to move the science boom to the locked position, but the computer system had aborted the command, showing that a problem existed. Controllers tried jettisoning the dust cover while reorienting the spacecraft, to jolt the assembly enough to open the boom hinge and lock it into position, but this was unsuccessful. JPL had decided to put Voyager 2 on hold to allow controllers to concentrate on the launch of the other Voyager Sept. 5. (Voyager mission status bulletins 3 through 6)
Radio signals between the four Viking spacecraft on Mars and earth-based antennas had provided the most accurate confirmation so far of Einstein’s theory of relativity in an experiment conducted Nov. 25, 1976, when Mars moved behind the sun relative to the earth, causing a total blackout of communications with the Viking spacecraft. Radio signals transmitted to the Viking spacecraft from antennas at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia, had produced “incredibly precise” measurement of the radio transmission. According to Adam I. Braufman of the Mass. Institute of Technology, the “uncertainty” over a space of some 322 million km was less than 2m, an accuracy of five parts in 10 million millionths. The Viking radio science team was trying to confirm Einstein’s prediction that the sun’s gravitational force would bend and delay radio signals (or any form of radiation) traveling close to a massive body such as the sun. Previous tests using the spacecraft communications systems tended to confirm the theory, but the Viking test proved much more accurate than the previous ones. (NYT, Jan 7/77, A-8; W Post, Jan 7/77, A-l)
The W Post reported that NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher would resign effective May 1. Appointed by President Nixon in 1971, Dr. Fletcher had headed the agency during the end of the Apollo project; the successful Skylab missions; the Apollo-Soyuz test project; and numerous unmanned missions including the launch of the earth resources monitoring system, Landsat, and the Mars probe Viking. Dr. Fletcher planned to return to private life after his resignation. (WPost, Mar 11/77, A3; NASA Release 77-48)
Launch preparations had begun for the 2-spacecraft mission to outer planets Jupiter and Saturn scheduled for late summer 1977, KSC announced. The center described them as “almost a replay” of the Mars Viking launches in 1975. Launch date for the first Mariner Jupiter/Saturn (MJS) at complex 41 would be Aug. 20, with the second scheduled 10 days later. Preparation for two major launches within a 10-day timeframe had required “the choreography of an intricate ballet,” the center said. Checkout of the Titan Centaur rockets 6 and 7 was in progress; operations personnel expected arrival Apr. 11 of a pathfinder spacecraft to be used for pad tests, along with 2 flight craft expected Apr. 25 and May 23. The MJS spacecraft would weigh 3 times more than the Pioneer 10 and 11 that reached Saturn in 1973 and 1974, respectively, and would carry additional instrumentation such as narrow- and high-resolution wide-angle TV cameras, cosmic-ray detectors, and infrared spectrometers and radiometers to study the outer planets and satellites. John Noble Wilford reported in the NYT that the new vehicles would have a new name—either Voyager or Discovery—fitting the new design for outer planet environments characterized by pale sunlight and great radio distances. The new craft looked like “a giant round ear,” Wilford said, consisting of a dish antenna with struts and booms resembling spider legs. The powerful lightweight radio-transmitter tubes that had been the major problem in building the spacecraft had arrived from the contractor a year behind schedule, reducing the time for “life tests” of their durability and performance. Each of the spacecraft would also carry a 3-computer system to handle failures during flight, in view of the 2.5hr required for round-trip radio signals between earth and Saturn. Trajectories chosen should provide data on particles and magnetic currents (magnetosphere) around Jupiter and Saturn, and if possible Uranus; on the atmospheres of those planets, believed to have gaseous rather than solid surfaces; and on the surfaces of any solid moons of the outer planets. The Uranus encounter would occur in Jan. 1986, nearly 8.5yr after launch from earth. (KSC Release 65-77; NYT, Feb 22/77, 15)
NASA announced that Thomas C. Duxbury, a guest investigator at JPL, would use the shadow of Martian moon Phobos on Sept. 20, 24, and 28 to pinpoint the exact location of the Viking 1 lander on the planet’s surface. JPL explained that the spacecraft had landed within a known area but was too small for detection by orbiter cameras, which had been unable to tie in photographs of the site to the lander’s position. Duxbury had programmed both the lander and the orbiter to take a picture as the shadow of Phobos passed over the landing site; the time of the photograph and the exact position of the shadow on 3 occasions would permit calculation of the lander’s position. Duxbury was one of 20 chosen to participate in the Viking guest investigator program set up by NASA to offer experimenter opportunities beyond those originally planned for the mission. (NASA Release 77-199)
Distant planets Uranus and Neptune had turned out to have spin rates similar to earth’s, so that their days correspond to earth days and they had probably come from the same debris that earth did, reported Kitt Peak astronomers Michael J.S. Belton and Bethanne Hayes. Using the observatory’s just-over-400cm telescope, world’s second largest, the astronomers found that (contrary to previous theory) spin rates of the outermost planets (except for Pluto) resembled not those of Saturn and Jupiter but rather those of earth and Mars. The discovery indicated they were solid ice-like bodies, not big balls of gas, Dr. Belton said. Using a smaller telescope at Kitt Peak, a separate 4-member team of scientists had reported the first observation of weather patterns in the upper atmosphere of Neptune. Dr. Richard Joyce and 3 scientists from the Univ. of Hawaii had found a marked increase in Neptune’s reflectivity between April 1975 and March 1976, suggesting the presence of thin transient clouds high in that planet’s atmosphere. Astronomers had been using the planet as a standard measure of brightness, thinking that it experienced no atmospheric changes. (W Post, Feb 20/77, F16)
Nature reported that a May 13 meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in London had discussed Mars’s moons Phobos and Deimos, the 100th anniversary of whose discovery would occur in Aug. Observations, both ground-based and from satellites, had revealed oddities: Phobos, the only satellite in earth’s solar system that circled its central body faster than that body could spin on its axis, would appear to an observer on the planet’s surface to rise in the west and set in the east, whereas its fellow Deimos would appear to rise in the east and set in the west like earth’s moon. Also, the orbit of Phobos was coming nearer to the surface of Mars (a body approaching within 8700km would be pulled apart by differential tidal forces, the article said). A Soviet astrophysicist, I.S. Shklovsky, had claimed in the 1950s that the low density of Phobos indicated it was a hollow artificial satellite produced by an advanced civilization on Mars. Viking spacecraft images had shown that the moons were blackish gray rather than the red of Mars, indicating different composition; astronomer Joe Veverka of Cornell Univ. concluded that the moons had originated in the asteroid belt. Viking had found that the lOkm-diameter Stickney crater on Phobos covered 40% of the maximum diameter of Phobos itself. The two Mars moons had almost identical shapes (triaxial ellipsoids) and both rotated synchronously with their orbital periods and their long axes pointing directly at Mars (Nature, June 30/77, 758)
The Chicago Tribune reported that A. Thomas Young, NASA’s head of lunar and planetary programs, had presented to the Washington, D.C. meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union a planetary-exploration plan to launch two roving vehicles to Mars in 1984, a possible robot-vehicle landing on Mercury, and flights to Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Halley’s Comet, and four asteroids. The plan also included launch of automated ships to Mars in 1990 to collect samples of rock and soil and return them to earth. (C Trib, June 7/77, 4-16)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that the USAF industry team that produced and demonstrated the B-l aircraft system was 1976 recipient of the Collier trophy, rather than the NASA Viking project with its “spectacular success” in landing spacecraft and instrumentation on Mars. The AFSCNewsreview said that the B-l team represented the Air Force, Rockwell Inti. Corp., General Electric, Boeing Co., Cutler-Hammer’s airborne instruments laboratory division, and more than 3000 other subcontractors and suppliers. The NAA noted that 50yr earlier the solo flight of Lindbergh across the Atlantic, considered a shoo-in, had failed to receive the trophy given for “the greatest achievement in aviation in America, the value of which has been demonstrated by actual use during the preceding year”; that trophy committee had unanimously awarded it to Charles L. Lawrence, designer of the Wright Whirlwind aircooled radial engine that had powered not only Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, but also a number of other notable flights in 1927. (NAA newsletter, May 77, 1; AFSC Newsreview, May 77, 4)
NASA formally adjudged the Viking 75 mission, launched toward Mars on Aug. 20 and Sept. 9, 1975, successful, according to the post-landing mission operations report. All Viking instruments except the seismometer on the first lander (which failed to uncage itself) operated successfully and were continuing to send data to earth. The prelaunch mission objectives (advancing knowledge of Mars by orbital observation and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the planet’s surface) had been realized, the report said. (MOR S-815-75-01/02)
JPL reported it had assisted DFRC with an engine problem on a possible Mars reconnaissance plane, a small remotely powered vehicle (RPV) called the Mini Sniffer developed by DFRC’s Dale Reed for environmental research at 100 000ft above earth’s surface. The 13ft aircraft with a 22ft wingspan, powered by an airless 30hp engine running on hydrazine, was the first propeller-driven plane designed to operate above 50 000ft. JPL had taken a hand when asked by DFRC to help with an engine-catalyst problem; Dr. Jose Chirivella, who solved the problem, saw the possibilities of using the miniplane on Mars. Deployment of 16 mini RPVs, 8 from each of 2 carrier spacecraft, over Mars so that each could make 5 or more separate takeoffs and landings in different locations, could achieve a total of 80 possible missions. The carriers, orbiting about Mars, would serve as comsats to collect data from the mini RPVs for relay to earth. The Martian RPVs would be instrumented to collect seismographic, meteorological, and geochemical data; they would conduct aerial magnetic and gravity surveys, take high-resolution photos, look for subsurface water, and study the speed and direction of winds and the pressure and density of the atmosphere. They might also collect surface samples from widely separated areas, storing them at a central location for return to earth by later missions. The small craft could be folded into 3m-long canisters protected by coverings that would fall away when parachutes unfolded to support the vehicles as they opened out to flight configuration for descent and cruise through the lower Martian atmosphere, landing like helicopters under power from variable-thrust retrorockets. (JPL Universe, Dec 9/77, 1)
NASA announced resumption of communication with the four Viking-mission vehicles—two landers and two orbiters—at the end of the “conjunction” period during which contact was degraded and temporarily lost because of the changing position of Mars, behind the sun with relation to the earth since Nov. 1976. The Viking mission extended into the post-conjunction period would use the functioning spacecraft to obtain seasonal-variation data, do long duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and gather additional information not possible during the primary mission because of time or observational constraints. No known limitations would preclude completion of at least a year of extended mission and probably more, the announcement said, as the orbiters had made minimal use of their consumables during the early mission and had performed a minimal number of battery-recharge cycles. Lander B’s location at Mars 44°N would encounter temperatures below the qualification limits in the winter season, but the effect of this was unpredictable because lander tests had not gone beyond qualification limits. Extended-mission data collection had actually begun last Nov. when controllers had used the spacecraft transponders passively to measure ranging, tracking, signal-time delay, and solar-corona-induced perturbation. The extended mission would continue through May 1978, the announcement said, and data analysis would continue through Sept. 1977; requirements for data analysis beyond FY 1978 were under study. (MOR-S-815-75-01/02)
NASA reported that Dr. Herbert Frey, a NASA-Univ. of Md. scientist working at GSFC, had prepared a paper for presentation June 2 at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., suggesting that asteroid bombardment more than 4 billion yr ago that created earth’s ocean basins had resulted in the development of life on this planet. Building on the work of other scientists, including that of GSFC’s Dr. Paul Lowman on earth’s crustal evolution, Dr. Frey used data from Apollo lunar landings and photography from spacecraft studies of the moon, Mercury, and Mars to show that during the reference period all the inner bodies suffered heavy asteroid impacts which must have affected earth as well. The impacts led to geological changes on earth that resulted in plate tectonics and the formation of seabeds. If the presence of life had eventuated from catastrophic bombardment by asteroids, the paper noted, then life elsewhere might also depend upon such events. (NASA Release 77-105)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
A short-circuit in the power supply of Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer (GSMS) had forced controllers at JPL to turn off the instrument Mar. 12, NASA reported. JPL received confirmation of the command from the Viking system Mar. 14. NASA had shut down the GCMS, which had analyzed the composition of Martian atmosphere and soil early in the mission, to avoid damage to other instruments such as the onboard computer and communications system. (NASA Release 77-51)
ERDA announced that the longest space mission ever planned—a lOyr trip by two Voyager spacecraft to the outer planets—would get power from RTGs (radioisotope thermoelectric generators) developed by ERDA as successors to nuclear systems that had powered earlier missions to Mars and Jupiter. ERDA’s predecessor, the Atomic Energy Commission, had begun the research on nuclear power for space missions. ERDA plans included developing high-efficiency thermoelectric materials and dynamic converters for NASA missions such as a Jupiter orbiter in 1982 or a Mars rover in 1984, and DOD satellites in the 1980s. (ERDA Release NF-77-20)
DFRC and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had joined in a study of the “Mars airplane” (a derivative of the Mini-Sniffer), the DFRC X-Press reported. The idea of a Mars airplane resulted from a January 1977 meeting between David Scott, former director of DFRC, and JPL director Dr. Bruce Murray, who had offered JPL’s assistance in perfecting the hydrazine engine of the Mini-Sniffer remotely-piloted vehicle (RPV) designed to fly at 70 000 to 100 000ft. The plane was originally a low-cost alternative to the U-2 for atmospheric research; DFRC’s Dale Reed and JPL personnel had recognized the possibility that the Mini-Sniffer could cruise halfway around Mars in the planet’s low gravity and thin atmosphere, using its unique nonairbreathing hydrazine engine. Developmental Sciences, Inc. had received a $60 000 contract for designs to send four Mars airplanes folded into capsules to conduct low-altitude surveillance flights down Martian canyons and volcanoes and over icecaps. The researchers believed technology was advancing so quickly in lightweight solar cells, beamed-microwave energy, lightweight electric motors and batteries, and lightweight radioisotope electric generators, that it would soon produce a generation of high-flying long-endurance long-range aircraft, the paper noted. (DFRC X-Press, Dec 15/78,3)
The most extensive study ever made of Venus would begin in December when Pioneer Venus 1 and 2 arrived at the planet, NASA announced. Pioneer Venus 1 would swing into orbit around the planet Dec. 4, taking pictures and making measurements for one Venusian yr (225 earth days) or more. On Dec. 9 the four probes and transporter bus constituting Pioneer Venus 2 would plunge into the Venusian clouds at widely separated points to make detailed measurements of the dense atmosphere from top to bottom. These flights, the first devoted to studying the atmosphere and weather of another planet on a global scale, would use the largest number of vehicles so far for such a study, and would make measurements at the greatest number of locations. They also would seek information on characteristics of Venus’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as the lower atmosphere, and would study the interactions of these regions with the solar wind. At periapsis (orbital low point) the Pioneer orbiter would come as close as 150km (90mi) to the planet’s surface, dipping into the thin ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978 ORIGINAL PAGE IS rJOVEMBER OF POOR QUALITX Venus upper atmosphere, sampling its composition, and making radar measurements of surface elevations and roughness. It would also take daily ultraviolet and infrared pictures of the thick clouds and atmosphere. The orbiter’s primary mission was designed to cover the time it took Venus to make one revolution on its axis; the slow rotation of the planet under the periapsis of the orbit would permit closeup radar mapping of the entire circumference. The four probes of Pioneer Venus 2 would enter the atmosphere at points 10 000km (6O00mi) apart over the planet’s earth-facing hemisphere: the large probe would enter Venus’s atmosphere near the equator on the day side; the day probe would enter Venus’s southern hemisphere Artist’s conception of Pioneer Venus arbiter and multiprobe investigating the cloud-covered planet on their arrival in late 1978. The orbiter (left) v/ould circle Venus for 8mo, relaying images of the clouds and measurements of the atmosphere, while making radar maps of the surface. The probe (right) would split into five entry craft, four to sample the atmosphere down to the surface at widely separated points; the transport bus would continue to sample the upper atmosphere until it burned up from friction. (NASA photo 78-H-20&) on the planet’s day side; the night probe, the night southern hemisphere on the night side; and the north probe, the north polar vortex on the night side. The transporter bus would enter in the southern hemisphere on the day side. Critical operations on arrival near the planet would be to inject Pioneer Venus 1 into orbit while it was out of radio contact behind Venus, and the entry and descent through the atmosphere of the four probes and bus. On Dec. 2, controllers at ARC would orient the orbiter for orbit insertion, and the next day would load command-memory sequences. On Dec. 9, the probes would be in position to make their hr-long descent through Venus’s atmosphere. Major operations problem would be retrieving probe data; during the critical lhr 38min of probe and bus operations at Venus, all the Pioneer spacecrafts would be transmitting simultaneously. Radio frequencies of the probe signals would shift rapidly because of huge entry decelerations — from 42 OOOkm/hr (26 OOOmph) to about 65km/hr (40mph)—and signal distortions caused by Venus’s dense atmosphere. One consequence would be that, after the 10- to 15-sec communications blackout during entry, signals would reappear again at new frequencies. To ensure recovery of the data, NASA had installed special equipment in DSN stations at Goldstone, Calif., and Canberra, Australia. To avoid loss of data, both DSN stations would use newly developed receivers and recorders with a frequency band wide enough to ensure receipt of the four shifting signals. The real-time system would use automatic tuners, but would lose some data. Scientists believed that the coordinated Pioneer Venus atmospheric data, combined with similar data from Mars, Jupiter, and other planets, would aid understanding of atmospheres in general. Studies of the interactions of temperatures, pressures, composition, clouds, and atmospheric dynamics different from those of earth should define mechanisms on another planet that would improve scientists’ understanding of earth’s complex weather processes. (NASA Release 78-181)
Despite the wealth of data on Mars provided by Mariner 9 and the Viking missions, some mysteries remained, including the “White Rock,” a unique topographic feature nestling inside a crater not far from the Martian equator, JPL Universe reported. White Rock’s discovery by Mariner 9 had intrigued scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory because of the reflectivity of its unknown basic material, and the fact that no other formation on Mars resembled it. At first glance White Rock looked like the paw-print of some manytoed animal, as it was rounded on two-thirds of its perimeter and on the remaining sides had great serrated formations like claws, referred to as “reentrants” and “dunes,” reaching into the floor of the surrounding Martian crater. Scientists believed the ridged area had been eroded by ORIGINAL PAGE IS ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978 Q£ POOR QUALITY NOVEMBER White Rock, strange topographic feature inside a crater on Mars whose composition had puzzled scientists: not snow or ice, because of its proximity to the equator, the formation exhibited high reflectivity first noticed by Mariner 9 in 1972. This photomosaic came from the Viking orbiter in Sept. 1978 (straight lines on the image resulted from assembly of the photographs into a mosaic). (NASA photo 78-H-634) ever-present Martian surface winds. The possibility of ice cover on its surface had been rejected early on because of its proximity to the equator. Speculation on its mineral composition had included salt and/or sand theories. Roughly 18km across, White Rock appeared to rise from the floor of an impact crater some 93km in diameter. Very small impact craters on the floor of the larger crater and on the feature itself might suggest the age of the formation in relation to its surroundings. Although labelled “white,” general opinion was that the feature had a very light orange or pink tint. After Mariner 9 discovered the unique feature, Viking had been programmed for a closer look; Viking's more sophisticated vidicon would offer five times better resolution at a similar altitude. Computer processing of Viking data could produce information to help solve the mystery of White Rock. {JPL Universe, Nov 10/78, 2)
JSC announced plans for the week-long ninth annual lunar and planetary science conference focusing on the moon and other worlds, with the Lunar and Planetary Institute of Houston as co-host. Topics of presentations would include the formation of the solar system; new discoveries in moon rocks; the histories of planets; meteorites containing material from ancient stars; and comparative studies of Mars, Venus, and the earth. For the third consecutive year, the USSR would send a delegation. A number of topics would be emphasized: constraints on structures; composition and history of planetary interiors; characteristics and movement of material on lunar, planetary, and asteroid surfaces; characteristics and evolution of volcanic landforms; characterization and evolution of planetary crusts; nature and effect of impact processes; extraterrestrial materials; solar, interplanetary, and interstellar probes; and earliest history of the solar system. JSC had scheduled special sessions on industrial development of near-earth space, on origin of the solar system, on the future of planetary exploration, and on Mars and Mercury. (JSC Release 78-40)
Preliminary analyses of Viking Orb iter 1 (VO-1) data on the Mars satellite Phobos revealed low density and a spectral reflectance and low albedo that suggested a composition similar to type I carbonaceous chondrites, reported Science magazine. VO-1 had obtained a spectacular picture sequence at 100km, an encounter by far the most demanding navigation performance of any interplanetary-spacecraft exploration to date. Since Phobos had a mean radius of only 11km and was only partially illuminated when viewed during the flyby, the VO-1 position relative to Phobos had required accuracy of within a few kilometers. Imaging data had revealed small positive features (hummocks), small craters with bright ejecta blankets, dark material on the floors of some craters, large variations in topography, and an abundance of linear features resembling crater chains. Further analysis would refine density estimates to determine Phobos’s origin. (Sci, Jan 6/78, 61) Corp had fired the apogee kick motor Jan. 7, putting the satellite into near-geosynchronous orbit. After initial positioning at 74°E the satellite would be moved to 60°E as backup to Intelsat IVA F-6, and was scheduled to be on station at 63 °E by mid-June. Intelsat IVA F-3 had an overall height of 6.99m and a diameter of 2.38m. Height of the solar panel was 2.82m. Liftoff weight was approximately 1515kg (33401b); in-orbit weight after apogee motor firing, 825.5kg (18201b). Design life was 7yr. Ten Intelsat IV and IVA satellites were currently in synchronous equatorial orbit over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans, providing full-time telephone, teletypewriter, data, and television services to 107 countries, territories, and possessions. The Intelsat IVA had almost two-thirds greater communications capability than the Intelsat IV series, with about 6250 two-way voice circuits and 2 television channels in its system configuration. The number of operating transponders had increased from 12 to 20. Improvement of the antenna system had produced greater effective bandwidth through frequency reuse by beam separation: for Indian Ocean service, the east-pointed beam of Intelsat IVA F-3 would illuminate Japan and Southeast Asia using a 320MHz bandwidth, and would reuse the same 320MHz bandwidth in the west beam illuminating Europe and Africa. In addition to eight east-beam transponders and eight west-beam transponders, four transponders connected to an earth-coverage antenna would illuminate all stations in the Indian Ocean region. The Communications Satellite Corp. (ComSatCorp), U.S. member of INTELSAT, would be management services contractor for the satellite system; ComSatCorp on behalf of INTELSAT would reimburse NASA under a launch-services agreement for costs of the Atlas-Centaur and the launch. The Intelsat IVA program represented an investment by 101 nations of approximately $295 million (US); this launch had cost approximately $47 million ($18 million for the satellite and $29 million for the launch vehicle and related services). (NASA Release 77-250; MOR E-491-633-78-5 [prelaunch] Jan 5/78, [postlaunch] June 23/78; W Star, Jan 7/78, A-5)
NASA reported the U.S. Postal Service would commemorate the Viking missions to Mars by issuing a special postal stamp Thursday, July 20, second anniversary of the Viking 1 landing on Mars. LaRC and the Postal Service would hold a First Day of Issue ceremony in LaRC’s activity center, and Dr. Donald Hearth, center director, would buy the first stamp. Robert McCall, whose two large murals were on display in the National Air and Space Museum, had designed the stamp. NASA had launched two Viking spacecraft toward Mars in Aug. and Sept. 1975; the Viking 1 lander had touched down on Mars at 8:12am EDT July 20, 1976, and the Viking 2 lander arrived at 6:59pm EDT Sept. 3, 1976. During the mission ending in Nov. 1976, the landers and their partner, the orbiter spacecraft, had conducted experiments in 13 scientific disciplines. NASA had extended a reduced Viking mission until May 1978 to gather more information on Mars’s weather, seasonal variations, and soil characteristics; a further reduced mission controlled by JPL would continue through Feb. 1979. The Viking high-resolution photographs of the planet from the surface and from orbit, numbering more than 30 000, had mapped most of Mars and had provided scientists with valuable information. (NASA Release 78-106; LaRC Release 78-34; Langley Researcher, July 14/78, 1)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced it had fabricated and displayed a prototype roving ball planetary explorer, an instrument-laden reinforced-fabric ball capable of inflating and deflating automatically or on remote command from earth during possible Mars exploration. Driven by high winds known to prevail on the planet’s surface, or powered and steered by an inner drive system much like that of a bicycle, such balls or balloons could roam freely and conduct scientific experiments and measurements over a vast area. A ball could partially deflate if necessary for additional study of a particular area. This “bouncing ball” would offer the advantages of low cost, long life, and extended traverse of the planet’s landscape. As a Mars explorer, a ball would constitute a payload of 20 to 30kg (about 44 to 661b) capable of a traverse of 100 to 200km (60 to 120mi). The “skin” of the ball, “sandwiched” or laminated Mylar and Kevlar (both registered DuPont products), would be strong enough to cover some of Mars’s most difficult terrain. Schjeldahl Corp. designed and built the ball for the Aerospace Corp. for the ATMOSAT project. Jacques Blamont of France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) had proposed the concept. (JPL Universe, Mar 3/78, 1)
A new gallery, “Exploring the Planets,” opened Nov. 7 at the National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Star reported. Melvin Zisfein, acting museum director, said the gallery was “jammed full of information and contains more facts and figures and concepts than any other gallery in the museum. Yet the information is easy to digest. We tried hard to make sure you didn’t need a degree in astronomy to understand it.” Keeping up with new information on the solar system (the gallery would be updated continuously) was one of the challenges. The gallery, designed by Lucius Lomas, had succeeded in teaching without neglecting imaginative features visitors had come to expect at the museum. Visitors could make a “Descent to Venus” in a simulated cockpit of an interplanetary spaceship circa 2150. A “Flight over Mars” from an altitude of 100 000 to 200 000ft (actually relief maps of the Martian landscape sculpted on to rotating cylinders and viewed through special windows) was based on photos taken from Mariner 9 and Vikings 1 and 2. A full-scale replica of the Voyager spacecraft was the largest single object in the gallery. The relative sizes of Jupiter and 21 other planetary bodies was conveyed in a corner by brightly colored spheres made to scale: Jupiter was 10ft in diameter; Ceres, the largest asteroid, linch; the earth, 1ft. Six computer terminals offered “Space Academy exams” where visitors could test their knowledge of the solar system. (W Star, Nov 7/78, F 3)
AvWk reported NASA’s announcement that it would send Pioneer 11 to fly just outside the rings of Saturn as a pathfinder for two Voyager spacecraft scheduled to reach Saturn in 1980 and 1981. Passing 15 OOOmi rather than 3700mi from Saturn’s surface, the new course would place Pioneer 11 at about the same distance from Saturn as the trajectory of Voyager 2, if NASA should decide to use Saturn’s gravity to hurl Voyager 2 toward Uranus. The outside trajectory would permit NASA to achieve the maximum science return for all three spacecraft. Pioneer 11 should reach Saturn in Sept. 1978. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 15; Lewis News, Jan 6/78, 2)
NASA announced that scientists working for NASA and NSF had discovered living organisms inside rocks on the frozen deserts of the Antarctic. The discovery, made in a region called the Dry Valleys whose harsh climate resembled conditions on Mars, would significantly extend the known limits of life on earth, and would have important implications in a search for extraterrestrial life. Dr. E. Imre Friedmann and Dr. Roseli Ocampo-Friedmann, a husband-wife team who had searched for more than 15yr for microbial life in rocks, had made the discovery. They had isolated the newly discovered microorganisms (bacteria, algae, and fungi) and were growing them in laboratory cultures for clues to their endurance. Although the Dry Valleys of Antarctica had appeared lifeless, and the region’s freedom from snow and ice, combined with constantly blowing winds, had produced an environment among the world’s harshest, the Friedmanns had found in the Dry Valleys a widespread rich microbial vegetation under the surface of rocks, in the airspaces of porous rocks, or in fissures. Rocks broken open had revealed the presence of organisms as a dark-green layer a few millimeters deep. Dr. Richard Young, NASA’s chief of planetary biology, said the Dry Valleys in many ways resembled the environmental extremes found on Mars by the 1976 Viking landers, which searched the Martian soil unsuccessfully for signs of microbial life or organic molecules. “If Martian life forms exist only in the interior of Martian rocks, as is principally the case in the Antarctic, that could easily serve as an explanation for the lack of evidence on Mars,” Young said. “This interesting (if speculative) analogy is of considerable interest to NASA in designing future attempts to study planetary surfaces for evidence of life.” NASA and NSF research grants had supported the Friedmanns’ work. (NASA Release 78-14)
NASA announced that Voyager 1 on its way to Jupiter and Saturn had completed transit of the asteroid belt, leaving the region Sept. 8. The belt, a band of rock and dust 360 million km (233 million mi) wide between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter with its inner edge about 105 million km (65 million mi) from earth’s orbit, was formerly believed an impassable hazard to spacecraft bound for outer planets and beyond. Voyager 1, launched after Voyager 2, had entered the asteroid belt Dec. 10 a few hours behind Voyager 2 on a master trajectory that would carry it steadily beyond Voyager2, which it would overtake Dec. 15. Voyager 1 would make its closest approach to Jupiter Mar. 5, 1979, at 286 000km (178 OOOmi); Voyager 2 would pass 643 000km (399 OOOmi) from Jupiter in July 1979. Both spacecraft would continue on to Saturn where Voyager 1 would arrive in Nov. 1980, Voyager 2 in Aug. 1981. (NASA Release 78-137)
NASA announced that JPL engineers had commanded the shutdown of the Viking 2 orbiter on July 25, when it ran out of attitude-control gas after circling Mars 706 times over the past 2 yr. Several mo previously, orbiter 2 had sprung a leak in one of its attitude-control jets; engineers had slowed the leak but could not stop it completely. Viking 2, launched Sept. 9, 1975, had traveled more than 643 735 000km (400 million mi) to reach Mars orbit Aug. 7, 1976. The Viking 2 lander, riding piggyback on the orbiter, had landed Sept. 3, 1976, in the Utopia Planitia region of Mars’s northern hemisphere. Plans called for the Viking 1 orbiter and both Viking landers, functioning well almost 3yr after launch, to operate through Feb. 1979. The Viking project would continue through Sept. 1979 to allow scientists and engineers to process a backlog of data from the spacecraft and experiments. NASA had designed the orbiters to operate for 150da after planetary encounter and to orbit for at least 50yr, in hopes of avoiding planetary contamination before they disintegrated. (NASA Release 78-115)
NASA had been considering FY81 and 82 missions to send a probe toward Halley’s comet and land it on Tempel 2 comet, and one that would return a sample of Martian soil to earth, AvWk reported. Return of a Mars sample—to be studied first aboard the Space Shuttle in earth orbit—had become the key mission sought by scientists planning Mars strategy for NASA, who viewed a sample mission as a direct follow-on to the Viking mission in progress. NASA would have to make its decisions this summer on specific missions for FY82. NASA might request the comet mission for FY81, in view of the determination by NASA planners and scientists to send a spacecraft near Halley’s comet, even though a plan to rendezvous with the comet had disappeared when NASA was unable to obtain a Halley mission in FY79. The Halley/Tempel 2 comet mission would consist of a 1985 Space Shuttle launch of a vehicle using solar-electric propulsion to encounter Halley’s comet in Nov. 1985 about 93 million mi from earth, eject a probe that would dive into the head or nucleus area of the comet, and return atmospheric data. The mother spacecraft would continue a high-speed flyby of the comet, either passing through the comet’s tail or flying a safer trajectory in front of it. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 14)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
NASA’s Pioneer 11 had encountered Saturn’s bow shock (where the solar wind—a stream of electrified particles from the Sun—bent around Saturn’s magnetic field), project manager Charles Hall reported from ARC, adding that solar storms during the past few days had played havoc with Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was not designed in 1967 to fly to Saturn; that mission arose only after a successful Jupiter flyby in 1974, calling at first for Pioneer to fly through Saturn’s rings on what the Washington Post called a “kamikaze mission.” The most dangerous moment of the 6.5-year 2-million-mile journey would be crossing September 1 through belts of unknown material beyond the ring systems around Saturn that had been visible from Earth, during which Pioneer would risk a potentially fatal collision. Because of intense radiation (solar-particle interference was degrading the quality of Pioneer images), mission controllers at ARC had reduced the data transmission rate by half. Solar storms had occurred late in July and in midAugust, and high-energy particles from the second storm had reached Saturn at the same time as slower particles from the first storm. Reducing the transmission rate would diminish effects of interference and also the quality of the images. Pioneer would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring system at 10:44 a.m. EDT, but scientists would not know for 86 minutes whether it had survived (the time the signals needed to reach Earth). No one knew the composition of the 2 minute-wide third ring; if it consisted of boulders, Pioneer could probably get past it safely, but a ring of dust particles could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr. John Wolfe said chances for survival were half and half; pictures already transmitted by Pioneer were better than any yet taken from Earth telescopes. The Washington Post reported September 1 that solar storms had increased the noise level in space to 10 times normal. In early afternoon, Pioneer had flown into a detectable magnetosphere, showing that Saturn was surrounded by a strong and sizable magnetic field estimated at 700 to 1,000 times the size of Earth’s but roughly equivalent in strength. The New York Times reported September 2 that, as of 12:31 p.m. EDT September 1, Pioneer 11 had survived a hail of fine particles to get within 13,000 miles of Saturn for a 4-hour first encounter. During the approach, scientists were keeping watch on the plane of the visible rings through which Pioneer was descending: Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa was first to note Pioneer’s approach to “dangerous ring debris” in its path. However, the 10:30 a.m. crossing at a speed of 48,000 mph had taken only a second, though ARC had to wait until 2:02 p.m. to learn what had happened; when the radio signals continued past that moment without interruption, “a cheer went up.” LaRC’s Donald H. Humes said that Pioneer 11 might have had a close call, as the micrometeoroid detector had registered two impacts during the crossing: this was the limit of the instrument’s counting ability, and more impacts might actually have occurred. The impacts apparently caused no damage. The sharp rise in radiation encountered by Pioneer before it flew under the rings had fallen as abruptly as it rose, and by the time Pioneer was under the rings (closer to the planet) the radiation reading had disappeared completely. Dr. John Simpson of the University of Chicago said the rings were big enough to “scour out” nearly all the radiation trapped by the planet’s magnetic field. (The New York Times quoted Dr. Van Allen as saying that the radiation count while Pioneer flew under the rings was even lower than while the spacecraft was sitting on its launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 6.5 years ago. Saturn’s radiation, although it would be lethal to an unprotected human, posed no hazard to spacecraft, Van Allen added.) After its close approach, Pioneer swung behind the planet, out of radio contact for 78 minutes, during which its on-board instruments recorded data for later transmission. Upon reemerging, the spacecraft had to cross the ring plane again on its outward journey; the outbound crossing came at 2:32 p.m., and controllers again had to wait for indication that the spacecraft was safe. At 3:55 p.m. the signals affirmed that Pioneer 11 had survived another crossing. This was the last predicted hazard for the spacecraft, which would continue past Saturn to the outer edge of Earth’s solar system and enter interstellar space in 1993, by which time its radio would no longer be audible. The safe passage meant that Pioneer could spend September 2 and 3 photographing Titan and measuring Saturn’s rings from the dark side of the planet; also, that the two Voyager spacecraft following Pioneer could approach without fear of damage. In its two-hour passage, besides recording impacts, Pioneer had photographed a new ring previously undetected by Earth telescopes, called the F ring: scientists already knew of four rings called A through D (in order of discovery, not location), three of them bright enough to be seen from Earth telescopes, and a fifth (or E) ring had been suspected close to the A ring although Pioneer did not report it. Pioneer had also tracked what might be a new Saturn moon orbiting about 70,000 miles out; some thought it might be a known moon, Janus, but it was in a position indicating that it was an entirely new satellite that would bring Saturn’s count to 11, one short of Jupiter’s 12. Pioneer 11 photos of Saturn showed dark blue and green stripes across it just below the north pole; the colors, not so vivid from Earth, probably came from sunlight scattering in upper-atmosphere clouds. Jet streams like those seen on Jupiter appeared to whirl around Saturn at speeds of 300 mph. Pioneer images could give a better idea of the dimensions and composition of the rings when compared with Earth-based photographs. In the six years it had taken to reach Saturn, Pioneer 11 had reported a space-particle strike only once every two months or so, LaRC’s Humes recalled. Once past Saturn, Pioneer was to photograph Titan from about 221,000 miles, record its temperature and atmospheric methane, and try to detect “life chemicals”; as no life was evident on Venus or Mars, this might be the last chance to find extraterrestrial biology in the Earth’s solar system. First images of Titan had shown a fuzzy ball of light indicating a stratospheric layer of orange smog with blue streaks that might denote an atmosphere beneath the smog and clouds. The closest approach at 2:04 p.m. September 2 was 220,000 miles, and Pioneer had taken the first pictures at 260,000 miles. The pictures would be enhanced by computer before scientists could make detailed analysis. On September 3, Pioneer was already more than a million miles from Saturn, relaying no ill effects from the planet’s rings or radiation belts. Early on the morning of September 2, NASA reported loss of about two hours of Titan data from Pioneer transmissions to the Madrid station; ARC controllers did not know whether the loss occurred between spacecraft and station or between Spain and the control center about 40 miles south of San Francisco. A loss between spacecraft and station would be irretrievable: Pioneer had only the one opportunity for Titan observations after its close approach. It was not sending images at the time, but about 15 minutes of a CalTech infrared sensor’s readings on Titan temperature were lost. The cause might have been electrical storms in space or on Earth, or passage of the signals close to the surface of the Sun on their way to the Earth, any of which would make it difficult or impossible for the Madrid station to lock on to the signals. A dramatic difference in day-night Titan temperatures would suggest a thin atmosphere; a thicker, warmer atmosphere might be more hospitable to life forms. Project manager Charles Hall reported September 4 that the Titan data loss previously attributed to radiation disturbances was now thought to result from radiofrequency interference by a Soviet satellite. Both Pioneer 11 and three USSR satellites had been operating on a frequency reserved for scientific use. The Soviet Union had twice agreed to shut down during Saturn encounter, and Hall said NASA had “no doubt the Soviets would have acted” if they had been asked; “we did not request them to turn off their satellite on Monday,” U.S. scientists did not realize at first that signals from a recently launched Soviet satellite might interfere with reception of Pioneer data, being “between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than the signals we were receiving from our spacecraft.” Aerospace Daily said September 6 that the three Soviet satellites that had stopped transmitting September 1-2 for the benefit of Pioneer’s Saturn flyby were early-warning satellites designed to detect U.S. ballistic missile attacks on the Soviet Union. Cosmos 1024, 1109, and 1124 had suspended transmissions September 1 and 2 at NASA’s request; however, no request was made regarding September 3, and Cosmos 1124 had operated as usual. Western analysts questioned, Aerospace Daily noted, “whether the U.S. would suspend communications with any of is early-warning satellites if the Soviets made such a request” during a planetary mission. Pioneer project officials told a September 6 news briefing that the loss of Titan data was not the fault of the Soviet satellite, which was broadcasting before but not during the lost transmission. Poor data had resulted from the combination of solar storm and poor transmission from Madrid. Some data had in fact reached ARC, but was so “noisy” as to be useless. Scientists said the moon discovered by Pioneer was inside the orbit of Janus, previously the innermost known satellite of Saturn; the new ring (labeled G) was between the orbits of Rhea and Titan, beyond the rings visible to Earth telescopes. (NY Times, Sept 2/79, 1; Sept 3/79, A-l; Sept 4/79, C-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; W Post, Sept 1/79, A-3; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 5/79, A-10; W Star Sept 1/79, A-4; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; A/D, Sept 6/79, 17; Today, Sept 1/79, 4A; Sept 2/79, 1A)
NASA announced that MSFC had appointed a board to investigate the automatic cutoff of a test firing July 2 at NSTL of the Space Shuttle main-engine test article (three main engines mounted in an orbiter aft section and attached to an external tank). A liquid-hydrogen leak from a main fuel valve caused the cutoff after 18.5 seconds; no explosion occurred, and the gaseous nitrogen and water fire-control systems put out an external fire resulting from hydrogen accumulation around the test article’s aft area. Inspection revealed damage to the aft heat shield and charring of external-tank insulation, but the engines appeared generally in good condition. (NASA Release 79-92) 570 million miles a flood of scientific data and “stunning photographs of the planet and some of its moons,” as the New York Times described them. Scientists at the JPL, control center for the mission, said that the flight was continuing to provide them with “new surprises.” They had modified observing sequences on Voyager 2 to benefit from discoveries by Voyager 1 on its encounter in March. Changes included more darkside images of the planet to measure lightning and aurora; images of Jupiter’s ring, taken away from the equatorial plane; and about nine hours of continuous imaging of Io for volcanic activity. Voyager 2’s inward track past three of the four “Galilean” satellites had let it see regions not viewed by Voyager 1; its path was “more conservative,” as it passed 10 Jupiter radii above the visible clouds compared to Voyager i’s 4.9 radii, for “complementary observations.” Voyager 2 studies began April 25 and would continue for a seven month look compared to Voyager Ts three month look. Voyager 2 had been launched August 20, 1977; Voyager 1, launched September 5, 1977, on a faster and shorter course, had overtaken its sister ship before the end of the year. Scientists found that Jupiter and its moons did not resemble planets or satellites nearer the Sun, nor one another. Surprises in the findings were due, they said, to real differences between the outer and inner solar system and lack of previous knowledge, a result of the distance separating Earth from Jupiter. Before Voyager 1, “we thought we had some idea of what planets were like,” said Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey after seeing Europa images from Voyager 2. Instead of a sphere heavily pocked such as Earth’s moon and Mars from meteor impacts, Voyager 2 images showed Europa “as smooth as a billiard ball,” with hardly any craters on a surface covered by a mantle of slushy snow and ice up to 60 miles deep, with far-reaching shallow marks like cracks in an eggshell. The spacecraft passed Callisto and Ganymede on its way toward Europa and, after its encounter with Jupiter, had begun a 10-hour watch for Io, where it photographed six volcanoes erupting. On its approach to Jupiter, Voyager 2 had encountered radiation so intense that JPL had turned off a sensitive ultraviolet (UV) detector six hours earlier than planned; however, project director Ray Heacock declared “no problems and no failures in any of our instruments.” (JPL Release 901; NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, June 26/79; NY Times, July 10/79, C-l; W Post, July 10/79, A-10; W Star July 11/79, A-4; July 13/79, A-10) The PRC news service told of the difficulties encountered by Skylab and the U.S. government’s offers of assistance and compensation in case of damage or injury, noting that some airlines had suspended flights during the critical period. Tass said that western Australia authorities had “warned the population that some parts of Skylab might be radioactive and urged. .. caution in approaching them.” At a NASA press conference a few days earlier, a reporter asked how NASA could tell if someone brought in a piece of debris claiming falsely that it was part of Skylab. Richard G. Smith, deputy associate administrator, space transportation systems, who had been “actively in charge of Skylab activities for NASA,” replied that “it is very easy to identify an object that’s been in space. The high-energy particles that penetrate it in orbit give an extremely low-level but characteristic radiation background—no radiation for anybody to be worried about.. .But it’s very easy to determine that.” United Press International (UPI) reported July 13 that the Kalgoorlie town hall had squeezed into its lobby the biggest fragment recovered so far, a 6.5-foot by 3.25-foot cylindrical piece of metal bearing a stamped number 102: “very good for the tourist industry,” said Mayor Ray Finlayson. (NASA press conf July 6/79; coord ctr bltns July 9, 10, 11/79; NASA Dly Actv Rept July 12/79; W Star, July 12/79, A-l; UPI, July 14/79, A-7; FBIS, Xinhua in Chinese, July 12/79; Tass in English, July 13/79; AvWk, July 16/79, 22)
NASA reported that the Viking 2 lander cameras had photographed a new layer of frost on the Utopia Planitia site, creating “a scientific puzzle” for researchers. In September 1977, the lander recorded frost on the surface of Mars during its northern winter (one Mars year and almost two Earth years ago); scientists had explained the frost as the result of a major dust storm, during which atmospheric particles picked up moisture that wound up as frost on the surface. However, latest observations of Mars showed the atmosphere clearer than it had been since the Vikings arrived in 1976, so that the frost could not be explained as before. (NASA Release 79-107; JPL Universe Aug 17/79, 1)
DOT announced that Secretary Brock Adams had sent to Congress proposed legislation to provide $6.6 billion for improving U.S. airports and airway systems over 5 years, beginning October 1, 1980. The proposal emphasized aviation safety measures to meet expected 1980s growth in air transportation. Financed by a 10 year continuation of the airport/airway trust fund and related aviation user taxes, the bill would include airport development and planning; acquisition and upgrading of airway facilities and equipment; research to reduce congestion and delays at large U.S. airports; improvement of air traffic control, instrument landing systems and radars, and other navigation aids; reduction of aircraft noise; and funding for smaller airports to reduce the load on larger ones. (DOT Release 51-79) During April: NASA reported new data on Venus From the Pioneer mission and the radar at the Arecibo observatory in Puerto Rico. Radar had given best information on the surface of Venus, not visible through optical telescopes because of heavy cloud cover. Radar images covering an area 80 million square kilometers showed craters on Venus as large as 320 kilometers in diameter; like lunar craters, which they resembled, they apparently resulted from meteorite impacts. A circular area 1,120 kilometers in diameter called Alpha, first noticed because of high radar reflectivity, consisted of many parallel ridges identifiable for great distances. This area had no Earth counterpart except extensive dune systems in the Arabian peninsula; Alpha showed a central dark object, possibly a volcano. Another radar feature known as Beta, with long rays of rough material extending out as far as 48 kilometers, also had a central dark area like a volcano crater. The radar also detected parallel ridges about 2,100 miles high, extending more than 960 kilometers across the surface of Venus, forming a structure exceeding the Grand Canyon in scale. A report on Pioneer Venus orbiter and multiprobe mission findings included discovery of the largest canyon in the solar system, bigger than Mar’s Vallis Marineris, previously thought largest. Lightning activity detected by USSR Venera spacecraft was continuous from altitudes of 32 kilometers down to 2 kilometers, with discharges as frequent as 25 per second. Pioneer’s orbiter apparently saw this lightning also; experimenters Dr. Boris Ragent of ARC and Dr. Jacques Blamont of the University of Paris now theorized that a glow measured by Pioneer instruments was continuous indistinguishable lightning on Venus, rather than an occurrence on the spacecraft. The orbiter also found an 1,100-kilometer-wide hole containing few or no clouds in the North Pole cloud cover, suggesting a downflow of atmosphere there. (NASA Release 79-47; ARC Release 79-12)
NASA set June 30, 1980, as the date of the first Shuttle launch, depending on several milestones: Columbia rollout from the orbiter-processing facility to the vertical-assembly building in late March 1980; rollout of the complete Shuttle stack (orbiter, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank) from the VAB to launch pad 39A in mid-April; and a flight-readiness (20-seeond) firing of the Shuttle’s main engine on the launch pad in mid-May. Also needed to make this schedule was certification of the Shuttle main engine by June 30, 1980. Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch said that “some time in August or September” would be a much more likely date as unforeseen problems could delay the launch. NASA planned nine unmanned launches in 1980, eight of them reimbursable by other organizations. (NASA Release 79-162) During November: NASA announced appointment effective immediately of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of JSC’s Shuttle payload and integration development program, as acting associate administrator for STS operations at Headquarters. Lunney would set up the new office that resulted from NASA’s decision to separate STS acquisition from operations, reporting to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. Lunney had been with NASA since 1959, serving at LeRC and LaRC and going to Houston when the MSFC was created. There, he was technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz test project 1972-1975 and was deputy associate administrator for space flight at Headquarters before taking the position at JSC in August 1977. (NASA Release 79-156; NASA anno Nov 16/79) —NASA announced’appointment of A. Thomas Young as director of GSFC, succeeding Dr. Robert Cooper, who left government service in June. Young, deputy director of ARC since February 1979, had been with NASA since 1961 and had worked at LaRC as mission director for the Viking mission to Mars and mission-definition manager for the lunar orbiter project. Before assignment to ARC, he had headed the Headquarters Office of Space Sciences planetary program. (NASA Release 79-164; NASA anno Nov 30/79) —NASA announced that John W. Boyd, on detail as deputy director of DFRC since January 1, would return January 1, 1980, to his post as associate director of ARC. He had begun working at ARC in 1949 as an aeronautical engineer, becoming research assistant to the director of ARC in 1966 and deputy director for aeronautics and flight systems in 1970, serving in that position until his detail to DFRC. He was named associate director of ARC in July 1979.	(NASA anno Nov 19/79) —DFRC announced that Robert R Johannes would become deputy director of DFRC, effective December 1, replacing John W. Boyd. Formerly with the U.S. Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Johannes joined NASA in 1979 and had been director of engineering at DFRC. (DFRC Release 79-40)
Pioneer 10 had become the first U.S. craft to fly beyond Mars, Today reported. An Associated Press (AP) story said Pioneer 10, now 2 billion miles from home, had crossed the orbit of Uranus July 11 on its way out of the solar system. Launched in March 1972, Pioneer 10 sent back the first close-up views of Jupiter 21 months later and continued to transmit “valuable data about unexplored space and the outer solar system,” said NASA spokesman Duke Reiber. A spokesman for TRW, which built both Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11, said Pioneer 10 would cross Pluto’s orbit in 1987. (Today, July 13/79, 10A; NASA Release 79-84)
KSC reported that Shuttle orbiter Columbia, mated with other elements on a mobile launcher in the VAB, was ready for its first major test as a unified system. On November 24, Columbia moved 300 yards from the VAB to the orbiter-processing facility where solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank had been assembled on the mobile platform. A Shuttle-interface test running more than two weeks would check electrical and mechanical connections between elements and on-board flight systems. Interface tests originally scheduled earlier this week were delayed by problems including failure of a device providing umbilical link with the orbiter. This was the first flow of flight hardware through KSC processing facilities: the orbiter Enterprise, not built for spaceflight, served as “pathfinder” through the facilities in 1979 but lacked many of the systems installed in Columbia. Individual Columbia systems had passed checkouts in late 1979 and early 1980, but the,upcoming test would check the entire Shuttle system as a unit with the prime and backup crews taking part in simulations of ascent to orbit, abort, and descent to landing. William H. Shick, chief of prelaunch test operations, noted that this would be the first time the astronauts had occupied the cabin with the vehicle in a vertical position; they would “get a feel of what they can and can’t reach,” he added, to assess crew comfort while awaiting launch. (KSC Release 206-80)
Viking 1 launched toward Mars in August 1975 arrived there June 19, 1976. Its lander reached Mar’s surface July 20 with a planned 90-day lifetime but on July 20, 1980, would have observed the planet for more than two full Mars years (four Earth years) and would operate unattended on Mars into 1990, perhaps into 1994. The orbiter and lander of Viking 2 had been commanded off on July 24, 1978 and April 11, 1980, respectively. Fewer than 30 people at JPL remained in Viking operations and data processing. (JPL Release 940; NASA Release 80-108)
The first Viking soft-landed on Mars just four years ago, the Washington Star noted, but “it seems now like ancient history”: this week, the Viking orbiter would shut down for good [see July 9]. It had been mapping Mars with high-resolution photographs since 1976; even more remarkable was the lander, scheduled to last for 90 days and now programmed to operate possibly through 1994. “All this suggests an extraordinary contrast,” the paper said, “On Mars, American technology is thriving. . .on earth, the American genius that made such things possible is not being encouraged.” As the last messages arrive from the Viking orbiter, “its most important message—what the end of its useful life has to say about America’s scientific and technological future—is the one not heeded.” (W Star, July 28/80, A-6) July JO:LaRC said that its researchers, working with the FAA in a Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics, might have solved a problem relating to general aviation aircraft distress-signal equipment, six of every seven failing to transmit after a plane crash and about 75% of all signals being false alarms. The devices, emergency locator transmitters, emitted a signal on a wavelength designated for emergency use to locate downed aircraft and were supposedly activated by the impact force of a crash. The problem was in the sensor switch, which was sometimes too sensitive to normal aircraft vibrations (and sent false alarms), sometimes not sensitive enough to forces in a crash. Langley engineer Huey D. Carden had designed and tested an experimental switch sensitive to low-cycle vibrations out of the range of normal aircraft vibrations and closer to the low-cycle pulselike force of a crash. The researchers were also looking into the general usefulness of the beacons and their performance as a total system. (LaRC Release 80-53; NASA Release 80-118)
The Washington Star reported on a campaign to raise $1 million for a Viking fund to collect and preserve data from Mars. The Viking landers “sitting on the red sands of Mars and sending back information” could keep doing so for the next 10 years, the story said, but NASA had decided that no life existed on Mars and stopped listening to the Viking transmissions. Among those supporting the fundraising campaign was Ben Bova, editor of Omni magazine, who said “the only people who have lost interest in space are here in Washington.” NASA had not officially endorsed the effort, but “at least one spokesman” said the agency would be delighted to accept the contribution. (W Star, Feb 20/80, C-l)
NASA said that investigators at GSFC and the University of Maryland had discovered a natural infrared laser on Mars, a find that could help detect new planets in the universe and require rewrites of books on general physics of the planetary atmosphere. Members of the team were Dr. Michael J. Mumma, Dr. David Buhl, Dr. Gordon Chin, Dr. Drake Deming, Fred Espenak, and Dr. Theodore Kostiuk, all of GSFC, and Dr. David Zipoy of the University of Maryland. The discovery was reported in Science magazine. Optical lasers since their 50-year-ago invention had proved extremely useful not only in scientific laboratories but also in everyday life; for example, as price scanners in supermarkets. However, the investigators said, no naturally occurring laser had ever been reported, although “the extreme variety of physical and chemical environments of extraterrestrial objects.. .arguefd] that natural lasers must exist.” In theory, “natural” lasers would occur whenever atoms or molecules were stimulated to release photons in transition from higher to lower energy states. A Goddard-developed device (an infrared heterodyne spectrometer) used with the McMath solar telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona had detected such a process in the Mars atmosphere (made up almost entirely of cabon dioxide) between January and April 1980. The new device let the scientists confirm occurrence of a molecular-population inversion, necessary for lasing. The natural laser on Mars, identical in principle to man-made lasers with commercial, scientific, and military applications, had a total continuous power output of more than a million megawatts, equivalent to that generated by a thousand large hydroelectric-power projects; in fact, the Mars laser generated more than five times the total power output of the United States. The investigators said orbiting satellites might eventually be able to extract power from the natural laser and beam it wherever needed. (NASA Release 81-78)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that it had awarded four contracts totaling more than $7 million for design and development of a modified Centaur launch vehicle and components to be used as a Shuttle upper stage. A $1,545 million contract with Teledyne Industries called for five digital computer units and nine remote multiplex units. A $1,593 million contract with Honeywell was for three inertial-measurement groups, part of an automatic navigation and guidance system. A $3,412 million contract with General Dynamics was for design and development of two modified Centaur vehicles. A $.933 million contract with United Technologies Corporation would cover building four RL10-3-3A rocket engines, two of which would provide primary thrust for one Centaur. Work under these contracts would con PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED tinue through September 1981; they were all to support the Galileo mission to Jupiter, scheduled for launch in 1985, and the international solar-polar mission in 1986. The Centaur for these missions would resemble the one used over the past 15 years as an upper stage for Atlas and Titan boosters on Mariner missions to Mars and Venus, Pioneer missions to Jupiter and Venus, Viking and Voyager missions, and the cooperative Helios missions with West Germany. It had carried low Earth-orbit missions for NASA, such as the Heao series and commercial and military geosynchronous satellites. (LeRC Release 81-26; NASA Release 81-75)
On the basis of data acquired in support of its mission objectives, NASA declared successful the Viking extended mission conducted from the end of its primary mission in 1976 until August 1980. Viking’s mission was to explore the planet Mars using two instrumented orbiters operating in conjunction with two instrumented landers on the surface. Identical spacecraft launched in 1975, each consisting of an orbiter and a lander, began operating at Mars in 1976. The design life of the spacecraft was 90 days following orbit insertion or landing on the Martian surface; however, the Viking flight team found “ingenious ways” to extend the operating lifespans and obtain the maximum possible science data. When the extended mission began November 15, 1976, Orbiter 2 operated until July 24, 1978 (another 20 months), when a small leak in its attitude-control system depleted its gas supply. Lander 2 operated on the planet’s surface for 41 months, until April 12, 1980; its transmitter was turned off when its batteries could no longer hold a charge. Orbiter 1 lasted even longer, a total of 45 months after orbital insertion, and completed is operations August 7, 1980, when its control gas was also exhausted. The end of Orbiter 1 operation was to be the official end of the Viking extended mission; however, Lander 1—designated the Mutch Memorial Station January 7, 1981—was still operating in a continuation automatic-mission mode and providing important science data. Extended-mission objectives were “to obtain seasonal variations, long-duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and to obtain data not possible during the primary mission due to time constraints or observational limitations.” Mission results were “far in excess of those expected.” The program now consisted of Lander l’s acquiring and storing imaging, meteorology, and engineering data in a seven-plus day cycle and transmitting to Earth on command. Data should continue until the end of 1994, when the radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) could no longer power the transmitters. (NASA MOR S-815-75-01/02 [postlaunch] Feb 3/82; NASA Release 82-36)
A robot craft, Venera 13, fifth from the Soviet Union to land on Venus, sent the first color pictures of that planet’s surface and scooped up a soil sample for the most detailed analysis to date of Venus chemistry, Tass reported. A module detached from Venera 13 plunged through Venus’s dense carbon dioxide atmosphere to an area called Phoebe, south of its equator. A Venera 14 identical lander was scheduled to arrive March 5 at an area east of the Phoebe site. Soviet mission planners had consulted scientists and radar maps from the U.S. Pioneer Venus project in deciding where to aim the Veneras; they promised to share Venera data at future international scientific conferences. U.S. scientists familiar with the Soviet plans said that the Veneras were equipped for “much more sophisticated” studies of Venus soil chemistry than previous probes; these were the first craft able to drill into the crust, extract a sample, and analyze it, as the Vikings had on Mars. Pioneer Venus 1 had been orbiting Venus since December 1978, mapping the planet by radar. Pioneer Venus 2 deployed five probes to sample the planet’s atmosphere, only one of them surviving to transmit an hour of data on surface temperatures. Soviet studies of Mars failed, but Venera 9 and Venera 10 in 1975 transmitted the first images from the Venus surface, and Venera 11 and Venera 12 in 1978 collected data on radioactive soil. After separation and landing, Venera 13 had survived to send surface data relayed by the mother ship for 127 minutes. (FBIS, Moscow, Tass in English, Mar 1/82, Mar 2/82; NY Times, Mar 2/82, C-l; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-10)
Charles (Pete) Conrad, who commanded Skylab’s first mission and was now a vice president for marketing at McDonnell Douglas, said that pieces of Skylab that crashed in 1979 over western Australia after five years in orbit would go on sale, with proceeds to NASA, for the support of Viking I, the Mars lander still sending messages from the surface of that planet. The Skylab pieces fitted into colorful posters were expected to raise from $150,000 to $500,000. Conrad had been a member of the Apollo 12 mission that landed on the Moon as well as commander of the Skylab mission in 1973. (W Post, Nov 12/82, A-10)
Final attempts to contact the Viking 1 lander on Mars failed, and JPL spokesman said that they would try no more “unless NASA Headquarters changes its mind.” The craft outlived its 90-day guarantee by years; it was survivor of a pair of two-part spaceships, each including an orbiter that circled Mars while its robot laboratory sampled and photographed the planet’s surface. Viking 2’s lander and Viking l’s orbiter went mute in April 1980. The $500-million project returned data on Mars, including pictures of rust-red rocks and boulders, dust storms, and periodic layers of frost; recorded temperatures ranged from 124-24°°F below zero. (NY Times, May 23/83, A-17; W Post, May 23/83, A-8)
After months of unsuccessful effort to communicate with Viking lander 1 (the Mutch Memorial Station on the surface of Mars), engineers at JPL decided that they probably could not reestablish contact. Launched in August 1975, the lander reached Mars July 20, 1976, ami was joined by lander 2 September 3 of that year for the most thorough examination of another planet ever undertaken. When contact was lost in November 1982, engineers vainly transmitted command series based on studies of possible failure modes. However, lander l’s internal program could initiate signals to Earth without being commanded; if the lander were still operating, it might transmit in May. Lander 1 was renamed the Mutch Memorial Station to honor Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, former leader of the Viking imaging team, who disappeared in
NASA transferred operation and management of its Landsat system to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) during ceremonies at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Beginning in 1972 with the launch of Landsat 1 (Erts 1, the Earth-resources technology satellite), the Landsat program was a research and development effort to determine the usefulness of satellite multispectral data from synoptic views of the Earth’s surface for agricultural and urban planning, geologic exploration, land management, and snowmelt and flood-runoff analysis. Over the following 10 years NASA had operated four Landsats, including Landsat 4, launched in July 1982, and a ground system at GSFC. Landsat 1 and Landsat 2 were no longer operating; Landsat 3 would be retired later in 1983 because of degradation related to age. In 1979 the Reagan administration told NASA to transfer operation to NOAA so that the latter agency could work toward eventual commercialization of the system. NASA had relinquished operation of Landsat 4 (except for the thematic mapper, which NASA would continue to use), the control center at GSFC, and the multispectral-scanner data-processing facility, also at GSFC, and would hand over control of the thematic mapper early in 1985. NOAA would also take over the Landsat 4 backup spacecraft (the Landsat D now in final checkout by General Electric) that would replace Landsat 4, probably in mid-1985. NOAA would reimburse NASA for the use of buildings and utilities. (NASA Release 83-7) JPL would go ahead with efforts to reestablish contact, which would be unsuccessful if the lander had multiple problems. No telemetry dala were available to diagnose the situation. The 64-meter Deep Space Tracking Network antenna, near Canberra, had bombarded the lander on Mars with 80-to 100-kilowatt signals, said George Gianopulos, Viking team leader at JPL. Gianopulos said that commands from JPL through Australia could be up to 40° off the receiving line into the leader’s antenna dish and still be picked up. Getting into the lander to reset the switch “is going to be a neat trick,” he added. Launched August 20, 1975, and designed for a 90-day mission, Viking 1 had shown “incredible stamina” in the harsh environment of Mars. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) could provide power for years, but in 1982 its four nickel-cadmium batteries began to show their age. Viking could be instructed to charge or discharge batteries to keep them functioning longer. A command sent November 19 to repeat this exercise apparently got into the antenna-pointing subroutine and switched the crucial communications antenna to point away from Earth. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 28/83, 1)
The Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched on January 25, 1983, as a joint project of the United States, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, depleted its supply of helium at 1:30 a.m. GMT. The superfluid helium refrigerant cooled the telescope, which would cease operations in about a week, mission officials said. Throughout the mission, the telescope’s focal plane was cooled to a temperature of about 2.5° above absolute zero (—■455 °F), making the instrument the coldest manmade object ever flown in Earth orbit. The telescope surveyed more than 95 % of the sky, pinpointing the locations and intensities of more than 200,000 infrared objects. During its 300 days of observations, IRAS carried out the first complete survey of the infrared sky and made many discoveries, including the detection of a ring of solid material around the star Vega and seven comets and bands of dust around the Sun between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. More than 200 billion bits of data came from IRAS, and results announced to date represented only a hurried look at a very small proportion of this data. It was evident, however, that IRAS would have a major impact on many areas of astronomy and that astronomers would be making new discoveries from its data for years to come. On November 9, NASA announced two IRAS findings: a new object in the solar system—possibly an asteroid or a dead comet—that passed closer to the Sun than any planet or known asteroid and three giant rings of dust that circled part of the solar system. The unknown object, temporarily designated minor planet 1983TB, appeared to be less than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) in diameter and about 30 million kilometers (19 million miles) from Earth. 1983TB passed within 15 million kilometers (9 million miles) of the Sun, closer than any planet or known asteroid and 10 times closer than Earth. And its orbit almost PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED BlTFMTtOWMTT WAKK 445 exactly matched that of the Geminid stream of meteoroids, which were visible as a shower of meteors (shooting stars) in December 1982. Astronomers were planning additional observations with photometers and spectrometers in an effort to clear up the mystery of the identify of 1983TB. The three dust rings were 100 million miles wide and were circling the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter 200 to 300 million miles from the Sun. The dust bands appeared to defy the laws of physics by encircling the asteroid belt in three extremely stable and symmetrical rings. Particles making up the dust bands “this small can only survive in stable orbits for a few ten-thousands of years before they are pulled apart by the sun,” said Dr. Frank Low of the University of Arizona. “There must be something that replenishes the rings because three stable bands that large cannot exist any other way.” In addition, NASA announced that same day that astronomers studying IRAS data at the University of Groningen, the Netherlands, had discovered three giant dust shells that were asymmetrically placed around the star Betelgeuse. It was already known that the red supergiant star lost material, but IRAS data showed evidence of the presence of dust shells that extended more than four light years from the star. At that distance, the material must have left the star 100,000 years earlier. The IRAS observations thus allowed astronomers to study the earliest stages in the episode of mass loss. (NASA Release 83-162, 83-171, 83-172, 83-181; W Post, Nov 10/83, A-l)
A Solar System Exploratory Committee, representing the science community and NASA, concluded a two-year study by recommending that the agency undertake “moderately priced missions” to Mars, Venus, Titan, and a comet before the end of the century. NASA had sent 32 unmanned spacecraft to other worlds in the 1960s and 11 in the 1970s; only 2 in this decade. Proposals were a Venus radar-mapper in 1988, a Mars orbiter in 1990, flyby of an asteroid and rendezvous with a comet in the mid-1990s, and a probe of Saturn’s moon Titan between 1988 and 1992. Other missions of interest to the group would be sampling Mars and comets; robot rovers on Mars; and probes to Neptune, Uranus, and Saturn. (W Post, Apr 17/83; A-9; NY Times, Apr 17/83, 22)
At a ceremony today in Washington, D.C., NASA transferred ownership of Viking Lander 1, which was on the planet Mars, to the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. It was the first time a museum would own an object located on another planet. The transfer also included loan of the official Viking Lander plaque, which renamed the lander the Thomas A. Mutch Memorial Station in memory of the Viking landing imaging team leader and NASA associate administrator for space science who had died in a climbing accident in the Himalayas in 1980. NASA retained reclaimant rights to the lander for scientific purposes. (NASA Release 84-58; NY Times, May 3/84, A-19)
NASA reported on scientific data of the Viking Lander Monitor Mission (VLMM) in the areas of meteorology, radio science, and imaging. The Viking program had explored Mars, using two instrumented orbiters operating in conjunction with two instrumented landers on the planet’s surface. Two identical spacecraft, each consisting of a lander and orbiter, were launched in 1975 and began operating at Mars in 1976. A frugal VLMM was conducted from the end of the extended mission in 1980 until June 1983. Based on the data acquired in support of the mission objectives, NASA judged the VLMM successful. Analyses of the data from the mission would continue for some years, supported by the Mars Data Analysis Program of the Solar System Exploration Division. (NASA MOR S-815-75-01/02 [postlaunch] Jan 16/84)
The National Academy of Sciences' Astronomy Survey Committee, the NASA Solar System Exploration Committee, and the NASA Committee on Solar and Space Physics made recommendations for future NASA space exploration and science programs, which Rep. Wyche Fowler, Jr. (D-Ga.) was asking the U.S. House to endorse in concurrent resolutions, Defense Daily reported. Advisory committee recommendations were often the basis for programs NASA sought to implement. The Astronomy Survey Committee recommended the following major new programs "in order of priority" for total funding of up to $950 million (in constant 1980 dollars) over the next ten years: (1) the advanced x-ray astrophysics facility (AXAF) to be authorized in FY 87, (2) a very-long baseline (VLB) array of radio telescopes, (3) a new technology telescope (NTT) of the 15-m class operating from the ground at optical and infrared wavelengths, and (4) a large deployable reflector (LDR) in space. The Solar System Exploration Committee recommended a program funded at a sustained annual level of $300 million per year (in FY 84 dollars). Its four initial core program recommendations were the Venus radar mapper (authorized in 1984), the Mars observer (authorized in FY 85), a comet rendezvous/ asteroid flyby to be authorized in FY 87 for a 1990-92 launch, and the Titan probe/Saturn orbiter to be authorized for a 1988-92 launch as a joint NASA/ European Space Agency mission. Other committee recommendations included the Mars aeronomy orbiter, the Venus atmospheric probe, the lunar geoscience orbiter, the Mars surface probe, the comet atomized sample return, the multiple mainbelt asteroid orbiter/flyby, the earth-approaching asteroid rendezvous, the Saturn flyby/ probe, the Uranus flyby/probe, the Neptune flyby/probe, and the Pluto flyby. The Committee on Solar and Space Physics recommended an average annual funding of $400 million (in FY 84 dollars) "which would be sufficient to achieve the highest objectives in solar and space physics between the year 1988 and the year 2000." Major missions recommended were the upper atmosphere research satellite (authorized in FY 85), solar optical telescope for launch in 1990, the international solar terrestrial physics program for launch between 1989 and 1993, a solar probe for launch in 1995, and a solar polar orbiter to be launched in 2000. The committee also endorsed a series of moderate Explorer-class missions of about one launch per year. (D/D, Oct 8/85, 197)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
NASA announced that a panel of scientists at its Ames Research Center (ARC) said today that, although Mars presently was a frigid desert planet, it once had enough water to cover its entire surface with an ocean more than 300 feet deep. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey said at the meeting, which grew out of research discussed the previous winter at ARC's Water on Mars Workshop, that "The pictures taken by the two Viking spacecraft in orbit around Mars tell us that Mars had as much water in geologic history as earth did." Carr said the 20,000 close-up pictures taken since 1976 by the two Viking spacecraft revealed canyons that were deeper, wider, and longer than the Grand Canyon and could be made only by rushing rivers. The photos also showed thousands of gullies formed only by water or snow and ice slicing into the surface or forcing their way up to the surface. "If all the water that existed on Mars to form these channels covered its surface today," commented ARC's Dr. James Pollack, "it would be enough to form a global Martian ocean tens of hundreds of meters deep." Carr pointed out that the Viking photos also suggested that water was below the surface at latitudes near the Martian equator where the planet's interior heat could keep it from freezing just as do underground rivers in most temperate latitudes on earth. "There is a softening of the terrain, a rounding off of the edges . . . that is evidence of underground water flow and the creep of ice near the surface," he said. "This terrain is also located where most of the Martian gullies are today, where snow, ice, and water burst out of the ground to cause the colossal floods that formed the channels we see today," Carr said. And Pollack added that Mars long ago lost most of its carbon dioxide, which helped trap the sun's heat, causing in effect a permanent Martian ice age. (NASA Release 85-140)
Dr. George Wetherill, director of the department of terrestrial magnetism at the Carnegie Institution of Washington, said in an interview with the New York Times that his report to appear in the May 17 issue of Science discussed his hypothesis that the inner planets of the solar system appeared to have been formed when a number of planets, some of them three times larger than Mars, repeatedly collided with one another until only one survived in each of the present planetary orbits. Wetherill believed the present planets had "lots of brothers and sisters" not much smaller than themselves, which collided to form "trial" planets, the NY Times reported. "The four we see today [Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars]," he said, "are the survivors. One of the final collisions," he added, "probably increased the spin of earth sufficiently to throw off materials that consolidated to form the moon." Wetherill derived his hypothesis from a computer simulation of what probably happened after the solar system began to take shape from a rotating cloud of dust and gas about 4.5 billion years ago. The analysis took into consideration various factors affecting the formation process once some 500 bodies, each one-third the size of the moon, had formed in the region around the sun now occupied by the four planets mentioned above. These factors included the gravitational fields around each object, the frequency of near misses that would throw the objects into eccentric orbits, and the collisions that may have canceled the eccentricity. Collisions would have generated enough heat within the earth to melt most, if not all, of its interior, allowing heavy material to sink and form earth's metallic core. Wetherill's calculations assumed that not enough gas was present to affect motions of the objects as they sped past one another; many scientists concurred that a violent "wind" blowing out from the sun swept the inner solar system clear of gas. Each collision would have driven off most of any planetary atmosphere that had begun to accumulate, and since impact histories of Earth and Venus were different, this could account for the differences in their atmospheric abundances of such inert gasses as argon. Initially, material destined to form the planets was so uniformly spread around the sun that their motions were determined by multiple collisions much like those of molecules in a hot gas. By the time this material had formed into larger bodies, Wetherill said, their mutual gravitational attractions would have become a significant factor. During the ensuing collisions, Wetherill believed, the existing planets had acquired 50% of their present material; after 100 million years the process was 99% completed. Age determinations of moon rocks indicated that the last great crashes, enough to produce the lunar seas, did not end until 3.8 billion years ago, or several hundred million years after the formative process began. By then, however, the impacting bodies were "quite small," Wetherill said, "about 30 miles in diameter." What remained in the form of asteroids and meteorites was far less than that needed to produce even a small planet. Jupiter and the large planets beyond it were not in a region swept clear of gas, making their formation histories very different, Wetherill concluded. (NY Times, May 11/85, 12)
Although a mission to put a human colony on Mars seemed unlikely anytime soon, members of the National Commission on Space [see U.S. Space Policy/National Commission on Space, Mar. 29] said it appeared to be only a matter of time until such an undertaking took place, the Washington Post reported. The commission was due in May 1986 to present a report outlining what it thought the U.S. space program should look like over the next 20 years. The U.S. last visited Mars in 1976, when unmanned Viking 1 and 2 missions landed and began collecting data. The Mars Observer was scheduled for a 1991 launch to study the planet from orbit. NASA officials said that beyond that there was nothing concrete on the drawing boards, although they were considering sending an unmanned craft to land on Mars, collect samples, and return in a manner similar to early moon explorations. (W Post, June 5/85, A5)
During a "Science and Engineering" radio program, Boris Belitskiy responded to a New Zealander's question about the possibility of there someday being a larger Soviet space station, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. "A Soviet orbital station of the next generation will be a larger and more comfortable complex with better facilities for research work, pilot production, cosmonaut exercises, recreation, and everyday life generally," Belitskiy said. When asked whether the Soviets were developing a reusable spacecraft like the U.S. Space Shuttle, Belitskiy responded, "For the present, freighters of the Progress type meet the needs of resupplying Salyut orbital stations. Nevertheless, Soviet space scientists do see a future for reusable transport systems and have been conducting tests in this area. The technological problems involved have, on the whole, been solved, but this cannot be said of the economic problems . . . This being so, Soviet space scientists are interested in quite a few other approaches to the problem as well," In response to a question about a manned mission to Mars, Belitskiy said, "Some day, undoubtedly, there will be such a mission but that's still a long way down the road. And a vast project of this kind, bound to be very expensive, would be greatly facilitated by more cooperation between the major space powers." (FBIS, Moscow World Service in English, July 22/85)
In its recently published "1986 Long-Range Program Plan," NASA outlined plans for an evolutionary, permanently manned space station in low-earth orbit; operation by the year 2000 of man-tended platforms in equatorial, polar, and geosynchronous orbit; and routine manned missions on the moon and later Mars by the early 21st century, Defense Daily reported. The annually updated plan, summarizing the status of NASA planning as of the end of February 1985, also detailed some 120 ongoing and planned NASA space projects and missions for approximately the next ten years, with some out to the year 2000. The plan did not discuss budget figures, but for the near-term assumed budgets with the 1% growth promised annually by President Reagan (which had since disappeared in the deficit battle in Congress). The report did not project a need for more than four Space Shuttle orbiters but did not rule out such a need, while calling for development by 1990 of an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV). Beyond 1990, objectives of the NASA spaceflight program included developing an orbital transfer vehicle complementary to the Space Shuttle for transportation of payloads, to, between, and beyond earth orbits; defining, designing, and providing a second-generation space transportation system including unmanned cargo vehicles and second-generation orbiters; developing and operating on a routine basis, beginning in the mid-1990s, geosynchronous orbit space platforms that were unmanned, permanent, and multifunctional; developing and putting into routine operation by the year 2000 geosynchronous orbit facilities that were permanent, multifunction, and able to be periodically manned; developing technology and techniques to construct, deploy, or assemble such facilities in space and to test and service them in orbit; and encouraging and supporting NASA and industry development of technology to improve concepts for space boosters that significantly reduced launch costs. The NASA report noted that "achievements in the early 21st century in science, exploration, earth applications, and commercial uses would depend on two trends: first, the increasing capabilities of space systems with regard to accessibility, payloads, stay times, and variety and sophistication of operations; and second, the increasing capability of instruments with regard to detection, resolution, pointing accuracy, and data collection and management made possible by improvement of their power supplies and cooling mechanisms." In the 21st century, the NASA report said, "automated or human-tended instruments located on the lunar surface will begin complementary observations" with instruments in low-earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit. For manned transportation from the space station, "a cyrogenic version of the orbital transfer vehicle evolutionary family, currently in early stages of preliminary design, is expected to provide by the year 2000 reusability for manned and sortie flights to at least geosynchronous orbit ... It also should be able to provide the basis for transportation for longer flights to establish a lunar base and for planetary missions such as a Mars sample return . . . Routine access to the lunar surface will make possible the first intensive, systematic study of another major celestial body," the report noted. "Extensive sample collection and scientific traverses conducted by humans and long-term instrument networks installed and managed by humans will help determine the details of the moon's structure, composition, and history. They also will make accessible the record of solar and cosmic ray particle fluxes preserved in the lunar soil . . . Similar scientific activities can be carried out on Mars, either by large automated spacecraft or by a manned mission . . ." (D/D, Oct 22/85, 268)
NASA announced that Rockwell Internatl. Corp. made significant additions to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to accommodate three research experiments that would measure orbiter aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics as it reentered earth's atmosphere. Researchers would use the flight data to develop future generation space transportation systems. The most obvious change was a cylindrical housing that replaced the fintip atop the vertical tail. The new experiment pod, containing equipment for the shuttle infrared leeside temperature sensing (SILTS) experiment, was approximately 20 in. in diameter and was capped at the leading edge by a spherical dome. SILTS would obtain high-resolution infrared images of the upper (leeside) surfaces of Columbia's port wing and fuselage as the orbiter reentered the atmosphere, providing detailed temperature maps at the surface of the leeside thermal protection materials and indicating the amount of aerodynamic heating of surfaces in flight. Tape recorders would store experiment data. Infrared cameras mounted inside the dome would view Columbia's left wing and fuselage through two windows protected during launch from debris by plugs that filled the window cavities and that fell away when the experiment began about 400,000 feet above earth at reentry. Injection of gaseous nitrogen into the cavities would cool the cameras during that period. For the shuttle entry air data system (SEADS) experiment, a new nosecap had 14 penetration assemblies distributed about its surface, each containing a small hole through which local surface air pressure was measured from an altitude of about 56 miles through landing. This would allow precise postflight determination of the arbiter's attitude relative to the oncoming air-stream and the density of the atmosphere through which the vehicle was flying. The shuttle upper atmosphere mass spectrometer (SUMS) would complement the SEADS experiment by providing atmospheric density information at altitudes above 50 miles. SUMS would sample air at Columbia's surface through a small hole, located just aft of the nosecap, to measure the number of molecules of various gas species in order to determine the atmospheric density that, with vehicle motion information, would allow determination of orbiter aerodynamic characteristics at altitudes where the atmosphere was extremely thin. NASA originally developed the SUMS mass spectrometer for the Viking spacecraft that landed in 1976 on Mars and modified it to operate in the orbiter's reentry flight environment. NASA' Langley Research Center developed the experiments as part of the orbiter experiments program managed by NASA's office of aeronautics and space technology. (NASA Release 85-127)
NASA announced that its Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded a research grant to Tuskegee University to research possibilities of growing food in outer space. In the project, the researchers would select several sweet potato varieties that looked promising and research nutrient delivery and hydroponic systems that appeared best suited to development of the crop. The sweet potato project was part of NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support Systems (CELSS) program to search for methods to supply a continuous food source and to regenerate waste during long-duration spaceflights or for proposed lunar colonies. Dr. William Knott, manager of KSC's Life Science Support Facility and technical monitor for the project, said that, if the sweet potato could deliver enough energy conversion efficiency and productivity, NASA would incorporate it into a nearly full-scale "breadboard" of a working CELSS that it was developing. Other plants previously chosen for the CELSS breadboard project included sugar beets, lettuce, snap beans, wheat, soy beans, and white potatoes. The sweet potato research would focus on three systems: plant growth, food processing, and waste management. The program would begin by studying the plants in a sealed 24 by 12-foot growth chamber with controlled light, food, water, and temperature. Plants would receive food in the chamber by recycling the atmosphere and water that passed through the nutrient system. NASA expected the chamber, once used to test the Mercury spacecraft for flight, might produce enough food for two to three people. A waste management system would treat leftovers from the recycling process, converting the waste products into a nutrient source for the plants. Knott said a major challenge of the project was to harvest the highest yields possible while using a minimum of space and water to deliver nutrients to the plants. "We will take the edible seeds and fruit out of the chamber for processing and storage. The leaves, stems, and parts of the plant normally not consumed also would be converted into a food material." Calling the CELSS program "a beyond the year 2000 endeavor," Knott said NASA would test some of the concepts of the program on the proposed space station "just to see if they work." However, he pointed out, "resupply on a long-duration spaceflight, a lunar base, or on a Mars mission . . . would make the 'space farm' . . . much more attractive." (NASA Release 85-180)
Finland and Sweden would together build measuring equipment for two Mars space probes for launch in three years by the USSR, FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish reported. The work was significant, the service quoted Risto Pellinen of the Finnish Meteorological Institute as saying, because it was the first time Finns would build equipment to be launched into space. Altogether 11 countries and the European Space Agency would participate in the program. The Mars probes would study solar winds, the planet itself, its near surroundings, and its two moons (Phobos and Delmos). Finland with Sweden would build equipment to measure the nature and characteristics of space particles. Participants and funding sources for the Finnish program were the Center for the Development of Technology, the Academy of Finland, the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Scientific-Technical Cooperation Committee of the Foreign Ministry, and the Meteorological Institute. (FBIS, Helsinki Domestic Service in Finnish, May 29/85)
Roger Bonnet, director of the European Space Agency's (ESA) scientific programs, speaking today at the opening of a meeting with the USSR's "Intercosmos" Council for International Cooperation, Soviet Academy of Sciences, said, "We are keenly interested in extending cooperation with the Soviet Union in space exploration," FBIS, TASS in English reported. "The first results of our joint work and experiments have given us reasons for making the most optimistic forecasts and opened up new opportunities for studying and using space for peaceful purposes." The program for the three-day meeting included discussion of details of the Soviet "Vega" mission to study Venus and Halley's Comet and review of preparations for a similar West European program called "Giotto," which would use data from the Soviet probe. Attendees also heard reports on the Soviet "Phobos" project for the comprehensive study of Mars and its satellites and ESA's plans to develop an orbital radio telescope. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 15/85)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
Dr. John Billingham, chief of the Extraterrestrial Research Division at Ames Research Center (ARC) and founder of the ARC-based Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), said at a Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ALERT colloquium that study of the earth's part in the 15-billion-year cosmic evolution held the key to searching for life beyond the solar system, the Lewis News reported. "By studying how our own planet formed and how basic elements required for life evolved, we can theorize that a similar life-structuring process may be occurring or had occurred elsewhere in the universe," Billingham said. As an example, he mentioned the collection of microorganisms scientists observed in 3.5-billion-year-old rock formations discovered in the marine environment of Western Australia. Scientists could use that data to study rock-like formations on other planets that might display a similar evolutionary process. Billingham believed that it was reasonable to assume that life, including intelligent life, existed in the universe because, with 400 million stars in earth's galaxy alone, the natural cosmic process included formation of planets—a rule, not an exception—and the basic stuff of life existed throughout the universe. Because the Viking program had failed to turn up signs of life on Mars, SETI would focus its sights on life beyond the solar system, Billingham said. To accomplish this would require either a manned interstellar vehicle or radio telescopes. The former option would require, to reach the nearest star, a four-stage spacecraft weighing 34,000 tons, traveling 3/10 the speed of light and using electrical power equal to 500,000 years of earth usage driven by antimatter—hardly a feasible option, he noted. However, researchers could design and build radio telescopes to listen to life from other cosmic sources, he said. Such a system would make use of the microwave window frequency range, a quiet region of the spectrum that provided the best chance of picking up extraterrestrial signals. To accomplish this, SETI's information system would need to develop the technology using the largest radio telescopes to amplify the signal (1 to 3 GHz) and to build a signal processing system driven by a specially designed SETI computer. Billingham said the biggest challenge facing the SETI program would be identifying the format, frequency resolution, and time of the signals in order to recognize and eliminate as much interference as possible, thus separating noise from sound manifestations. To determine signals of non-natural origin, SETI would apply a sequence of logical tests coupled with a huge computer-based storehouse of information that would filter out most of the interference signals. "A radio telescope placed in low earth orbit will help eliminate some of the interference problems," Billingham said, "and the prospect of a much larger lunar orbiting radio telescope would offer an even more advantageous interference-reducing listening position that would cover a radius of 1,000 light years." SETI was then preparing its first system radio telescope prototype for testing at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, where a 1,000-ft. radio telescope conducted signal searches. Once fully operational and in orbit, the new telescope would receive signals originating 30 to 40 light years away. "Either we are alone or not," Billingham concluded, "and either has large implications. And we wonder, indeed if there is intelligent life elsewhere, will it help us understand our own." (Lewis News, March 22/85, 2) SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
NASA announced that its associate administrator for space science and applications, Dr. Burton Edelson, in a speech today at the 36th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Stockholm warned his audience that the earth's environment as was presently known might be in jeopardy and called on the world's scientific community to accelerate its study of the planet. "Resources, once thought to be limitless, are slowly being depleted," Edelson said. "Earth's atmosphere is changing, and some of its life forms are threatened. It is imperative that we, as scientists and engineers, take action now to maintain the quality of life on our planet and improve its biological productivity." Edelson cited the many accomplishments of planetary science since the beginning of spaceflight 28 years ago. "We have examined most of the planets in the solar system at close range and have performed systematic studies of our closest neighbors, Venus and Mars, through telescopes and more recently, through data and imagery received from planet-orbiting spacecraft," he said. "We still lack synoptic, systematic, and temporal knowledge, predictive skills, and an understanding of the mechanisms underlying earth's global processes," he pointed out. Calling for an international study effort, Edelson said, "Our sophisticated spacecraft; new air, sea, and spaceborne sensors; and enormous computing capability will enable us to measure, monitor, model, and finally begin to understand the earth as a system. This mission to planet earth could unlock the secrets of life itself . . . and could well prove to be the most important ever undertaken by humankind." Edelson called particular attention to the problems of water pollution in rivers, lakes, and streams; potential depletion of the ozone layer; growing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide; and a sharp increase in the levels of carbon monoxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. "Economic development over large portions of the earth have significantly changed the patterns of land and water use," he said. "The results have been mixed—while in some cases the benefits have been significant—we have paid a substantial price. We must study the land and learn to use it properly." To emphasize the importance of his proposal, Edelson said, "The U.S. National Academy of Sciences has reviewed the scientific merit of the global habitability concept and has found it to be both sound and worthy. The Academy is now participating in the broader efforts of the International Council of Scientific Unions in a program called Global Change. NASA and several other government agencies, notably the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation, also will participate." Edelson said he envisioned multifaceted investigations with oceanographers, meteorologists, biologists, and foresters studying the land, sea, atmosphere, and the air-sea and solar-terrestrial environments. "This is truly an international challenge," he concluded, "involving many scientific disciplines. Everyone on earth has a stake in our success." (NASA Release 85-142)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) planetary scientist Steve Ostro recently completed a five-year study of asteroids located in a belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, the JPL Universe reported, and then turned his attention to observing near-earth asteroids using the world's most powerful radar telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. "Some asteroids are among the most primitive planetesimals—the matter which accreted to form the solar system," Ostro said. "Asteroids are every bit as exciting as comets and potentially the most important objects in our solar system," he pointed out. Asteroids constituted an enormous and diverse population, ranging in size from a few hundred meters to 1,000 km, and varying in composition, spin rate, and shape. Most asteroids were in the belt Ostro had studied and were thought to be the remnants of a planet that failed to form due to Jupiter's gravitational influence. However, many other asteroids tumbled through space close to and sometimes across earth's orbit. Some scientists believed near-earth asteroids could be the nuclei of burned-out comets. "We really don't know what the nucleus of a comet is," Ostro said. "Comets might eventually lose all of their volatile compounds and then travel as asteroids." And scientists believed asteroids were some of the most primitive objects in the solar system. "We really have a spectrum of asteroids—some of the primitive material left from the solar nebula all the way up to those that are highly evolved," Ostro commented. "So asteroids are a laboratory for studying the evolution of planets and other planetary objects." No spacecraft had ever explored an asteroid, nor had scientists obtained an image of an asteroid's surface. That was why many planetary scientists believed JPL's proposed Comet Rendezvous/Asteroid Flyby mission was critical to understanding not only comets and asteroids, but also the history of the solar system. Another JPL planetary scientist, Eleanor Helin, recently discovered a nearearth asteroid with a 36-inch telescope located in Caussols, France. The asteroid, designated 1985-PA and the 22nd asteroid discovered by JPL researchers, had a small elongated orbit highly inclined to the ecliptic plane; scientists had discovered only two other near-earth asteroids with orbital inclinations higher than 1985-PA. Helin said the asteroid's inclination suggested it could have had a close encounter with Mars and been knocked into the steeply inclined orbit. At discovery the asteroid was moderately bright—measuring at 16.5 magnitude—and reddish, indicating the asteroid was probably a stony, silicaceous body. (JPL Universe, Nov 1/85, 1 and 2)
The Federal Aviation Administration has become increasingly concerned with the problem of inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 17hourperday schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, commercial jetliners are prone to numerous mechanical breakdowns. Although "modern jets are designed to fly despite even serious defects" and although U.S. carriers employ an army of airline mechanics repairing planes in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by the Federal Aviation Administration last summer for a "series of maintenancerelated transgressions." The National Transportation Safety Board was considering whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 31 people were killed, was caused by poor maintenance. Some airsafety experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious about safety; still, maintenance error ranked third behind pilot error and bad weather as a cause of fatal airline crashes. (WSJ, Jan 3/86) 0*January 6: NASA renamed two planetary missions scheduled for flight in 1988 and 1990. The mission to map the planet Venus, previously known as Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan spacecraft, attached to a CentaurG upper stage, would map the entire surface of the planet Venus for the first time, using a syntheticaperture radar instrument. The spacecraft would orbit the planet about once every three hours, coming as close as 250 kilometers from the The mission to map the planet Mars, previously known as the Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing productionline type of Earthorbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of its surface and to investigate the Martian climate, both present and past. The Magellan and Mars Observer projects were managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 861)
Technology developed by NASA for delivering a culture medium into the Martian soil was modified and implanted into a diabetic patient to serve as an insulin pump. Although other insulin pump implants have been used in the past, the spaceage pump not only had a longer life, but also was programmable after being implanted. (C Trib, Nov 20/89)
A Presidential panel report was to be released April 11, but details that aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by 1994, called for establishing a lunar base after the year 2000 for mining and production of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially0*useful asteroids, and a "network of spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian colony by the year 2027." (W Post, Mar 24/86; NY Times, Mar 25/86; CSM May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, selected the RCA Corporation and Orbital Sciences for negotiations leading to the award of contracts to build a spacecraft and upper stage booster for the Mars Observer Mission scheduled for launch in August 1990. The first in a series of proposed planetary observer programs, the Mars Observer would study the climate, atmosphere, and surface, using eight science instruments while in orbit around the planet a full Martian year, 687 Earth days. (NASA Release 8634; WSJ, Mar 26/86)
Negotiators concluded an agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union for cooperation in scientific exploration, primarily focusing on Mars research, said officials from NASA. The agreement, said other sources, made no commitment to a specific joint mission and could be signed at the upcoming summit meeting. (LA Times, Nov 11/86; CSM, Nov 11/86)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
NASA announced that Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, were studying concepts for designing and building a robot space vehicle for Mars exploration and samplereturn mission. If approved, the robotic space vehicle mission would be launched in 1998 and return with martian samples in 2001. The mission would precede human exploration of Mars. (NASA Release 8744)
NASA announced that it was studying four major initiatives to help determine the next major goal in space. The initiatives emerged from proposals by NASA's Strategic Planning Group and by a group headed by astronaut Dr. Sally Ride. The four initiatives were a considerably expanded study of Earth systems, an enhanced program of solar system exploration, establishment of a permanent scientific base on the moon, and human exploration of Mars preceded by untended missions. At the same time, the independent NASA Advisory Council recommended that exploration of Mars be the Nation's primary goal in space. (NASA Release 8736)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
NASA released a long awaited report of a task force, headed by Dr. Sally K. Ride, set up to assess NASA's future space policy in the wake of the Challenger disaster. The 63page report, delivered to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher the preceding week, urged that the United States build a permanent outpost on the Moon as the first step toward the ultimate goal of "exploring, prospecting, and settling Mars." Ride emphasized, however, that while settling Mars should be "our eventual goal," it should not be "our next goal." She recommended a strategy of "natural progression which leads step by step, in orderly, unhurried way, inexorably toward Mars." (LA Times, Aug 18/87; NY Times, Aug 18/87; W Post, Aug 18/87; W Times, Aug 18/87)
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA officials, who met in Moscow with their Soviet counterparts December 713 to discuss cooperation in space, said the Soviet Union planned to launch a spacecraft to Mars in 1992. In addition, the Soviets asked the United States to modify an American spacecraft to help relay data from another Soviet mission to Mars set for launching in 1994. (CSM, Dec 21/87; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 19/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that its Denverbased Space Systems group was one of the companies awardedh) 0*0*0*two NASA contracts to study and design spacecraft for a mission to Mars. A contract to study the techniques of robotic rover to traverse Martian surface was awarded by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA awarded a similar contract to the FMC Corporation of Santa Clara, California. The second contract was awarded by NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. It called on Martin Marietta to study braking methods that would allow a spacecraft to orbit Mars, enter its atmosphere, and descend to the surface of the planet. The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of Sunnyvale, California, was the other company awarded this study contract by the JSC. Martin Marietta was the company that designed, built, and tested the twin Viking spacecraft that landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 and 1977. (AVWK, Oct 26/87; B Sun, Oct 1/87, Rocky Mountain News, Oct 1/87)
Astronomer Carl Sagan told the Senate Commerce committee that a U.S. Mars mission would be the best cure for USA's "sagging" space program. According to Sagan, some 20,000 U.S. scientists have written to Congress urging a Mars mission. He recommended that NASA consider a possible joint mission with the Soviet Union, which had stepped up efforts to land on Mars. (NY Times, Feb 20/87; USA Today, Feb 20/87)
The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 1 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. Phobos 1 and Phobos 2, scheduled for0*launch the following week, would carry 100pound landers designed to analyze Phobos, the larger of the two moons of Mars. The 17milelong, potatoshaped Phobos and its smaller moon Deimos were thought to be asteroids captured by the gravitational field of Mars. Tracking support for the Soviet missions would be provided by NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN), whose primary mission would be to provide essential tracking data to permit landings on Phobos. The DSN would then shift to enabling a key scientific goal of the mission, to track Phobos very precisely. The 13,000pound Phobos spacecraft would carry more than two dozen robotic instruments on their 200day journey to Mars. (FBISSov88131, Jul 8/88; SSR 1988 058A; NASA Release 8887; UPI, Jul 8/88; NY Times, Jul 8/88; W Post, Jul 8/88;)
The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive "Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21st century. The release of the space policy had been delayed for several days because of a dispute among NASA, the President's Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of the commercial space initiative. The most controversial component of the initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), an orbiting, Shuttletended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by some members of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward the permanently crewtended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a "minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council's recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF from Space Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response to the Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statement recommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and a reconfiguration of the facility as a crewtended laboratory. A draft of the 39page commercial space initiative included a report by the National Security Council on national security implications of commercializing space, and legislative and administrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Among other key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicle industry and the establishment of limits on the amount of thirdparty liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. President Reagan also announced a program to develop the technologies needed to conduct humanassisted exploration of the solar system, including a mission to Mars. The program, labeled Project Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year 1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the Moon and Mars. (Presidential Directive on National Space Policy: Fact Sheet, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; NY Times, Jan 24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88)
Aviation Week Space Technology reported that the Soviet Union was assessing a major expansion of its untended Mars balloon/rover mission planned for 1994. Soviet officials were evaluating the possibility of significantly increasing the payload capability of its dual Mars orbiter/lander spacecraft by using aerobraking instead of rocket propulsion to enter Martian orbit. Aerobraking would enable the Soviets to dispense with rockets needed to decelerate the spacecraft sufficiently to enter Martian orbit, thereby making available an additional 3,300 pounds of payload An approved aerobraking maneuver would give the Soviets several new features to the balloon/rover mission, including: a 110pound subsatellite that would be released into Martian orbit to provide Mars gravity data; 10 "meteorbeacons" dropped on the surface that would return data on temperature, pressure, and wind velocity; 2 penetrators that would dive as deep as 16 feet into Mars' surface to return data on chemical composition, soil temperature, and water vapor content; a high resolution orbiter imaging system; and 2 Earthreturn vehicles, which would serve as test vehicles for a future automated soil sample return mission. AvWk, Feb 29/88)
NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
In an interview with the Washington Post, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev announced he would ask President Ronald Reagan to approve a joint SovietU.S. untended flight to Mars during the upcoming summit meeting in Moscow. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said Gorbachev's proposal for a Mars mission was recommended by Roald Z. Sagdeev, a Soviet space expert, as a symbol of superpower cooperation and a fruitful scientific and technological undertaking. "This is a field for cooperation that would be worthy of the Soviet and American people," Gorbachev said. "And I will make that proposal to President Reagan." (W Post, May 22/88; UPI, May 22/88; LA Times, May 22/88; B Sun, May 23; C Trib, May 23/88)
The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 2 spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facility. The Phobos 2 launch occurred less than a week after the launch of its companion spacecraft, Phobos 1. (FBISSov88134, Jul 13/88; SSR 1988 059A; W Post, Jul 13/88; W Times, Jul 13/88; LA Times, Jul 13/88; P Inq, Jul 13/88; C Trib, Jul 13/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
A guidance system malfunction caused the Soviet Mars observer spacecraft Phobos 1 to wobble out of control on its way toward Mars. The spacecraft stopped responding to commands from Soviet ground controllers and was rapidly losing power as it was unable to properly orient its solar panels toward the Sun. Phobos 2 continued to function normally. (UPI Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 9/88; W Times, Sep 9/88;
The Soviet Union's Phobos 2 Mars observer spacecraft entered into Martian orbit after firing its braking engine. In addition to various instruments for remote observation of Mars, Phobos 2 carried a lander module to be deposited on Mar's moon Phobos in early April. Phobos 1 became inoperative in August 1988 after a flight command error disoriented the spacecraft and misdirected its solar power arrays. The schedule for Photos 2 was moved forward by several days because of electrical problems that might endanger the mission. (FBISSOV89018, Jan 30/89; NY Times, Jan 30/89; LA Times, Jan 30/88; P Inq, Jan 30/89) During January: Using data from the orbiting Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), astronomers at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor discovered several dim galaxies in an area of the universe previously believed to be devoid of large celestial objects. The discovery of seven dim galaxies in the "Bootes Void" challenges accepted theories of the structure of the universe, which is believed to consist of filaments or "bubbles" of matter surrounding less dense areas of relatively empty space. The Michigan astronomers said they planned to continue studying IRAS' infrared data in hopes of finding more dim galaxies. (W Post, Jan 16/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
The Soviet Union announced that it would suspend occupation of the Mir Space Station for at least three months following the return to Earth of its current crew in late April. The reason given by the Soviets for the abandonment of the station, which had been continuously occupied since February 1987, was a delay in the manufacture of additional pressurized modules to be attached to the facility. Western experts were interpreting the temporary shutdown of the station as a possible costcutting measure and another setback to the Soviet space program following the loss of its twin Mars probes during the last several months. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine was also reporting that degradation of the station's solar power arrays was causing an electrical shortage. (NY Times, Apr 13/89; W Post, Apr 13/89, 15/89; LA Times, Apr 12/89; UPI, Apr 14/89; W Times, Apr 14/89; P Inq, Apr 19/89)
The Tass News Agency reported that the Soviet Phobos 2 spacecraft had begun to transmit high quality closeup images of the Mars moon Phobos. Phobos 2 was expected to dispatch two small robot landers to the surface of Phobos. (FBISSov89034; LA Times, Feb 23/89; W Post, Feb 27/89)
Soviet and western planetary scientists announced results from the Phobos 2 mission to Mars and the moon Phobos. Despite the premature loss of spacecraft transmissions because of a computer error, scientists revealed that valuable data had been obtained from the twomonth period preceding the loss of communications. The new findings showed that Mars has no magnetic field of its own and that incoming solar particles impact directly with the planet's ionosphere. Researchers hypothesized that the direct interaction between the solar wind and Mars' upper atmosphere may have been responsible for the depletion of the planet's original atmosphere, as ionospheric particles were gradually electrified by the incoming solar particles. The observations suggested that Mars may have had an atmosphere comparable to Earth's during the first billion years after planet formation, and that conditions for the appearance of life may have prevailed during that time. (NY Times, Oct 19/89)
In a severe setback for the Soviet Union's planetary exploration program, Soviet ground controllers lost stable radio contact with the untended Phobos 2 Mars probe, the Tass news agency reported. Phobos 2 stopped responding to ground control commands shortly after the craft was ordered to perform a delicate maneuver around the Mars moon Phobos. The maneuver was an initial step toward landing a probe on the Martian moon. During its transit toward Mars, Phobos 2 had experienced a failure of its main radio transmitter, forcing ground controllers to rely on a lowpower backup transmitter for all communications with the spacecraft. A companion spacecraft, Phobos 1, was also lost in September as a result of a ground control command error. The loss of communications with Phobos 2 was described by Western experts as having occurred at the "worst possible time" because few of the main mission objectives had yet been fulfilled. (FBISSov89059, Mar 29/89; UPI, Mar 28/89; AP, Mar 29/89; NY Times, Mar 29/89; W Post, Mar 29/89; W Times, Mar 29/89; P Inq, Mar 29/89)
A panel of experts convened by the National Academy of Sciences opined against a U.S./U.S.S.R. joint mission to Mars. The reason they cited was the lack of any experience in cooperation between the two and instead suggested a "graceful path of coordinated but independent explorations." (NY Times, Apr
President George Bush announced his plans for a cooperative effort with the Soviet Union in the humanassisted exploration of space, including voyages to the Moon and Mars. On a related note, Japan agreed to open its doors to foreignmade satellites by lifting its ban on government agencies and businesses that required them to buy only Japanese spacecraft. The Japanese law was created in order to help Japan's fledgling H&space industry. (NY Times, Apr 3/90; Apr 4/90; W Times; Apr 4/90; WSJ, Apr 4/90)
The Los Alamos National Laboratory urged NASA and the National Space Council to fund a multibillion dollar nuclear propulsion project that the group believed would reduce the Mars journey by half of the expected time. The proposed system would draw on a 1970s technology, Rover and Nerva programs, that circulated liquid hydrogen through a solid reactor core, thereby heating the hydrogen and creating thrust. The reactor engine could operate only in a vacuum, so testing it on Earth would prove difficult. The program, reported Space News, would likely receive substantial money. (Sp News, Feb 1925/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist and planned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90159) During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and several disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope was successfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented the most distant observations for which it was designed. However, it began unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry, astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographs from Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus in August, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the poles of the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravityassisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASA Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars. Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown of five months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. Two Department of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellite was retrieved. The Astro1 astronomy mission was also successfully completed, though not to every scientist's satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90160)
The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA's 1991 budget. The bill drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiative and cut $863.6 million from the planned Space Station. The measure was to go to a conference committee to iron out differences with the House appropriations bill before being sent to President George Bush. (WSJ Oct 4/90)
The White House began looking at other ideas for astronaut expeditions to the Moon and Mars besides those presented by NASA. The unprecedented move stemmed from NASA's cost and time estimate, $400 billion over 30 years for the project. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met in the previous week, and the National Research Council planned to review its own efforts to seek innovative ideas later in the week. NASA joined the search for sources of outside ideas as well. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for Aeronautics, called the move "highly appropriate" and added, "A lot of our ideas are good, but we certainly haven't covered the waterfront." NY Times, Jan 15/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory began testing its prototype for the Planetary Rover Navigation Test Bed Vehicle, a selfnavigating vehicle, about the size of a small car, for use in planned outposts on the Moon and Mars. (Daily News, Mar 13/90)
President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budget spending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satellite program to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Jan 29/90)
A letter from Lennard A. Fisk to Jacques Breton of the French space agency, the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales, revealed NASA's defunct plans for a U.S.French experiment that was to fly aboard a 1994 Soviet mission to measure the mineral content of Mars. The constraints recently imposed on the two countries was the reason given for cancellation of the project. W Post, Jun 18/90)
The House passed a $44 billion, 3year spending authorization bill for NASA that included establishment of a Moon base and a crewassisted expedition to Mars. The bill was to next go to a conference committee to work out differences with the Senate. (LA Times, Sep 29/90) During September: Astronaut Bruce McCandless retired from NASA and as Captain from the U.S. Navy. He helped develop the space agency's Manned Maneuvering Unit, a jetpowered backpack he was the first to wear during a Space Shuttle Challenger mission in February 1984. (W Times, Sep 12/90)
NASA's 1991 budget would be cut by $1 billion dollars, warned Congress. The Space Station, planned explorations of the Moon and Mars, and the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle were slated to be trimmed. Money for the Earth Observation System was earmarked for an increase. (Sp News, Mar 26Apr 1/90)
NASA responded to a request issued August 7 by the Office of Management and Budget asking for various Federal agencies to outline the effects of a $100 billion cut in the 1991 budget. The report submitted by NASA warned of a halt in Space Shuttle flights, suspended development of the Space Station, and delayed launch of the Mars Observer spacecraft. Although not expected, cuts acrosstheboard were a possible result of the GrammRudman deficit control law. (Sp News, Sep 913/90)
The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crewassisted missions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as a springboard to further research. Among their recommendations were greater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater emphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essential research concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs of building the Space Station was recommended as well; it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90 Sp News, Mar 1218/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company announced it has teamed up with Japanese architectural and engineering firm Shimizu Corporation to develop space exploration technologies for the proposed U.S. lunar/Mars initiative. Each company was to fund its own research, which included applying solar energy on the lunar surface to process materials into useful resources such as oxygen and creating closed system that would recycle most of the products needed for a lunar base or long-term expedition to Mars. (WSJ, Jul 12/91; LA Times, Jul 12/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an ingenious "Mars rover" that Soviet scientists want to send to Mars, was ready to be tested in the Mojave Desert. The desert was selected because it resembles the surface of Mars. (LA Times, Sep 13/91)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
A policy paper by the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington think tank, said defense and national security should be top priority for the US space program. Exploration of the moon and Mars should occur as a result of "market incentives" or interest of research organizations. Environmental research should be the province of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or the Department of Energy. If NASA's functions could be performed by other agencies, it should be closed. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA scientist Thomas J. Miller said NASA would establish a Nuclear Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center in early 1991 to develop nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. The Defense and Energy departments would join in this project; the NASA FY 1991 budget included about $1 million for nuclear propulsion development. Such propulsion could significantly reduce the time required from Earth to the moon or Mars. (AvWk, Jan 7/91)
Members of NASA's Project Viking, the group that put the first two spaceships on Mars 15 years previously, gathered at the Langley Research Center to commemorate that event on July 20, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, Jul 23/91)
Former astronaut Thomas Stafford, head of the Synthesis Group, told Congress it would not require much start-up money to set the U.S. on a course to Mars in the next century. He said funds could come in savings from the Department of Defense and Department of Energy budgets. (AP, Jul 10/91)
Exploring the Moon and Mars, a report by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment, was quoted. The report advocated the need for the United States to take the development and use of robotic technology more seriously if robots are to be used in a mission to Mars. Furthermore, the report projected that robots would be considerably cheaper than human exploration that NASA appeared to favor. (W Times, Aug 30/91)
The media reported a study contained in the British journal Nature, written by Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California, Christopher P. McKay, who also worked at Ames, and James F. Kasting, associate professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State University. The authors concluded it would be relatively easy to alter Mars' atmosphere to make it suitable for plants. Making the planet fit for people, however, would take about 100,000 years. (P Inq, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; C Trin, Aug 8/91; LA Times, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91)
The New York Times featured a lengthy article on robots that might be used in Martian exploration as well as in industrial activities. The designer of the principal robot under consideration was William L. Whittaker, a Carnegie-Mellon University professor. He demonstrated to government officials the Ambler, a 19-foot tall, six-legged robot that could step over high boulders and avoid holes. Named Attila, the robot has 25 motors and 150 sensors and develops its behavior from the interaction of dozens of independent processors. The robot represents a combination of electrical and mechanical engineering and computer science. In addition, Whittaker  demonstrated a computer and laser vision system that could steer a vehicle in a straight line. (NY Times, Apr 21/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
Former astronaut Michael Collins in his new book, Mission to Mars, said that he believed homosexuals and lesbians should be barred from space exploration because they would be likely to create interpersonal problems. NASA never considered sexual orientation in hiring. (AP, Apr 9/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, Apr 9/91)
Edward Stone, new director of the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which manages planetary missions for NASA, commented on present and future plans. He stated Magellan was sending back pictures of Venus; Galileo, on its way to explore Jupiter and its moons, would view the asteroid Gaspra in October; and Mars Observer was being prepared for a September 1992 launch. He spoke of the preliminary unmanned research necessary before any exploration of Mars could be undertaken. (CSM, Apr 15/91)
A cover story feature article on Mars dealt at length with NASA and the Bush Administration's plans for a "New Age of Exploration" that was intended to result in the "terraformation" of Mars. Life on Mars was described at length and as was planned launching of the Mars Observer. Various stages of terraformation were discussed, beginning with the first (2030-2080), which is to raise the mean temperature of the planet. The final stage (2150-2170) is conceived as having achieved a breathable medium, when Earth's vast investment would begin to pay off. (Life, Apr/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
The report of the committee appointed by the Bush Administration, headed by Norman R. Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, produced favorable comments from industry, according to the New York Times. Industrialists believe that the report showed greater realism about the space program, with its emphasis on unmanned flights and request for larger funding for NASA. In contrast to this complimentary review, Alcestis Oberg in Space News maintained that the Augustine panel's recommendations were irrelevant and a new agency was needed to pursue moon and Mars initiatives. (NY Times, Feb 7/91; SP News, Feb 4-10/91)
The Washington Post cited the Synthesis Group unpublished report stating that although a Space Station in Earth orbit was preferable, if such could not be built in timely fashion and with the desired capabilities, one could consider using the moon as a preparatory environment for a Mars mission. (W Post, May 25/91)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
An article by S. Fred Singer, guest scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the Smithsonian Institution, where he is completing a book on space policy, discussed the Space Station and the Stafford committee report. He advocated Martian moon exploration as NASA's best solution. (H Post, Jun 20/91; W Times, Jun 25/91)
The Space Propulsion newsletter commented on the report of the Stanford University professors who, together with Soviet aerospace engineers, projected that at a cost of $60 billion (about one-eighth NASA's estimate) a joint venture using the Soviet Energia heavy-lift rocket could land humans on Mars by 2012. In contrast, the Stafford Synthesis Group estimated 2014 as the earliest date to reach Mars, using lunar bases established in the interim. Some civilian space experts found flaws in the Stanford study. In line with comments on the Stanford report, the New York Times featured a lengthy article on the designer of the Energia rockets, currently visiting New York and seeking a U.S. buyer for the rocket. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91; NY Times, Jul 9/91)
NASA announced that scientists and engineers at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, successfully tested the mini-rover Rocky III in the Avawatz Mountains south of Death Valley. The mini-rover, weighing 52 pounds, was designed to be used on Mars. (NASA Release 91-153; Bus Wk, Sep 9/91)
NASA announced that it had signed an agreement with the National Science Foundation (NSF) by which the two organizations would use Antarctica as a testing site to prepare for future missions to the Moon and Mars. The agreement would enable NASA to benefit from NSF's 33 years of experience in scientific research in the harsh Antarctic environment. Scientists believe that Antarctica's climate, terrain, temperature, and isolation provide an environment on Earth that most closely parallels the conditions of isolation and stress to be faced on long-duration human missions in space. (NASA Release 91-13)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced a nationwide search for a senior official to direct NASA's activities to send people to the Moon and to explore Mars. This announcement represented an implementation of a recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program to create a new Office of Exploration under an Associate Administrator. (NASA Release 91-24)
The New York Times cited the recent issue of Nature with articles by NASA scientists and others on the possibility of using advanced technologies to make Mars's environment more terrestrial and thus hospitable to humans. A May issue of Life magazine was also cited as evidence of growing scientific interest in the potential habitability of Mars. Nevertheless, serious obstacles remained, in addition to the tremendous costs that would be involved. (NYT, Oct 1/91)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope enabled the most detailed images of Mars ever taken. Scientists said the telescope made possible a long-term program to monitor seasonal climate and surface changes on Mars that previously had been impossible. According to the Space Telescope Institute in Baltimore, the images revealed Martian features as small as 31 miles across. (W Post, Mar 18/91; UPI, Mar 18/91; CSM, Mar 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
The media reported that a private study by American scientists concluded that an international manned mission to Mars could be done within 21 years for less than $60 billion. These figures represented faster and cheaper estimates than those of a proposed United States-only project. (USA Today, Jun 27/91; UPI, Jun 27/91; AP, Jun 27/91; H Post, Jun 30/91)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
The flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, carrying seven astronauts from three countries, was the second Shuttle mission in a row to carry an array of life science experiments focusing on the effects of space travel on humans and other organisms, with an eye toward preparing to send astronauts on interplanetary flights, specifically, NASA's proposed manned mission to Mars. The astronauts were split 12-hour work shifts so experiments including a battery of medical tests could be conducted non-stop. Researchers hoped to learn more about space motion sickness and back pain, common ailments among astronauts in orbit. Experiments were also to be conducted in the cargo bay to measure effects of zero gravity, fertilization of eggs, and cartilage formation in various organisms. The Shuttle would also study the effect of bombardment by high-energy cosmic rays on living tissue. (B Sun, Jan 22/92; NY Times, Jan 23/92)
NASA announced the selection of 33 participating scientists to take part in a wide range of investigations on the Mars Observer mission, planned for launch September 16, 1992. These scientists would  be added to the current science teams in October 1992 to increase the range of studies planned for the 2-year global mapping mission. Besides representing U.S. universities and research centers, the newly selected group of participating scientists included four individuals from the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Six scientists from Austria, the United Kingdom, France and Germany were already involved in the mission, and a group of 10 participating scientists from Russia were to be added later this year. (NASA Release 92-45)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
NASA sent its remote-controlled robot named "Dante" to Antarctica, where it was scheduled to explore the active volcano Erebus. The $2 million mission was intended to use Antarctica to test possible Mars-bound technology because the harsh climate is as close to that of Mars as occurs naturally on Earth. Upcoming U.S. missions to Mars were expected to land small robots programmed to look around, take samples, and perhaps begin mapping the planet, all tasks "Dante" would test in Antarctica.  (WSJ, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
The launch date of Mars Observer was rescheduled from September 16 to 25 in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew. Although the hurricane passed well south of Cape Canaveral, the craft was nonetheless removed from the launch pad for protection. It required cleaning before it could be repositioned for launch, necessitating launch postponement. (NASA Release Launch Advisory, Sept 2/92; W Post, Sept 4/92; AP Sept 3/92)
Robotics engineers and scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, planned to demonstrate a new planetary lander and robotic rover at a specially designed test site near the laboratory. "Rocky IV," a prototype of a mini-rover, might be launched to Mars in 1996 as part of the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Pathfinder mission. The 16.5-pound testbed would let NASA researchers study how to integrate planetary lander functions and science instruments under conditions approximately those of a Mars mission. (NASA Release 92-93)
Large landslides have been identified on Venus by Magellan Project scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. They are similar to landslides that have been known for some time to occur on Earth and Mars, a project spokesman said. (NASA Release 92-75)
NASA Administration Daniel Goldin said President Bush's goal of a manned flight to Mars by 2019 was unrealistic because it would take longer to develop the spaceship and fly the robotic missions that must precede humans. (USA Today, Apr 3/92)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
Dr. Lynn Wiley, an obstetrician who had worked with NASA since the early 1980s, reported that because of plans for long-term missions in space, the question of sex and reproduction had become very important issues. Men and women could be teamed in lunar colonization efforts planned after the turn of the century and in trips to Mars, which could take two to three years for a round trip. Dr. Stewart Whitman of the Space Settlement Studies Program at Niagara University agreed that research was "essential if males and females are going to be on long-term missions together." But Barbara Shwartz, a spokeswoman for the Johnson Space Shuttle Center, said Shuttle sex is not feasible because there is no "privacy" and stressed that NASA plans no sexual experiments involving humans. (W Times, Feb 28/92; Huntsville Times, Feb 20/92; Birmingham News, Feb 20/92; NY Times, Feb 11/92)
Dr. Everett Gibson of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, Dr. Haraldur Karlsson, and scientists at the University of Chicago analyzed drops of water extracted from several meteorites believed to have come from Mars and concluded that the oxygen isotopes in the water were extraterrestrial. Photographs returned to Earth from the Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft show features that suggest Mars once may have had a water-rich atmosphere and flowing water on its surface. Through the years, several meteorites have been collected on Earth that scientists have identified as Martian by comparing them to information gleaned by the Viking spacecraft. Six of these meteorites were used in the water extraction procedure. Findings from the work completed by the team may answer some questions about the processes operating in the solar system. (NASA Release 92-35)
NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the U. S. Geological Survey in a published paper said that Mars was once very active tectonically and may still be shaken by quakes daily. The scientists said that although the planet is less seismically active than the earth, their studies, based on Viking photos, predict that about two marsquakes of magnitude five or greater occur per year, and about a hundred quakes of magnitude three or greater occur per year. (NASA Release 92-198; LA Times, Nov 6/92; W Times, Nov 7/92; P Inq, Nov 26/92)
In an interview in Huntsville, Alabama, Vice-Presidential candidate Al Gore said that a Clinton administration would support a return to the moon and Mars but would not commit major resources to such efforts. Given other current NASA priorities, Gore said the longer-range mission to Mars "must be pursued according to a sensible timetable." (Htsvl Tms, Sept 11/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
Air Force officials employed a revised and more accurate computer model of wind direction and speed in the launch of the Mars Observer. The officials insisted on ideal weather conditions before allowing the launch because of concerns that a plume of harmful nitrogen tetroxide could drift over nearby populated areas should the Titan 3 rocket explode within the first 20 to 30 seconds of flight. The new computer model allows the Martin Marietta-built Titan family of rockets to continue as launch vehicles, although the modelling may make it more difficult to launch on time. (Fla Today, Oct 4/92)
According to Michael Griffin, NASA's associate administrator for exploration, NASA needs $3 billion annually to conduct a program of human exploration of the moon and Mars. Those funds would have to come from sacrificing other space projects if NASA's overall budget could not be increased, Griffin said. (Space News, Apr 13/92)
Arthur C. Clark, the legendary science-fiction writer, whose accomplishments include numerous literary awards, academic honors, and more than 70 written works, including "2001: A Space Odyssey," declared that his latest personal odyssey was contemplating the feastability of "colonizing" and "farming" on Mars. "Mars is the next frontier, what the Wild West was, what America was 500 years ago...Mars is where the action is going to be in the next thousand years," declared Clark. (LA Times, Jan 24/92)
Scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation detailed experimental projects scheduled to be undertaken in the winter in Antarctica. The Antarctic Space Analog Program was to use the harsh, frigid conditions of the Antarctic continent to test technology and techniques for future missions to the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-200)
It was reported that Martin Marietta Corporation had abandoned the six-year venture into the commercial satellite launching business that it started in the summer of 1986, seven months after the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. The original plan was to build 20 Titan rockets for commercial launches. That number was reduced to 12, and the company charged $90 million to fourth-quarter earnings in 1988 for a reserve to help finance the launch venture. Martin eventually built only four commercial Titans, the last of which was scheduled for launch in September 1992, carrying a payload to map the surface of Mars and look for possible landing sites on that planet. (B Sun, May 8/92)
The Association of Space Explorers 8th Planetary Congress opened at Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. It was attended by the largest group of astronauts and cosmonauts ever assembled, with over 100 international space flyers, representing 19 nations, in attendance. The congress opened with remarks by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and was concerned mainly with discussions about an international mission to Mars. Goldin also mentioned the practical applications of NASA's technology innovations since the 1960s. He identified CAT scans, laser surgery, and intensive care units as having had their genesis in the space program. "New products, new industries, and new jobs come through NASA research," Goldin said. (NASA Note to Editors: N92-75; W Times, Aug 31/92)
NASA delivered a report to the U.S. Senate outlining a shift in emphasis towards smaller, lower cost and more frequent planetary missions. The Small Planetary Mission Plan, which was requested by the Senate Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD and Independent Agencies chaired by Senator Barbara Mikulski, described two proposed missions that NASA had selected for preliminary studies leading to launches in 1996 and 1998. The two missions were the Mars Environmental Survey Pathfinder and the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous. (NASA Release 92-63)
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft was seriously contaminated with metal filings, paint chips, and other trash and could not be launched until it had been cleaned. The contamination may have been introduced when technicians tried to protect the spacecraft from possible damage from Hurricane Andrew. Originally scheduled for launch on September 16, NASA officials estimated a postponement of at least 10 days or possibly two weeks in the launch date. (NY Times, Aug 28/92; AP, Aug 28/92; W Post, Aug 29/92; The Sun, Aug 29/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
David A. Paige of the University of California at Los Angeles reexamined the thermodynamics of ice under Martian conditions and concluded that there could be some ground-ice deposits just a few feet below the surface and that "these deposits could be valuable resource for human exploration." (W Post, Mar 9/92)
The Senate, defying veto threats by the White House, adopted an $6.3 billion savings package that demanded deep cuts in President Bush's military and space priorities, including the Strategic Defense Initiative. Approved 61-38, the measure would take $1.3 billion from prior appropriations for SDI and $1 billion from production funds for the B-2 bomber. The cuts from the space program, though much smaller, dealt a further blow to exploration of Mars, and they would kill an on-going project to design a high-speed aircraft capable of orbiting into space after launch from a conventional runway. (WSJ, May 7/92)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
NASA scientists announced that they would use "telepresence" technology in the Antarctic this fall to see if life that existed millions of years ago on Earth could provide clues about organisms that once may have lived on Mars. A team was scheduled to travel to Antarctica in October to study sediment on the bottom of ice-covered Lake Hoare on Ross Island. (NASA Release 92-147)
The eight-legged rappeling robot Dante was placed in position on the rim of the Antarctic volcano Mt. Erebus in preparation for its exploration of the interior of the crater and its lava lake. NASA and the National Science Foundation hoped that the Dante project would help develop technology and telecommunications capabilities that NASA could use in future explorations of the Moon or Mars or in ongoing research activities in the Antarctic. (NASA Dante Advisor #3; UPI, Dec 28/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 31/92)
If Japan follows through on plans to launch a probe toward Mars in 1996, it will become the third nation to explore the red planet, following the U.S. and Russia. Budgeted at $96.8 million, the 550-pound Japanese probe has been dubbed Planet B. It would begin to orbit Mars by October 1997, according to Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Science, which is planning the project. (Parade Magazine, Mar 3/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
Scientists prepared to decide whether Dante, a walking robot, would make a descent next month into an active Antarctic volcano. The project had two goals: testing the prototype robot for possible Mars missions, and getting a rare look at the minerals and gases ejected by the 12,000-foot icebound volcano. Scientists also wanted to learn about the permanent lava lake that bubbles and boils on the crater's floor. NASA, along with the National Science Foundation, was funding the $2 million project. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 29/92; P Inq, Nov 18/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
NASA said that its mission to send a robot into an Antarctic volcano had opened the way for exploration of the moon and Mars. Despite the fact that the mission had to be aborted, David Lavery, director of the Dante project, noted that the objectives of controlling the robot from afar and testing sophisticated hardware in a harsh environment had been met.
Scientists failed in a new attempt to get the Mars Observer spacecraft to re-establish contact with Earth, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said. The spacecraft did not respond to commands to turn on its primary telecommunications equipment. A proposal to try to restart the Observer's central computer was rejected because it was thought to pose an unnecessary risk to telecommunications with other spacecraft. (RTw, Aug 30/93; W Post, Aug 31/93; AP, Aug 31/93l CSM, Sept 1/93)
The Mars Observer failed to call Earth on August 25, when a five-day timer should have had it send an emergency signal, lessening hopes that the mission could be salvaged. Observer was the latest reminder of the growing problems of the U.S. space program.  The Observer failure added to a string of expensive space failures: the loss earlier in August of a $500-million spy satellite, then of a $67-million weather satellite, and a series of mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other planetary probes.
NASA said that the Mars Observer spacecraft fired four of its 24 thrusters as a means of adjusting its course so it could begin orbiting Mars on August 24. This was the third correction maneuver since the spacecraft was launched September 25 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (APn, Mar 18/93)
NASA announced that the Galileo spacecraft had successfully explored the asteroid Ida located between Mars and Jupiter. Although hampered by a jammed main antenna, Galileo zoomed around 1,491 miles from Ida and took all but three of 21 planned photographs.  The three missing photos were the longest-distance photos and unimportant compared with the close-ups. The first photos were not scheduled to arrive at Earth for another two months; the others were to be transmitted in the spring of 1994.  (AP, Aug 28/93; RTw, Aug 28/93; USA Today, Aug 30/93; NY Times, Aug 29/93
Several articles in the media discussed the planet Mars. An article in the Christian Science Monitor discussed Mars exploration, noting that the arrival of the Mars Observer spacecraft on Mars was just the beginning of a new saga of planetary exploration.
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft had returned to normal operations after its main antenna failed to point at Earth for the third time in about four months. Engineers were fairly certain that the glitch had been caused by a computer-programming problem. (AP, May 3/93; W Times, May 4/93)
At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
According to an article in the Washington Times, scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation were using the Antarctica as a model for Mars in the Antarctic Space Analog Program. The program used the harsh Antarctica terrain to test technology and techniques that might work on Mars. Sophisticated robots, already being used in Antarctica, would pave the way for human exploration of Mars. A spaceflight may carry a small robot to Mars as early as 1997. (W Times, Apr 4/93)
Mars Observer was scheduled to zoom into orbit around Mars next week, as the United States returned to Martian skies for the first time in 17 years. Mars Observer, which was launched from Florida on September 25, was scheduled to reach Mars on August 24. After maneuvering a near-polar orbit, it was scheduled to turn on its instruments and make one complete photographic map of the planet during a month-long test. It was scheduled to formally start its exploration on December 16. (P Inq, Aug 19/93)
Benson Edward Gammon, 76, a retired research scientist with NASA, died on February 24. Mr. Gammon worked with NASA and its predecessor agencies for 32 years. He served as chief of research and technology in the office of plans and program evaluation, where he worked on the proposal for a manned flight to Mars. (W Post, Feb 26/93)
French scientists, led by Dr. Jacques Laskar of the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris, writing in the journal Nature, and Dr. Jack Wisdom, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writing in the journal Science, described the implications of chaos in the solar system. New computer simulations have revealed that over great spans of time, small gravitational disturbances from neighboring planets, combined with their own wobbly rotations, can cause significant fluctuations in the orbits and orientations of the planets, leading to, for example, great temperature fluctuations. Mars, for example, is still undergoing great variations. According to scientists, Earth may be spared such variations because of the stabilizing influence of the moon, the only large satellite in the inner solar system. (NY Times, Mar 2/93; Time, Mar 8/93)
NASA announced that NASA scientists were to spend October and November in Antarctica testing "telepresence technology" that might be used in the future to explore Mars. The research expedition was sponsored by a joint NASA-National Science Foundation Antarctic Space Analog Program and funded for NASA by the Offices of Space Science and Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-178; LA Times, Oct 3/93; UPI, Oct 4/93)
NASA's Mars Observer spacecraft returned its first image of Mars taken last week when the spacecraft was 3.6 million miles from the red planet.  Mars Observer was to orbit Mars on August 24, and global mapping operations were scheduled to begin December 16. (NASA Note to Editors N93-43)
Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)
Writing in the Baltimore Sun, Gwynne Dyer, syndicated columnist, described the plan for "terraforming" Mars held by a group of scientists loosely called "The Mars underground."  One of the leaders of the group was Christopher McKay of NASA's Ames Research Center in California.
The Itar-Tass news agency reported that the United States and Russia planned a joint mission to Mars in October of 1994. According to the report, the Russian Space Agency and NASA signed an agreement on the Mars-94 project late last year. Scientific equipment on board a Russian space craft would include two small landers with probes for analyzing the Martian surface and atmosphere. The oxidization capability of the Martian soil would also be measured, Tass said. (RTw, Apr 4/93)
A NASA spokesman announced that the Mars observer spacecraft had spent eight days pointing the wrong direction but engineers thought that they now had the problem under control. It was the Observer's fourth such malfunction. Mars Observer was scheduled to go into elliptical orbit around Mars on August 24. (AP, May 18/93)
UPI reported that a solar-powered drill used to bore into icecaps on Earth could be used on a mission to Mars to collect ice samples from Mar's north pole. The drill would sample a core about three feet deep. The drill was scheduled to be used this summer to sample two ice caps in the Peruvian Andes. (UPI, June 6/93)
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) were cooperating on an experiment that involved three spaceships "listening" for passing gravitational waves. The spacecraft, now travelling to separate destinations in the solar system, were  NASA's Mars Observer, Galileo, and the ERS's Ulysses spacecraft.
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPLA), Pasadena, California, announced the selection of two major aerospace companies as the associate contractors for the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network Phase B1 study and MESUIR Pathfinder support effort.  The companies were Hughes Aircraft Company; Hughes Spacecraft & Communications , El Segundo, California; and Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division, Downey, California.  (NASA Release C93-r)
NASA officials said that the Mars Observer mission could be a total loss if ground controllers failed to re-establish contact with the probe in time for the scheduled start of the orbit on August 24. Engineers suspected that a faulty flight clock aboard the craft might have caused communications to cease. New computer commands were sent telling Mars Observer to switch to a backup clock.  However the commands failed to restore contact with the spacecraft, suggesting that the clock theory was wrong. If contact could not be restarted, controllers would have no way of receiving scientific data or even confirming if the Mars Observer probe had made it into orbit. The Mars Observer project was the first U.S. Mission to Mars in 17 years; it was designed to pave the way for a new generation of international planetary exploration centered on Mars.
Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)
House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)
According to  Luke Dones, a visiting Assistant Research Astronomer at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, the Earth's rotation rate may be caused by early collisions with rocks as large as Mars. Without the large impacts, the Earth would rotate only every 200 hours instead of the 24 hours it rotates today, said Dones. (NASA Release 93-012; AP, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Jan 19/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the establishment of a study team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to explore possibilities for a return mission to Mars to recover some of the scientific objectives of the Mars Observer mission, if communications with that spacecraft could not be reestablished. (NASA Release 93-157; UPI, Sep 1/93; AP, Sep 1/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and a team based at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages most planetary flights, have examined a variety of options for a new mission to Mars to achieve the scientific goals of the lost Mars Observer at less cost.  The flight would be launched no earlier than 1996. (W Post, Nov 13/93)
Some scientists, led by former CBS News science adviser Richard C. Hoagland, accused NASA of not doing enough to investigate surface features that may be signs of intelligent life. The critics say that computer-enhanced photographs taken by the 1976 Viking Mars mission show objects on the Cydonia Plain that they believe were left by an extraterrestrial civilization.  Mr. Hoagland said a "rogue group in NASA" might have sabotaged the Mars Observer mission to suppress information about the Cydonia Plain structures. NASA officials denied the charge.  (APn, Aug 24/93; LA Times, August 25/93; Weekly World, Sept 14/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
NASA announced the formation of an International Mars Exploration Working Group. In addition to NASA, members included the European Space Agency, the Russian Space Research Institute, the Italian Space Agency, the German Space Agency, and the French Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. The group would focus on producing an international strategy for the exploration of Mars after the year 2000. (NASA Release 93-87)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that they had signed a contract to fly two U.S. Mars Oxident Experiment (MOX) instruments on the Russian Mars '94 Mission. The contract had a potential value of $1.5 million. The Mars '94 Mission, scheduled to be launched in November 1994, would deploy small landing stations and penetrators and carry instruments to study the surface and atmosphere of Mars. (NASA Release 93-62)
George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)
Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)
Glenn Cunningham, manager of the new program at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said NASA planned a new program of Mars exploration. The program was to begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996. Launchings were to occur every 25 months over the next 10 years, using relatively low-cost spacecraft. Funds in the current NASA budget were to go for designing the first of the orbiting craft, the Mars Surveyor. Another Mars program, the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR), was to establish a seismic network on Mars. The program was to begin with the already authorized $175 million Pathfinder mission. (NY Times, Feb 15/94; CSM, Feb 16/94)
Rene Pellat, head of the French space organization CNES, said that both the Mars 94 and Mars 96 proposed Russian missions with large international participation were to be postponed by at least two years because of Russia's economic difficulties. (W Times, May 15/94)
NASA ground controllers were to send final commands to the Magellan space probe on October 7 to send it crashing to its death in the atmosphere of Venus on October 11. The robot had been in a highly successful Venus orbit since 1990 but its solar panels were failing and its gyroscopes worn out. On October 12 NASA announced that Magellan was expected to burn up within two days. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, declared Magellan dead on October 12. However, Magellan lasted long enough to radio back telemetry showing how much rocket power would be required to offset the increasing atmospheric turbulence, which was useful data for future designers seeking to use the atmosphere of Mars for orbit purposes. (LA Times, Oct 6/94; AP, Oct 6/94; USA Today, Oct 7/94; C Trib, Oct 9/94; W Post, Oct 10/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 11/94; Reuters, Oct 11/94; W Times, Oct 12/94; LA Times, Oct 12/94; CSM, Oct 12/94; NASA Release 94-170; Fla Today, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 12/94; W Post, Oct 13/94; NY Times, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
NASA researchers were to go underground on April 11 in Lechuguilla Cave in Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico to try to replicate conditions on Mars. NASA engineer Larry Lemke was mainly interested in the technology aspect of developing robots to collect the microorganisms in Lechuguilla if it proved a useful source. NASA planetary scientist Chris McKay and contract microbiologist Penny Boston wanted to see if microorganisms living inside Lechuguilla could reveal life that might exist on Mars. Bacteria in the cave get their energy from sulfur and iron, believed to be two main ingredients of Mars's soil. Samples taken during the five-day underground stay that ended on April 16 were to be analyzed at the U.S. Geological Survey laboratory in Denver, a NASA-contracted laboratory in Boulder, Colorado, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. (AP, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 13/94; AP, Apr 18/94)
Mars Pathfinder, the first of NASA's Discovery missions, was beginning construction in preparation for launch in two years' time. Anthony J. Spear, project manager for the Mars Pathfinder project at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, said fabrication of the cruise portion's structure had begun; final assembly of the spacecraft was to begin in June 1995. Testing of various kinds would follow with the spacecraft being shipped to Cape Canaveral for launch by early September 1996. The primary goal was an engineering demonstration of a low-cost Martian landing system. (AvWk, Dec 5/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced receipt of a report investigating the loss of the Mars Observer mission.
NASA announced a new Mars exploration program in fiscal year 1995 involving the development of a small Mars Surveyor orbiter. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, was to manage the program, which was designed to study the surface of Mars. (NASA Release 94-20)
Eric Glomboske, an 11th grader at Highland High School, was one of 10 regional winners in the NASA-sponsored Space Science Student Involvement Program. To compete, Eric designed, planned, and mapped out a human journey to Mars. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 25/94)
A feature article described repairs executed by NASA astronauts, and particularly board-certified surgeon Story Musgrave, to the Hubble Telescope. The Hubble now could spot the light of a firefly 8,500 miles away. James Crocker, an engineer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, proposed Hubble's "eyeglasses," called COSTAR (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement); other equipment also was added. Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, Apr 94)
A flight plan change seven months before the Mars Observer launch may have caused the craft's failure. Its propellant tanks were pressurized not five days after launch but eleven months into the flight as it reached Mars, thereby apparently causing a catastrophic rupture in a fuel line that spun the craft out of control. Pressuration, needed to fire the braking rockets to put the craft into orbit around Mars, involves opening previously closed valves and releasing high-pressure helium to squeeze the hydrazine fuel and nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer from separate tanks to mix and ignite. Minute amounts of condensed oxidizer possibly reached the hydrazine fuel, ignited, and ruptured the pipes, which released propellant into space and caused the uncontrolled spin. Peter G. Wilhelm, Director of the Naval Center for Space Technology, a panel member who focused on the propulsion system, said that the team debated the change extensively, and JPL project manager Glenn E. Cunningham stated that the team considered and rejected an option to change valves as too costly and slow, and a procedure that might have meant missing the 1992 launch window, thus requiring a two-year launch delay. (W Post, Jan 10/94)
Russian and U.S. Mars mission planners were meeting the week of June 6 at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to define how the two countries could best cooperate in a proposed multinational space exploration program to be called "Mars Together." France, Germany, and Italy were also considering joining the new 1998 mission to Mars. The new mission resulted from Russia's delay in its originally proposed "Mars 94" and "Mars 96" flights. The idea would be to combine major technological elements on which individual nations were already working. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)
The Mars Observer spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. NASA officials reported the probable cause of communication loss as a rupture in the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine--MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have put the craft in a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. Goldin asked Dr. Wes Huntress, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science, to conduct a thorough review of the findings and recommendations and to report back in the near future on corrective actions to be taken by NASA. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
A feature article described ways in which Pittsburgh was becoming "Robot City, USA." One of the reasons was NASA's $2.5 million grant in May 1994 to Carnegie Mellon University's Robotics Institute to establish an engineering consortium that would transfer robotics technology to U.S. industry. Other robotic firms also came to Pittsburgh recently. Other than industrial uses for robots, NASA wants to use robots to explore Mars and get instruments on the planet's surface. David Pahnos, director of the new NASA-CMU consortium, saw an opportunity for Pittsburgh to become a technical center that pushed technology forward. (CSM, Jun 8/94)
NASA announced that Jack Farmer, a paleontologist and geologist at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a strategy to search for microfossils on the planet Mars. Farmer presented his strategy, which was based on principles of Precambrian paleontology, at the Geological Society Meeting of America in San Bernardino, California. (NASA Release 94-49)
The group of scientists from Phillips Rocket Laboratory investigating the disappearance of the Mars Observer more than one year ago concluded the probable cause of the accident. Phillips aeronautical engineer and project manager said the likely cause was failure of a small pyro valve that allowed propellants to mix. This in turn could cause the rupture of a tube and result in the Observer tumbling out of control. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94)
Russian cosmonaut Krikalev aboard Discovery exchanged greetings with Russian cosmonauts aboard Space Station Mir. The Soviet cosmonaut also got through by ham radio to students in Mars, Pennsylvania. (AP, Feb 8/94; UP, Feb 8/94; Reuters, Feb 8/94; W Times, Feb 9/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would not claim a $21.3 million on-orbit performance fee and would return $17 million already received because of the failure of the Mars Observer craft. The total cost of the craft and its instrument cargo was $1 billion. Referring to the presumed explosion caused by a change in the flight plan with an eleven-month delay in pressurizing a system, discussed in the four-volume report but omitted in news media interviews, Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory and leader of the panel investigating the failure, said that "had J.P.L. been more closely involved with Martin Marietta in the development of the spacecraft, it is conceivable this issue would have been identified earlier." (NY Times, Jan 11/94; W Post, Jan 11/94)
NASA announced the selection of an ancient flood plain on Mars as the landing site for the 1997 mission of Mars Pathfinder, one of the first in a new generation of small, low-cost aircraft. The Pathfinder was scheduled to arrive at Mars on July 4, 1997. (NASA Release 94-149)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin addressed the University of Arizona's Open Sciences Forum at which professors presented overviews of their space-related work. He assured the faculty and students that NASA would continue to fund University of Arizona research projects such as the $3.6 billion Cassini Saturn probe. He urged scientists to simplify the way in which they discuss their experiments so that lay people would understand them and thus increase scientific awareness. Stressing the concept that "small is better," he mentioned the development of robots that may one day extract fuel from the moon or Mars, thus reducing the amount of propellant that would need to be stored on moon- or Mars-bound spacecraft. (Tucson Citizen, Apr 9/94)
In an address to business executives, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also spoke of NASA's goal of putting a man on Mars. With the proper technical groundwork and economic and political conditions, Goldin felt 10 years was a reasonable time frame for accomplishing this. The plan was for innovative technology to cut the cost, such as drawing methane from Mars to use as fuel for the return trip, thus cutting the space vehicle's size in half. Another part of NASA's vision was to learn how to work together with other countries in space programs. (Reuters, Feb 15/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report on the Mars mission to NASA. The spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. Despite lack of any communication with the craft, the board found that the probable cause of the loss of communication was a rupture of the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine - MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have caused the craft to enter a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. The board discussed a number of other concerns of a procedural nature. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
Remotely controlled tests by Ames Research Center of a modified Russian planetary rover, Marsokhod, are planned for February 13-18 in a volcanic area that resembles the surfaces of the Moon and Mars. The test site is in Kilauea Volcano�s summit caldera and southwest rift zone on the island of Hawaii. Marsokhod, which combines the Russian rover chassis with western avionics, is a sophisticated prototype of a long-distance rover. (NASA Release 95-14)
NASA�s telescope on its Kuiper Airborne Laboratory has begun to examine the chemical composition of Mercury, which is the least understood of the four terrestrial planets-Earth, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. Flying at 41,000 feet, the specially outfitted C-141 military transport plane is able to detect invisible infrared radiation that is refracted and reflected by the planet�s surface rocks. While nothing startling was immediately about the planet�s surface, weeks or months of analysis are likely to turn up new information about Mercury. (NY Times, May 16/95; Fla Today, Jul, 9/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope serves as an interplanetary weather satellite for Mars and Venus. It shows that the Martian climate has changed since Viking visited Mars in the mid-1970s. The planet is now cooler, clearer, and drier. Venus continues to recover from an intense shower of sulfuric �acid rain� triggered by a suspected volcanic eruption in the late 1970s. Such knowledge of weather is critical to the planning of future missions to these planets. They also make natural laboratories for testing computer models that will lead to a general theory of the behavior of planetary atmospheres. The Hubble Space Telescope is a project of international cooperation between NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA). (NASA Release 95-31; Fla Today, May 14/95; AvWk, Mar 27/95; Science, Mar 31/95)
The 1,700 lb., $1.7 million robot Dante II, built by Carnegie Mellon University scientists, took gas samples and video pictures of the Spurr volcano in Alaska. The research is aimed at proving that cheap robots can be used on dangerous missions on Mars. (Bus Wk, Jan 9/95)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory selected Lockheed Martin Astronautics to develop two small spacecraft that will explore Mars in 1998. They will be half the weight and cost of the 1996 Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Pathfinder. Their low weights of the new orbiter and lander will allow them to be launched on a new launch vehicle called the Med-Lite, which is being developed by McDonnell Douglas. (NASA Releases 95-30 & 196; Space News, Mar 27/95)
The Mars robot, that will land around July 4, 1997, will be named after �Sojourner� Truth, who advocated the right for all people to be free. (NASA Release 95-112; NY Times, Jul 16/95; AP, Jul 14/95)
Four more missions have been selected for NASA�s Discovery program. Formally started in NASA�s FY 1994 budget it features small planetary exploration spacecraft with focused science goals that can be built in about 36 months for about $150 million. Lunar Prospector was judged mature enough to proceed, while missions to study the Sun, Venus, and a comet (mission Stardust) were selected for further detailed study. Two missions are already under development in the Discovery program: the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission(which would orbit the asteroid Eros in 1999(and the Mars Pathfinder, which would land on Mars in 1997. (NASA Releases 95-19, 94, 112 & 209; W Post, Mar 2/95, May 15/95; Fla Today, Nov 5/95; AP, Mar 5/95 & Nov 27/95; AvWk, Mar 6/95 & Dec 11/95; Science, Mar 10/95)
A 600 pound, solar power aircraft named Pathfinder set a new altitude record of 50,500 feet. The remotely-controlled vehicle is being evaluated by NASA and industry for environmental sampling missions. (NASA Release 95-152; AvWk, Sep 18/95 & Sep 25/95)
NASA released images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, revealing a dust storm on Mars nearly the size of the state of Texas. The storm appeared in the pictures of the planet as a 600- mile-long (965-kilometer-long), salmon-colored patch. Scientists believed this was the first time that one of the huge storms had neared the planet’s northern polar ice cap.(Reuters, “Hubble Shows Texas-Size Dust Storm on Mars,” 4 November 1996.)
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planet’s surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, “U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars,” New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
NASA commemorated the 20th anniversary of Viking 1’s landing on Mars, the first time that a spacecraft had successfully descended to the surface of the planet. NASA marked the occasion with an address from Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the celebration of Mars Day at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Viking 1 had searched for life on Mars, but at the end of its quest, scientists had found no evidence of life on Mars. As it celebrated its accomplishments, NASA continued its efforts to learn more about Mars throughout its 20th anniversary year, with the development of Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Pathfinder.(NASA, “Activities Planned To Commemorate 20th Anniversary of First Mars Landing,” news release 96-141, 15 July 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
NASA returned the record-setting, solar-powered, research aircraft Pathfinder to flight-testing at Dryden Flight Research Center. Pathfinder had set an altitude record of more than 50,000 feet (15,000 meters) during a flight on 11 September 1995. Wear and tear during previous operations, as well as a ground accident inside a hangar, had damaged the craft. NASA had hired AeroVironment to repair the remotely piloted plane. AeroVironment made several improvements and rebuilt the damaged portions of the aircraft. The company installed stronger rib structure and higher-efficiency solar cells. NASA had adopted Pathfinder in the 1980s after the aircraft’s release from a classified military program.(NASA, “Solar-Powered Pathfinder Returns to Skies,” news release, 25 November 1996.)
NASA launched into space its unpiloted Mars Global Surveyor, the first in a series of missions to explore the Red Planet further. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission and vehicle embodied a shift in the United States’ approach to space exploration. With the expressed intent to make exploration as affordable and reliable as possible, NASA had developed the smaller Mars Global Surveyor, measuring 5 by 5 by 10 feet (1.5 by 1.5 by 3 meters) and designed to carry less fuel than Mars Observer. Mars Global Surveyor cost NASA US$150 million to develop, whereas Observer had cost nearly US$1 billion and had failed to reach Mars after its 1992 launch. Surveyor’s ability to function with less fuel than previous models heightened the chances that it would succeed in its mission. NASA predicted that after ascending to the desired 235-mile-high (378-kilometer-high) orbit, the robotic Global Surveyor would have to travel nearly halfway around the Sun before catching up with Mars in September 1997. The spacecraft would then begin mapping the Martian atmosphere and surface, a survey planned to last 687 days. Mission objectives included searching for evidence of life on Mars, gathering data about the Martian climate, learning more about the planet’s geology, and determining what resources were necessary to support future human missions to Mars. According to NASA, the search for water was the unifying theme of all missions to Mars. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission continued the exploration of Mars that NASA had begun with the Mariner and Viking missions of the 1960s and 1970s.(Associated Press, “Mars Probe Heads for Mapping,” 8 November 1996; Paul Hoversten, “Surveyor Sets Off for Mars,” USA Today, 8 November 1996; NASA, “1996 Mars Mission—Press Kit,” news release 96-207, November 1996.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
NASA reported that a team of scientists from Johnson Space Center and Stanford University had found evidence that “strongly suggested” that primitive life existed on the planet Mars. During a two-year study, the researchers discovered what they believed to be organic molecules of Martian origin on a potato-sized meteorite, which members of the National Science Foundation’s Antarctica Meteorite Program had found in 1984. Scientists estimated that the meteorite was about 4.5 billion years old. According to the team’s report, published in Science magazine, the remnants on the meteorite shared several mineral characteristics indicating biological activity, possibly even containing microscopic fossils of primitive, bacteria-like organisms. The minute scale of the evidence required the careful research of the team of specialists in the fields of microbiology, mineralogy, and chemistry. The largest of the possible fossils measured about 1/100th the diameter of a human hair. Only with recently developed technological instruments, including a dual-laser mass spectrometer, were the scientists able to make any substantial observations.112 The announcement generated immediate excitement in the scientific community and in the mass media, although some scientists responded with a multitude of critical questions. The researchers carefully qualified their report, stating, “It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let alone on Mars.”113 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make samples of the meteorite available to scientists throughout the world, to encourage a full scientific investigation.(McKay et al., “Search for Past Life on Mars,” 924–930; NASA, “Meteorite Yields Evidence”; Sawyer, “NASA Releases Images.”)
After exceeding even the most optimistic predictions made during its primary mission, the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft concluded its initial research maneuvers and began extended operations. The initial mission had returned to Earth 1.2 gigabits of data and more than 9,000 images of the Martian landscape. Project Manager of the Mars Pathfinder Mission Brian Muirhead said that the mission had not only had gathered an impressive amount of data, but also validated NASA’s new approach to exploring space. “This mission demonstrated a reliable and low-cost system for placing science payloads on the surface of Mars,” he stated. “We’ve validated NASA’s commitment to low-cost planetary exploration.” After completing the planned 30-day mission and traveling 171 feet (52 meters) across Mars’s landscape, the rover Sojourner remained in excellent condition. Operators gave Sojourner a two-day rest period to recharge its battery, before it began an extended exploration of the planet.(NASA, “Mars Pathfinder Results Generating New Picture of Mars as Mission Moves into Extended Operation,” news release 97-174, 8 August 1997; Los Angeles Times, “Mars Mission ‘100 Percent Success’, NASA Says,” Los Angeles Times, 9 August 1997.)
Two Yemeni men filed a lawsuit against NASA, claiming that NASA had committed trespassing violations when it landed Pathfinder on Mars. The men claimed that their ancient ancestors had deeded the planet to them as an inheritance, requesting that Yemen’s prosecutor-general bring U.S. Ambassador David G. Newton to court to stop the violation. Although no legal restitution was expected, the lawsuit highlighted the excitement surrounding NASA’s Mars mission and the widespread interest in the Red Planet’s exploration.(Reuters, “Get Off Our Planet, Yemeni Men Tell U.S.,” 25 July 1997.)
NASA reported receiving 265 million hits on its Web site during the four days following Mars Pathfinder’s landing. In response to what some observers called the “biggest event in computer network history,” NASA buttressed its own computers with donated equipment from corporate sponsors, so that the government site could handle the high volume of viewers. The Internet statistics validated the widespread popularity of the mission to Mars. The CNN network dedicated nearly half of its programming to the Pathfinder story on the day of the Mars landing, doubling its network ratings. Entrepreneurs sold a variety of Mars- and Pathfinder-themed products, and visitors jammed the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC. USA Today summed up the success of the Mars Pathfinder Mission: “NASA’s successful landing on the Red Planet has set off a Marsfest on the blue one.”(NASA, “Pathfinder Gets Hit Hard on the Internet,” news release I97-8, 9 July 1997; Martha T. Moore, “Mars Mania Invades Earth,” USA Today, 9 July 1997; Associated Press, “‘Mars Live’ Draws Millions to Web Site,” 9 July 1997; United Press International, “Mars Tops Internet Hit List,” 8 July 1997.)
A panel of scientists at the National Research Council issued a report warning NASA of the slight possibility that a mission to Mars might actually bring microbes back to the United States. Although their report clearly stated that the so-called Microbe Peril was unlikely, the panel argued, nevertheless, that a probe returning from an exploratory mission to Mars could possibly serve as a conduit to bring Martian germs back to Earth. The panel issued its warning because of NASA’s plan to send a mission to Mars to obtain samples of substances on the planet, and because NASA scientists had recently identified signs of possible microscopic life on a meteorite. The panel’s report stated, “If life forms ever existed on Mars, either by having been formed in an independent origin or having been transferred there from Earth, it is possible that they could have continued to exist up to the present time.”
Jurgen H. Rahe, NASA’s Science Program Director for Exploration of the Solar System, died when a tree collapsed on the car he was driving during a severe storm in Maryland. Rahe, 57 years old, had enjoyed a distinguished career in the field of astronomy and at NASA. At the time of his death, he was responsible for overseeing visionary NASA programs, such as the Galileo Mission to Jupiter and the much-anticipated July 1997 landing of Mars Pathfinder. Rahe had guided NASA’s efforts to make more frequent and cost-effective exploratory missions of the solar system. According to one colleague, Rahe had presided over the planetary exploration program’s “unparalleled period of major discoveries.” Before his tenure at NASA, Rahe held tenured positions at California Institute of Technology and Germany’s University of Erlangen- Nuremberg.(Associated Press, “Obituary: Jurgen Rahe, 57, NASA Official,” 20 June 1997; NASA, “NASA Mourns Dr. Jurgen H. Rahe, Solar System Exploration Science Program Director,” news release 97-137, 19 June 1997.)
Mars Global Surveyor passed a critical test on its journey toward the Red Planet, when it successfully opened valves allowing high-pressure rocket propellant to enter its fuel lines. The same task had thwarted the 1993 Mars Observer at a similar juncture during its trip to Mars. Mars Global Surveyor had traveled for 10 months and for more than 435 million miles (700 million kilometers) to reach Mars. According to Glenn E. Cunningham of NASA’s JPL, the process of transforming Global Surveyor from a high-speed-travel spacecraft into a slow-moving craft subject to Mars’s gravitational pull was “a nail-biter.” Without the powerful propellant, the transition could not occur, which would have ended any hope of the mission’s gathering data. With the opening of the valves complete, NASA scientists were optimistic that the US$250 million probe would descend slowly into a tight orbit of Mars, yielding new information about the planet.
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
Mars Pathfinder scientists announced that Mars appeared to have a crust, a mantle, and an iron core⎯attributes similar to those of Earth. The researchers suggested that Mars may once have been warm and wet, although they remained unable to determine whether Mars had a molten core, such as that of Earth or Mercury, or a “dead” core, such as that of the Earth’s Moon. The findings contributed to growing evidence that Mars might be more than a solid ball of rock and that the planet might once have had water and life. Signs of possible erosion and weathering encouraged such hypotheses, as well, although scientists clarified that proof of such theories was still probably years away.(K. C. Cole, “Internal Structure of Mars, Earth Similar, Scientists Say,” Houston Chronicle, 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Once Warm and Wet, Data Suggests,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Three Mars Layers Suggests Life on Planet Was Possible,” 9 October 1997.)
Sojourner, the roving vehicle carried to Mars aboard Pathfinder, began prospecting the surface of the Red Planet approximately two days after Pathfinder’s safe landing. NASA engineers and enthralled scientists described the scene of the six-wheeled, microwave-sized Sojourner, slowly descending the ramp of Pathfinder, as similar to Neil A. Armstrong’s “giant leap” in 1969. Richard A. Cook, managing the mission from JPL, set off a raucous celebration of NASA engineers when he announced, “The rover is on the surface of Mars. We’ve got some great images back, and all the scientists are in heaven.” Weather reports gathered by the Pathfinder reported that Sojourner was working in temperatures as high as 8° below 0°F (-22°C), as well as in wind and dust storms. Sojourner, named for black abolitionist Sojourner Truth, headed for a dark rock near Pathfinder, as its first object of close study. NASA scientists, who had named the rock Barnacle Bill because of its craggy appearance, used similarly whimsical terms to keep track of the various geological objects studied by Sojourner. Sojourner’s success, after some minor complication upon landing, encouraged mission scientists and drew wide acclaim from the media. Scientists began to speculate almost immediately, about whether the mission could possibly confirm or deny the existence of life on the planet.(John Noble Wilford, “On the Surface of Mars, Sojourner Rolls to Work,” New York Times, 7 July 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Data from Mars Indicate It Could Have Supported Life,” 7 July 1997; Peter N. Spotts, “Tiny Land Rover Begins Relaying Detailed Data About Surface of Red Planet,” Christian Science Monitor, 7 July 1997. 280 Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Aircraft Hits 71,500 Ft.,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 147, no. 3 (21 July 1997): 40; NASA, “Solar-Powered Pathfinder Sets New Record; Prepares To Monitor Deforestation of Hawaiian Island,” news release 97-153, 14 July 1997.)
In a once-in-a-century occurrence, eight planets lined up in the sky “like pearls on a string” from west to east. Astronomers could view, in one line of sight, Pluto, followed by Mercury, Mars, Venus, Neptune, Uranus, Jupiter, and Saturn⎯with a crescent Moon visible as well. Jack Horkheimer, host of public television’s Star Hustler described the event as “naked-eye astronomy at its best,” a boon for amateurs. According to computer calculations, the orbits of the planets would not line up in such a pleasing manner for observers on the Earth for at least another century.(Associated Press, “Planets in Once-in-Century Lineup,” 2 December 1997.)
Mars Global Surveyor fired its engine enabling Mars’s gravitational pull to capture it. Researchers from NASA’s JPL declared that the spacecraft had behaved exactly as planned during the crucial entry to Mars’s gravitational field. Experts predicted that the mission would produce 700 million bits of data, more than the amount acquired in all previous Mars missions combined. The mapping mission continued a new era of Mars exploration for NASA, involving dozens of probes surveying the planet’s surface and atmosphere.(Kathy Sawyer, “New Visitor from Earth Poised for Mars Orbit,” Washington Post, 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Everything ‘Perfect’ as Surveyor Craft in Countdown to Mars Orbit,” 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Global Surveyor,” 12 September 1997.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia lit more than 200 small fires, testing the flammability of dozens of gases and materials. The experiments took place under the direction of Paul D. Ronney, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Southern California. Ronney explained that the experiments had as much application for Earth as for space. According to Ronney, the weaker the flame in space’s weightless environment, the cleaner its fuel would burn on Earth. The astronauts found that, without the effect of gravity, the flames often formed the shape of a ball and heat did not rise. The experiments created some attention for Mission STS- 94, largely overshadowed by the success of the Pathfinder mission to Mars.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests of Tiny Fires Spur Delight,” 9 July 1997; Wayne Tompkins, “Columbia Crew Ready for Hot Time in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 July 1997.)
The Rasmussen Research Group reported that seven out of 10 Americans had seen at least one image of Mars obtained through the Mars Pathfinder Mission, denoting a remarkable level of public awareness of NASA’s mission to the Red Planet. The researchers also reported that nearly half of all Americans believed that an American would land on Mars within 10 years. Despite the widespread interest and optimism regarding the project, only 41 percent of those polled saw merit in the mission.(Mark Carreau, “Mars Trip a Monster Summer Hit,” Houston Chronicle, 2 August 1997.)
Astronomers using the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii announced the discovery of the most distant object ever observed from Earth. The discovery team comprised researchers from the University of Groningen in the Netherlands and the University of California at Santa Cruz. The scientists’ calculations indicated that the distant light they had discovered was an infant galaxy, approximately 13 billion light-years from Earth. Formally named Red Arc in CL1358-62, the discovery gave astronomers a glimpse into the universe as it had existed when only 7 percent of its present age. Lead researcher Garth D. Illingworth described the images as “a pathfinder for deciphering what is happening in young galaxies.”(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Discover Most Distant Object,” New York Times, 31 July 1997.)
NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder⎯distinct from Mars Pathfinder⎯broke the record for highest-flying, propeller-powered aircraft in a flight from the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, Hawaii. After climbing for nearly 7 hours, AeroVironment Pathfinder reached its record altitude, maintaining its height for about 13 minutes. Even at its peak distance from Earth, a span of more than 67 nautical miles (124 kilometers), AeroVironment Pathfinder transmitted data without any problems. The successful test was part of the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Program at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center.
NASA successfully landed the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft on Mars, exactly seven months after its launch from Earth. Project managers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) called the landing “near perfect,” celebrating the beginning of the “second era in the exploration of Mars.” The Mars Pathfinder Mission was the first to attempt a planetary landing on initial orbit, and Pathfinder’s safe landing followed a journey in which the spacecraft traveled at speeds of up to 16,600 miles (26,800 kilometers) per hour. Although NASA made its first successful flyby of Mars in 1965, in recent years it had taken a new approach to exploring the Red Planet. NASA achieved the development and deployment of Mars Pathfinder for US$266 million, a bargain compared to the US$1 billion cost of the failed Mars Observer. Because of its tightening budget, NASA had adopted a course of planning several simple, but targeted excursions, using low-cost spacecraft, rather than mounting a few complex and expensive missions. Pathfinder landed almost exactly at the point aimed for and immediately transmitted signals back to Earth announcing its safe landing. Officials at JPL noticed a slight complication, when early images revealed that some of the airbags used to cushion the craft’s landing had bunched up around the door that Sojourner⎯the rover set to explore the planet⎯would use to exit Pathfinder. NASA’s engineers clarified, however, that the temporary problem would not compromise the rover’s planned exploration.(John Noble Wilford, “Landing Called Near Perfect by NASA,” New York Times, 5 July 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Lands Today on the Planet of Dreams,” New York Times, 4 July 1997; Tony Knight, “Pathfinder Zeroes in on Red Planet,” Los Angeles Daily News, 4 July 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 3.)
NASA dedicated a plaque in memory of Ellison S. Onizuka, celebrating his record of achieving the highest altitude for propeller-driven aircraft. Onizuka had been Hawaii’s first astronaut and a member of the Shuttle crew aboard Challenger when it exploded in 1986. NASA’s recognition of Onizuka’s achievement, more than a decade later, occurred during the same year that the remotely controlled AeroVironment Pathfinder broke a distance record for unpiloted space travel, topping 71,000 miles (114,000 kilometers) during its 7 July 1997 flight. NASA honored Onizuka for his part in “reaching for the heavens and striving for excellence,” noting that his achievement had contributed to that of Pathfinder. NASA dedicated the plaque honoring Onizuka at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, where the record-setting Pathfinder plane had set flight on its historic mission.(NASA, “NASA Solar-Powered Altitude Record To Be Dedicated to Challenger Astronaut,” news release N97- 087, 3 December 1997.)
After a four-month mission, NASA officials announced that Mission Control had halted communications with Mars Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner. Sojourner’s batteries were nearly drained, and many of the rover’s instruments had frozen in Mars’s harsh climate. Mission controllers expected the rover simply to come to a halt on Mars’s vast plains, ceasing signal transmissions altogether. Nevertheless, NASA considered the US$266 million mission largely successful. The mission had lasted much longer than planned, transmitting, from the surface of the Red Planet to Earth, nearly 10,000 pictures of the Martian landscape, including images showing evidence of erosion, as well as more than 1.2 billion bits of data. Sojourner’s remarkable service, even in the midst of harsh dust storms and temperatures reaching
Following on the heels of Mars Pathfinder’s successful mission to map the surface of Mars, two researchers used sonar information and satellite images to create a highly detailed map of the global ocean floor, another largely unexplored area. David T. Sandwell of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Walter H. F. Smith of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration improved by 30 times the precision of the world’s most exact ocean maps. Their new map, revealing ridges and canyons never before delineated, helped explain ocean currents and tides across the world. The new mapping technology interested oil companies, looking for clues to the location of fossil fuel deposits, and fishermen seeking likely habitats of fish.(Robert Lee Hotz, “Map Dramatically Deepens Learning About Sea Floor,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997.)
As Mars Pathfinder and its surveyor Sojourner triumphantly explored the surface of Mars, NASA named as Software of the Year the Dynamics Algorithms for Real-Time Simulation (DARTS) software⎯a program used on the Pathfinder mission. Abhinandan Jain, Guillermo Rodriguez, and Guy K. Man of JPL had created the software to provide real-time simulations to test other software and hardware. DARTS allowed NASA mission managers to test procedures in a cost-effective manner.(NASA, “Software Used on Mars Pathfinder Wins NASA’s Software of the Year Award,” news release 97-154, 16 July 1997.)
NASA researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, announced a plan to collaborate with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California, to explore the potential of the substance Aerogel, which has tremendous insulating capabilities. Scientists said that they were optimistic that they could manipulate the material, rendering it transparent and, therefore, especially useful in constructing energy-efficient windows for homes and automobiles. During the 1930s, a researcher at Stanford University had discovered Aerogel, often called frozen smoke because of its hazy appearance. NASA engineers had used Aerogel as an insulating agent aboard Mars Pathfinder in 1996. Although the substance is the lightest solid known⎯only three times the density of air, a block of Aerogel weighing less than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) can support 0.5 tons (450 kilograms or 0.45 tonnes). Aerogel’s large internal surface area, which disperses heat throughout its structure, causes the material’s extreme insulating capability⎯a 1-inch-thick (2.5-centimeter-thick) Aerogel window would offer the same insulation value as 15 panes of glass. John M. Horack, Assistant Laboratory Director for Space and Science Communications at MSFC, called the development of Aerogel “a great example of how NASA space research generates scientific knowledge that can be used to improve the quality of life on Earth.”(NASA, “NASA Research in Space May Redesign Household Windows,” news release 97-34, 6 March 1997. 215 Warren E. Leary, “Microbe Peril from Mars Is Possibility, Panel Warns,” New York Times, 7 March 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Warn on Mars Bugs,” 7 March 1997; Mark Carreau, “Fear of Martians,” Houston Chronicle, 7 March 1997.)
New support emerged for NASA scientists’ claim that a meteorite discovered in August 1996 held fossil evidence of primitive Martian life. In an article in Science, a group of researchers from California Institute of Technology and McGill University used magnetic studies to demonstrate that the findings on the meteorite were not, as some critics had contended, the result of a high-temperature environment that would have made life impossible. “What we are able to show from the magnetic studies is that these things [the fossil remnant that had excited the interest of Johnson Space Center geologists] couldn’t have been heated even to the boiling point of water.” Although the scientists did not explicitly support NASA’s earlier claim that the remnant provided evidence for bacterial life, the team’s discovery opened the intriguing possibility that remnants of primitive life could migrate from one planet to another.(Joseph L. Kirschvink et al., “Paleomagnetic Evidence of a Low-Temperature Origin of Carbonate in the Martian Meteorite ALH84001,” Science 275, no. 5306 (14 March 1997): 1629−1634; Mark Carreau, “California Scientists Back NASA’s Theory of Life on Mars,” Houston Chronicle, 14 March 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Study Backs Idea that Meteorite Hints of Life on Mars,” New York Times, 14 March 1997.)
NASA researchers announced the discovery of wildly oscillating weather patterns on Mars. In yet another use for the HST images, scientists tracked much colder, cloudier, harsher weather conditions than they had expected. R. Todd Clancy of the Space Science Institute attributed Mars’s chaotic weather to a combination of factors, including the planet’s thin atmosphere and elliptical orbit and the ice and dust clouds surrounding it. When the planet’s orbit places it closest to the Sun, large windstorms push dust into the atmosphere; the dust absorbs sunlight, causing the air to heat, and Mars’s temperature to rise as high as 30°F (-1°C). HST images seemed to demonstrate further that, when the planet is farthest from the Sun, the dust storms remain at low altitudes, and ice clouds surround the planet, causing temperatures to plunge precipitously. The findings were of particular importance to NASA’s ongoing Mars Pathfinder Project, with Pathfinder’s entrance into the Martian atmosphere planned for July 1997.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Space Telescope Finds Big Shifts in Weather on Mars,” New York Times, 21 May 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Kaleidoscopic Mars Shows Its True Colors,” USA Today, 21 May 1997; Associated Press, “Hubble Finds Climate on Mars Harsher than Scientists Thought,” 21 May 1997.)
After altering the spacecraft’s path to move it farther away from Mars’s violent winds, NASA launched Mars Global Surveyor from its safe elliptical orbit of the Red Planet, sending the spacecraft into the planet’s harsh atmosphere. NASA officials indicated that, because of the change in flight plans, Mars Global Surveyor would begin its mapping mission of Mars in 1999, one year later than originally planned. The change of plan highlighted both the difficulty of exploring Mars and NASA’s ability to adapt to difficult conditions. When Mars’s atmosphere had proven more hostile than previously anticipated, mission controllers had proven able to readjust Surveyor’s orbit. In effect, the move had placed Surveyor in a holding pattern, keeping it from harm. Once conditions had improved, however, NASA would not be able simply to proceed as planned. Because Surveyor ran on solar power, the mission planners must wait for Mars and the Sun to realign, to provide energy for the craft. However, although NASA would have to postpone the mission for one year, the delay would provide an added benefit, allowing NASA’s researchers to set Surveyor on a circular orbit that would actually bring Surveyor closer to the planet than originally projected.(John Noble Wilford, “Mars Map Will Come a Year Late,” New York Times, 11 November 1997; Mark Carreau, “Mars Map Still on Tap,” Houston Chronicle, 11 November 1997; A. J. Hostetler, “Surveyor Has New Course,” Times-Dispatch (Richmond, VA), 13 November 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, just after sunrise, returning its seven-person crew to Earth. The landing marked the conclusion of a successful, 16- day mission, during which the astronauts completed 33 laboratory experiments. The low-cost mission was the first reflight in NASA’s history, concluding the research agenda planned for the April 1997 mission that NASA had terminated as a safety precaution. Although the press coverage of events on Mars and Mir had overshadowed the Columbia crew’s efforts, NASA Mission Manager Teresa B. Vanhooser stated confidently that scientific journals would give the mission due respect.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Returns Full of Research Information,” 17 July 1997.)
NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder, a remote-controlled, ultra-lightweight aircraft, set a new world record for highest altitude for a solar-powered aircraft. AeroVironment Pathfinder reached an altitude of 67,350 feet (20,500 meters), shattering the previous record of 50,500 feet (15,400 meters). The experiment took place at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility in Kauai, Hawaii. Engineers had designed Pathfinder to fly at extremely high altitudes, to supply researchers with atmospheric and environmental data that other planes could not gather. In traveling to such heights, Pathfinder experienced temperatures as low as -100°F (-73°C). After climbing for about 6 hours, the aircraft ascended into record-breaking territory, flying for more than 90 minutes at an altitude above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). A partnership formed under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Alliance, involving NASA, aerospace companies, and members of the scientific community, was responsible for developing AeroVironment Pathfinder.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Surpasses Propeller Altitude Record,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 146, no. 25 (16 June 1997): 53; NASA, “Pathfinder Sets New World Record,” news release 97-132, 12 June 1997. 267 NASA, “Hubble Is First To Spot Colliding Supernovas,” news release 97-129, 10 June 1997.)
After more than nine days without sending a signal, Mars Pathfinder’s main transmitter resiliently delivered a message to Earth. To anxious project managers, the message was a welcome relief. The breakdown in the spacecraft’s communication to NASA controllers had necessitated NASA’s activating a contingency plan for Sojourner. The rover had stopped gathering data and reverted to slowly circling its parent spacecraft, waiting to receive directions, a pattern that some scientists feared would be the long-term fate of the rover. The spacecraft’s aging batteries had caused the breakdown in communication of data. However, in spite of the malfunction, NASA officials reiterated that the mission had fulfilled its objectives, emphasizing that solving the problem of communicating with the craft while it was resting on the Red Planet would benefit future explorations of Mars.(Associated Press, “Lacking Signal, Mars Vehicle Is Left To Be Roving in Circles,” 7 October 1997; Associated Press, “Pathfinder Checks in After Weeks of Silence,” 8 October 1997.)
-50°F (-6°C), had excited scientists and public alike. Mars Pathfinder Web sites had received more than 565 million hits during the mission’s tenure. Using the treasure trove of information Pathfinder had gathered, scientists had concluded that Mars’s surface had many similarities to that of Earth. Perhaps the most compelling was the evidence compiled during the mission in support of the theory that, at one time, Mars had water on its surface. In addition, the mission’s research team concluded that water and wind had played crucial roles in shaping the planet’s surface. Mission controllers spoke of their gratitude for the data gathered, which would keep scientists busy for years, as well as about their excitement at the possibility of building upon Mars Pathfinder’s success in future missions.(Paul Hoversten, “Mars Pathfinder Comes to Quiet End Today,” USA Today, 4 November 1997; Reuters, “NASA Announces End of Mars Pathfinder Mission,” 5 November 1997.)
At an American Geophysical Union meeting, a team of research scientists led by David E. Smith of GSFC discussed new research findings based on data collected in the spring and summer by the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA). The data indicated that the ice cap on Mars’s north pole, although definitely water ice, is much smaller than previously thought. The scientists concluded that the amount of water in the ice cap is not voluminous enough to have created the “deep gullies that scar the surface of the planet,” nor could it have filled an ancient ocean. MOLA images showed the ice cap resting in a deep basin, possibly created by an asteroid impact. Scientists described this formation as unique in the solar system. The team of researchers remarked that their findings raised more questions about Mars’s formation and conditions than they answered.(NASA, “Laser Provides First 3-D View of Mars’ North Pole,” news release 98-219, 7 December 1998; Joseph B. Verrenga for Associated Press, “Icecap Seen on Mars’ North Pole,” 6 December 1998; Maria T. Zuber et al., “Observations of the North Polar Region of Mars from the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter,” Science 282, no. 5396 (11 December 1998): 2053.)
NASA announced the selection of nine researchers to form the Science Team for the Mars Microprobes, “a technology validation mission that will hitchhike to the [R]ed [P]lanet aboard NASA’s 1998 Mars Polar Lander mission.” NASA intended the probes to collect data measuring thermal and physical properties of the soil while searching for the presence of water ice. The nine selected scientists were David C. Catling, Julio A. Magalhaes, Jeffrey E. Moersch, James R. Murphy, and Aaron Zent of NASA’s Ames Research Center; Ralph D. Lorenz of the University of Arizona; Paul Morgan of Northern Arizona University; Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology; and Marsha Presley of Arizona State University.(NASA, “Science Team Chosen for Technology Validation Mission To Explore the Subsurface of Mars,” news release 98-59, 8 April 1998.)
New data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor Mission provided insights into the planet’s deeply layered terrain, its strong, localized magnetic fields, and the genesis and evolution of a Martian dust storm. Scientists analyzed data collected in October and November 1997, publishing the first set of formal results in the 13 March 1998 issue of Science. Mars Global Surveyor had used a variety of instruments to collect data. The thermal emission spectrometer had mapped the temperature and opacity of the Martian atmosphere during the sandstorm, and a camera had returned visual images of the storm’s effects. The spectrometer had also obtained some infrared emission spectra of Mars’s surface, indicating “the presence of pyroxene and plagioclase, minerals which are common in volcanic rocks, with a variable amount of dust component.” Surveyor’s magnetometer and electron reflectometer had measured strong localized magnetic fields on Mars. A laser altimeter had collected data from Mars’s northern hemisphere, revealing a flat surface, becoming increasingly rough toward the equator. Scientists had interpreted a variety of landforms in the Mars images, including the northern polar cap and gigantic canyons, ridges, craters, and shield volcanoes.
A Progress cargo spacecraft delivering supplies to Mir veered off course while in automatic mode, forcing the space station’s crew to perform a manual docking. Mission Control ordered Commander Talgat A. Musabayev to perform the docking when the two craft were only 65 feet (20 meters) apart. Musabayev steered the cargo craft smoothly and avoided repeating last June’s collision.(Reuters, “Focus: Technical Failure Mars Russian Space Docking,” 17 March 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 17 March 1998.)
Wesley T. Huntress Jr. announced that he would resign from NASA in the near future. As NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, Huntress had been responsible for programs in astrophysics, planetary exploration, and space physics. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin credited him with the revitalization of NASA’s Space Science Enterprise, in particular, with overseeing critical components of the program such as the HST and Mars Pathfinder. Huntress had joined NASA’s JPL in the 1960s, a research scientist specializing in ion chemistry and planetary atmospheres, and NASA had appointed Huntress to head the Office of Space Science in March 1993. In his retirement announcement, Huntress stated, “I have served in this position for more than five years now and it is simply time to move on.”(NASA, “Huntress Announces His Departure from NASA,” news release 98-31, 18 February 1998.)
Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planet’s polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyor’s data; the Arizona researchers believed that a “concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes.” The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water “was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.”(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, “Mars Discovery,” 28 May 1998; Washington Times, “Minerals Suggest Life in Mars’ Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers,” 28 May 1998.)
Steve Fossett’s Solo Spirit balloon, carrying NASA’s prototype Aerobot Science Payload, landed prematurely when it experienced equipment problems. NASA had been testing the Aerobot Science Payload prototype for use on balloons in outer space, to collect information from other planets’ atmospheres. On this trip, Aerobot returned accurate data on position, balloon velocity, vertical wind velocity, temperature, and humidity, but experienced problems with a pressure sensor and a satellite communications link.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Balloon Trip Helps Martian Studies,” 11 January 1998.)
After a one-day delay to correct a software problem, Mars Climate Orbiter launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Delta II rocket. NASA had scheduled the 1,400-pound (635-kilogram) robotic craft, paired with Mars Polar Lander, to launch on 3 January 1999. Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, the second pair headed to study Mars following Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor, were part of NASA’s “long-term strategy for Mars exploration,” calling for small robotic craft “to leave Earth two at a time,” about every two years. According to NASA’s plan, Climate Orbiter’s first task would be to provide a two-way communications relay between ground controllers and Polar Lander after Lander’s arrival and during its planned 60–90 day mission. Thereafter, Orbiter would generate weather maps and profile the Martian atmosphere for a full Martian year, or 687 days.(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Probe To Examine Climate; NASA Launch Is First of Two Designed To Shed Light on Potential for Life,” Washington Post, 12 December 1998.)
Mark H. Thiemens, professor of chemistry at the University of California at San Diego, and a team of researchers published a study in the journal Science disputing NASA’s theory that a rock from Mars contained evidence of life. NASA scientists had studied the rock, found in the Allen Hills ice field in Antarctica, concluding that some carbonate mineral structures in the rock were evidence that microbes had lived in the rock before it “blasted away from Mars,” during the collision of Mars with an asteroid millions of years ago. By contrast, Thiemens’s researchers concluded that the chemical characteristics of oxygen inside the rock originated from the carbon dioxide and ozone of the Martian atmosphere. The team explained that, if a microbe had deposited the oxygen, “the chemical signature of the minerals would have matched that of oxygen in water, not oxygen in the atmosphere.” According to the team, this finding did not provide final proof that the rock had never contained life. However, it provided a significant argument against NASA’s theory, controversial since its first proposal in August 1996.(James Farquhar, Mark H. Thiemens, and Teresa Jackson, “Atmosphere-Surface Interactions on Mars: Δ17Ο Measurements of Carbonate from ALH84001,” Science 280, no. 5369 (June 5, 1998): 1580; Los Angeles Times, “New Meteorite Study Casts Doubt on Theory of Martian Life,” 5 June 1998.)
Aerojet announced it had won a US$485,000 contract to build a rocket injector for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) that would help JPL scientists develop propulsion technologies for NASA’s Mars Sample Return Vehicle.(Sacramento Bee (CA), “Aerojet Lands Contract,” 11 June 1998.)
NASA released images recorded by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft, showing the Cydonia region of Mars in 10 times more detail than that provided in the images recorded more than 20 years ago by one of the U.S. Viking space probes. In the new images, the Sun was shining from the opposite direction than in the images recorded by the Viking probe. Viking’s images had revealed a surface formation in the hilly desert area, Cydonia, which some members of the public believed to be a monumental sculpture of a humanoid face, in spite of NASA scientists’ insistence that the “face” was only a common geological formation called a mesa. Some of those people who believed the structure to be a sculpture had accused NASA of manipulating data in a conspiracy to keep the origins of the face a secret. Surveyor’s new images confirmed NASA’s previous analysis of the formation. However, in an effort to counteract the conspiracy rumors, NASA posted on the Internet the raw data sent by Mars Global Surveyor and took no official position regarding what the images did or did not reveal. Several planetary scientists remarked that “the new image contained no surprises and no evidence of artificial origin.”(Robert Lee Hotz, “California and the West Alien ‘Face’ Recedes into Martian Myth Space: NASA Photo Appears To Show a Naturally Weathered Mesa,” Los Angeles Times, 7 April 1998; Kathy Sawyer, “With Mars Images, NASA Says: Face It, It’s a Mesa,” Washington Post, 7 April 1998.)
James B. Willet, a nuclear astrophysicist who had worked for NASA, died of cancer at his Maryland home. Willet had worked for 20 years on the scientific staff of NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, and for three years as JPL’s liaison to NASA Headquarters before joining the Space Research Association in 1993. At JPL, Willet had acted as a science coordinator and team chief for the Galileo Mission. Galileo was orbiting Jupiter at the time of his death. Willet was also a field operations team leader for the Mars balloon-testing program and had conducted research in gamma-ray astronomy. Willet’s duties as liaison officer involved him in the Voyager, Ulysses, and Pioneer programs.(Buffalo News (NY), “James B. Willet Nuclear Astrophysicist,” 20 June 1998.)
Due to arrive at Mars in October 1999 after a period of orbiting Earth, Japan’s Planet B spacecraft launched from Kagoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu. The Japanese Education Ministry’s Institute of Space and Aerospace Science developed the probe, nicknamed Nozomi, or Hope. The probe carried 14 scientific instruments developed by Canada, Germany, Japan, Sweden, and the United States. NASA provided two instruments for the probe: the Neutral Mass Spectrometer, designed to measure the gas composition of Mars’s upper atmosphere for the first time; and the Ultra Stable Oscillator, deployed to support a radio science experiment, also involving analysis of the Martian atmosphere, and to guide the spacecraft in its orbit around Mars.(NASA, “NASA Instruments on Japanese Planet-B Spacecraft Will Aid Studies of Martian Upper Atmosphere,” news release 98-119, 1 July 1998; United Press International, “Japan Launches First Mars Mission,” 4 July 1998.)
NASA researchers released images and temperature readings collected by Mars Global Surveyor. The images revealed that the Martian moon Phobos is covered in a layer of dust at least 3 feet (0.9 meters) deep, the result of the impact of meteoroids, occurring over millions of years. Surveyor’s thermal emission spectrometer revealed that, on Phobos, the temperature changes from -170oF to -25oF (-112oC to -32oC) between night and day. Scientists explained that dust accounts for some of the moon’s drastic temperature change, because Phobos does not have an atmosphere enabling it to trap heat. Therefore, the surface’s small particles have only 7 hours to absorb heat from the Sun, losing heat rapidly after sunset. Images of landslides on steep crater slopes indicated that Phobos’s gravity, even at just 1/1,000th of that of Earth, is sufficient to pull objects downward.(NASA, “Martian Moon Phobos Hip-Deep in Powder,” news release 98-164, 11 September 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Martian Moon,” 12 September 1998.)
NASA officially declared Mars Pathfinder “dead” six months after its mission ended, after getting no response to one last set of commands. Pathfinder’s mission had ended on 27 September 1997, when NASA lost communication with the craft. Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner had landed on Mars on 4 July 1997, and NASA had expected the two craft to “live” on Mars for only 30 days. However, Pathfinder had exceeded its mission by eight weeks, and Sojourner had roamed the Martian terrain 10 weeks longer than the originally planned one-week operation.(Dan Whitcomb for Reuters, “Scientists Declare Pathfinder Officially ‘Dead’,” 10 March 1998.)
Engineers discovered that exposure to 11 months of cold temperatures in outer space could cause the descent engine on Mars Polar Lander to malfunction. NASA had scheduled Mars Polar Lander to land on Mars on 3 December. Lander’s companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter had burned up as it entered its Martian orbit on 23 September. The investigative panel studying the cause of Orbiter’s loss had uncovered the potential problem with Lander’s engines. Because of the discovery, scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) altered their plans, deciding to turn on the craft’s descent engine heaters earlier than originally scheduled, to warm the engines to 46.4°F (8°C) before Lander’s descent.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Finds Flaw in Mars Lander Engine Turning On Descent Heaters Earlier Should Prevent Failure of Mission,” Florida Today, 9 November 1999; Mark Carreau, “Mars Probe To Get Brake Check: NASA Engineers To Warm Descent Rockets of Polar Lander,” Houston Chronicle, 9 November 1999.)
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services’ maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martin–built Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russia’s new Dnepr rocket, Europe’s Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporation’s Pegasus.(United Press International, “Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year,” 23 November 1999.)
Scientists Peter Smith of the University of Arizona and Justin Maki of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory published a report in the Journal of Geophysical Research summarizing the results of the Mars Pathfinder Mission. After an exhaustive review of more than 17,000 images from the Pathfinder’s 1997 mission, the report had concluded that Mars’s air and dirt are yellowish-brown in color, not red. Viking probes of the 1970s had likewise indicated that Mars is not red, but rather yellowish-brown. However, Mars appears red to the naked eye from Earth, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) data had indicated that Mars is red. The scientists reported that the detailed analysis using Pathfinder data had revealed that the HST, not Pathfinder, needed to be recalibrated.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), “The Red Planet? Mars Is Really Yellowing Brown: Pathfinder Discovers What Hubble Missed,” 24 April 1999.)
NASA announced that the magnetometer on board Mars Global Surveyor had revealed “banded patterns of magnetic fields on the Martian surface,” bearing a “striking similarity to patterns seen in the crust of the Earth’s sea floors.” Scientists interpreted the patterns as evidence that the Martian crust had shifted in the past. The discovery of banded patterns on the floor of Earth’s oceans had provided a record of Earth’s magnetic history, validating the theory of plate tectonics. Jack Connerney of NASA’s GSFC, a member of Global Surveyor’s magnetometer team, explained, “if the bands on Mars are an imprint of crustal spreading, they are a relic of an early era of plate tectonics on Mars.” He added that such tectonic activity on Mars is likely extinct, unlike on Earth. The spacecraft’s magnetometer had been able to capture the magnetic field observations because of the extended aerobraking phase, devised to protect against further damage to one of the spacecraft’s solar panels. The period of aerobraking had permitted the magnetometer to “obtain better-than-planned regional measurements of Mars.” Each time it reached the lowest point of its elliptically shaped orbit, below the planet’s ionosphere, the probe encountered minimal magnetic interference and enabling it to obtain additional data.(NASA, “Magnetic Stripes Preserve Record of Ancient Mars,” news release 99-56, 29 April 1999.)
NASA officials and Mars Polar Lander Mission scientists were unable to communicate with Lander following its scheduled landing. The team had expected the first signal to arrive from the spacecraft at a tracking station in the Mojave Desert in California, approximately 30 minutes after the scheduled touchdown at 3:01 p.m. (EST). A second attempt to communicate with the craft had produced nothing. Before the craft’s landing, tracking data indicated that Lander had veered slightly off course. Flight controllers had fired its thrusters briefly to alter its approach angle slightly. Flight Operations Manager Sam Thurman had expressed his satisfaction with the new tracking data, which showed the craft heading for a point within a mile of its target.(John Noble Wilford, “Probe to Mars Becomes Silent, Its Fate Unclear,” New York Times, 4 December 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
NASA launched Mars Polar Lander from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Boeing Delta II rocket, three weeks after the launch of its companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter. The craft’s main purpose was to search Mars for signs of water. Lander carried machinery and two microprobes, as well as a microphone to record the sounds of Martian wind. Mars Polar Lander and Mars Climate Orbiter formed a pair, the second launched in a 12-year series of dual missions to explore Mars, with the ultimate goal of collecting a sample of Martian soil to bring to Earth by 2008.(Reuters, “U.S. Mars Probe Launched from Florida,” 3 January 1999; Beth Dickey, “Craft Joins Mars Quest for Water,” New York Times, 4 January 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the mission’s failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASA’s interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California” had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, “Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named,” news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)
Mission controllers indicated that chances of ever contacting the US$165 million Mars Polar Lander were “remote at best,” after they failed to detect a signal during their “last best chance” of communicating with the probe. NASA officials announced that the loss of Lander meant that NASA would need to drop the timetable for future Mars missions and rethink the entire Mars exploration program, including the scheduled launch of the next lander in 2001. NASA had already spent US$193 million on the planned 2001 launch. Edward J. Weiler, head of NASA’s Office of Space Science, indicated that NASA would convene a panel of experts to diagnose the Mars Polar Lander failure and to suggest a “new architecture” for its Mars program. Although they had set no dates, members of Congress said that they planned to hold hearings about NASA’s procedures and budget.(Down Jones Newswire, “NASA Fails To Detect Signal from Mars Polar Lander,” 7 December 1999; Peter Kendall and Vincent J. Schodolski for the Chicago Tribune News Service, “Mars Exploration Put on Hold: NASA Scraps Its Timetable, and the Launch of a $193 Million Lander Set for 2001 Is Uncertain,” Oregonian (Portland), 8 December 1999.)
Scientists studying images obtained by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published two reports in the journal Nature about Martian volcanic activity. One study reported that the images contained evidence that “ten times more lava” than previously thought had erupted onto Mars’s surface. The other study suggested that at least one of Mars’s volcanoes was still active.(William Hartmann et al., “Evidence for Recent Volcanism on Mars from Crater Counts,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 586; Alfred S. McEwen et al., “Voluminous Volcanism on Early Mars Revealed in Valles Marineris,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 584; Rick Callahan, “Mars Was Truly Red Planet⎯as in Red- Hot Molten Lava⎯Scientists Say One Volcano Would Have Coated U.S. 4 Miles Deep,” Seattle Times (WA), 17 February 1999.)
NASA announced the winner of an essay contest to name the Deep Space 2 microprobes, which the Mars Polar Lander spacecraft was carrying to Mars. NASA had scheduled the two probes to crash into Mars’s south pole on 3 December. Paul Withers, a graduate student at the University of Arizona in Tucson, studying the thin upper atmosphere of Mars, had suggested naming the pair Amundsen and Scott, in honor of Roald Amundsen and Robert F. Scott, the first explorers to reach Earth’s South Pole. In his winning essay, Withers recalled that one century ago, Antarctica was Earth’s only unexplored continent. Withers wrote, “Scott perished in Antarctica. His memorial’s inscription reads: ‘To strive, to seek, to find, not to yield.’ These are the aims of the Deep Space 2.” NASA had designed the two probes with a dual purpose: to test advanced technology for future planetary-surface microlanders and to search for water ice 3 feet (0.9 meters) below the Martian surface. Deep Space 2 Project Manager Sarah A. Gavit remarked that the names of the Antarctic explorers were appropriate for the probes, because “like Amundsen and Scott, Deep Space 2 will have to survive great odds, including not only braving the elements but also crashing into the terrain with unbelievable force.”(NASA, “Mars Penetrator Probes Named for Pioneering Polar Explorers,” news release 99-135, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-135.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
The Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board released its first report, identifying eight contributing factors that had led to the 23 September loss of Orbiter as it entered its Martian orbit. Arthur Stephenson, chairperson of the board investigating the failure, agreed with NASA on the causes of the mission’s failure. The board reported that “the failed translation of English units into metric units in a segment of ground-based, navigation-related mission software” was the primary cause of the loss, but that other significant factors had set the stage for the mission’s failure. Moreover, the team had failed to identify and correct multiple mistakes, leading to “a major error in our understanding of the spacecraft’s path as it approached Mars.” The failure board faulted the Mars Climate Orbiter team with “inadequate consideration of the entire mission and its postlaunch operation as a total system, inconsistent communications and training within the project, and lack of complete end-to-end verification of navigation software.” Although engineers working with Lockheed Martin Astronautics’ mission operations team had failed to convert English units into metric for entering data into ground-based navigation software, the investigating board focused most of its attention on the navigation team at NASA’s JPL, which had overall management authority for the mission. The board remarked that, because it had navigated interplanetary spacecraft successfully for 30 years, JPL had developed a “widespread perception that ‘Orbiting Mars is routine’,” leading it to pay inadequate attention to the risk of faulty navigation.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Failure Board Releases Report, Numerous NASA Actions Underway in Response,” news release 99-134, 10 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-134.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Earl Lane, “Report Details NASA Failings: Assigns Blame for Orbiter’s Loss,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 11 November 1999.)
NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASA’s navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was “not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole,” because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost,” news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter,” 23 September 1999.)
NASA released preliminary findings of an internal peer review conducted at Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) after the apparent loss of the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its orbit on 23 September. The results of the review indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California led to the loss of the spacecraft.” The peer review discovered that “one team had used English units while the other used metric units for a key spacecraft operation.” NASA’s systems engineers had failed to detect the error. In addition to the JPL committee, NASA had formed a separate review committee of experts from within and outside of JPL and planned to establish an independent failure-review board shortly.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Team Finds Likely Cause of Loss,” news release 99-113, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-113.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
NASA released its first three-dimensional global map of Mars. The Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA), an instrument aboard NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor, had generated the data for the high-resolution map, created from measurements gathered in 1998 and 1999. David E. Smith of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Principal Investigator for MOLA and the lead author of a study published in the journal Science, said that, according to the new topographic map, Mars is slightly lopsided⎯the northern hemisphere is low and smooth, but the southern hemisphere had many craters and an elevation of about 5 kilometers (3.1 miles) higher than that in the north. Additionally, Smith noted that the depression in Mars’s northern hemisphere is “distinctly not circular,” indicating that it formed from internal geologic processes rather than an external impact. Carl B. Pilcher, NASA’s Science Director for Solar System Exploration, commented that the data MOLA had collected enabled scientists to know “the topography of Mars better than many continental regions on Earth.” Pilcher said that the data would “serve as a basic reference book for Mars scientists for many years,” inspiring “new insights about the planet’s geologic history.”(NASA, “First Global 3-D View of Mars Reveals Deep Basin and Pathways for Water Flow,” news release 99-66, 27 May 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-066.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); David E. Smith et al., “The Global Topography of Mars and Implications for Surface Evolution,” Science 284, no. 5419 (28 May 1999): 1495–1503.)
A six-member team of Brown University scientists used data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor to examine six categories of evidence supporting the hypothesis that oceans once existed on Mars. The team, led by planetary geologist James W. Head III, published their findings in the journal Science. Primarily using altimetry data and images captured by Surveyor, the researchers had found that the border between two geologically dissimilar areas was nearly level in elevation, suggesting an ancient coastline. Furthermore, they found that the topography below the possible coastline was consistent with the effects of sedimentation and the volume of the hypothetical sea was within range of previous estimates of Martian water. A series of terraces running parallel to the supposed shoreline gave credence to the idea of receding water; low areas contained the appearance of possible mud cracks; and scars from impact craters suggested groundwater or ice near the surface.(James W. Head III et al., “Possible Ancient Oceans on Mars: Evidence from Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter Data,” Science 286, no. 5447 (10 December 1999): 2134–2137; William J. Broad, “Tantalizing Signs of Ancient Martian Ocean,” New York Times, 10 December 1999.)
NASA announced its decision to end a US$240 million project to land a small spacecraft on a comet, so that scientists could learn how to destroy a comet if it were on course to collide with Earth. NASA had planned to launch the probe in 2003 and to land it on the surface of Comet Tempel 1 in 2005. After landing, the probe was to drill into the nucleus of the comet, helping scientists understand the comet’s composition. Manager of the Space Technology 4 project Brian Muirhead remarked, “we know very, very little about how comets are formed and what their constituency is,” adding that anyone serious about planetary protection must learn more about comets. NASA’s JPL was in the early stages of developing the Space Technology 4/Champollion project and had only spent US$10 million. NASA had also considered canceling Mars Surveyor 2001, but had already spent US$100 million on that project. Other projects were experiencing cost overruns also, such as the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, which needed an extra US$60 million to cover last-minute development problems. NASA intended to redirect some funds from Space Technology 4 to other missions experiencing funding difficulties, such as Chandra.(Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Comet Lander,” 29 June 1999.)
NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor successfully completed the aerobraking phase of its mission, raising its orbit completely out of the Martian atmosphere and preparing the craft to begin its primary mapping mission. Glenn E. Cunningham, Deputy Director of the Mars Exploration Program at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), described the Mars spacecraft’s “pioneering operation” of aerobraking as a long and arduous task, which had become a valuable learning experience for all involved—engineers and scientists alike. The technique required the spacecraft to use frictional drag “as it skim[med] through the planet’s thin atmosphere,” altering the shape of the craft’s orbit and providing an innovative method to change the orbit using less on-board fuel. NASA had first tested aerobraking in 1994, during the final days of the Magellan mission to Venus. A structural problem with Mars Global Surveyor’s solar panel had delayed the final burn of aerobraking by approximately one year, so that the flight team could ensure that the process would not overstress the weakened panel. The extended aerobraking phase had enabled Global Surveyor to acquire bonus science data, yielding “some spectacular new findings about Mars,” such as a “profile of the planet’s northern polar cap and information about the unique nature of its remnant magnetic fields.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-06, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
Joseph G. Beerer of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory stated that all of the instruments aboard Mars Global Surveyor were operating, and that the craft had begun mapping Mars, approximately one year later than originally planned. NASA had launched the craft in November 1996, and Surveyor had entered orbit around Mars in September 1997. NASA had delayed the mapping portion of the mission when scientists detected a structural problem with one of the craft’s solar panels. To avoid placing excessive stress on the panel, the flight team had opted to proceed cautiously in aerobraking. Aerobraking, a pioneering operation, was necessary to position the spacecraft for its Mars mapping mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-006, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 27 December 2007).)
The ESA signed a 60 million Euro contract with Matra Marconi Space, to design and build the Mars Express spacecraft, with a planned launch date of June 2003. The agency chose that target date because the planets would be in optimal alignment, allowing for minimum travel time to Mars with maximum payload capacity. Major space missions can require upwards of 11 years from concept to launch, and only six years remained before the 2003 date, so the ESA selected a contractor with the means to develop missions quickly and inexpensively. Matra Marconi demonstrated that it would be able to streamline the development of Mars Express, building and launching the mission for about half the budget required for similar efforts.
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named A. Thomas Young to chair the Mars Program Independent Assessment Team, charged with reviewing NASA’s approach to robotic exploration of Mars following the recent loss of the Mars Polar Lander Mission. Among the review team’s tasks were the evaluation of several recent NASA missions to deep space, including Mars Pathfinder, Mars Global Surveyor, Mars Climate Orbiter, Mars Polar Lander, Deep Space 1, and Deep Space 2. The team would analyze the projects’ budgets, content, schedule, management structure, and scientific organization, assessing how roles and responsibilities of those missions related to the missions’ safety, reliability, and success.(NASA, “Young To Lead Mars Program Assessment Team,” news release 99-147, 17 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-147.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
NASA announced that scientists studying high-resolution images from Mars Global Surveyor had detected no evidence that ocean shorelines once existed on Mars. Previously, researchers had interpreted features in images from NASA’s Viking missions of the 1970s as remnants of ancient coastlines. However, Surveyor images taken in 1998, with a resolution 5 to 10 times sharper than images that Viking had produced had not provided evidence that water in a coastal environment had formed those features. Michael C. Malin of Malin Space Science Systems, Principal Investigator for the Mars Orbiter Camera aboard Surveyor, remarked that although scientists could not rule out the presence of oceans on Mars at one time, the evidence in the new images appeared to undermine the “foundation for the ‘ocean hypothesis’ developed in the 1980s on the basis of suspected shorelines.” Nevertheless, Malin acknowledged “significant other evidence of water on Mars in the past,” suggesting that as the Mars Orbiter Camera continued to acquire new high-resolution images, scientists might have new clues to the role of water in the evolution of Mars.(NASA, “New Mars Images: No Evidence of Ancient Ocean Shorelines,” news release 99-114, 1 October 1999.)
JPL appointed Glenn E. Cunningham, Manager of NASA’s Mars Surveyor Operations Project, as the new Deputy Director of JPL’s Mars Exploration Directorate. In the newly created position, JPL tasked Cunningham with overseeing the implementation and operations of all Mars missions through 2013. As Cunningham’s successor, JPL appointed Richard A. Cook, former Flight Operations Manager for the 1997 Mars Pathfinder Lander and Rover Mission, to manage the Mars Surveyor Operations Project.
Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edgett of Malin Space Science Systems published research in the journal Science based on images from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft. The two researchers had found that the images showed massive sedimentary deposits on Mars, suggesting that the planet “was once a water-rich land of lakes.” Malin described the images as revealing “hundreds and hundreds of identically thick layers,” features that were “almost impossible to have without water.” J. William Schopf, head of the Center for the Study of Evolution and the Origin of Life at the University of California at Los Angeles, commented that the images provided the “strongest evidence yet for what appear to be sedimentary units on Mars,” supporting the theory that, billions of years ago, Mars had been wetter, warmer, and possibly hospitable to life.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Evidence of Martian Land of Lakes Discovered,” news release 2000-123, 4 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marslakes.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Associated Press, “Satellite Photos Indicate Mars Was Water Plentiful,” Washington Times, 5 December 2000; Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edget, “Sedimentary Rocks of Early Mars,” Science 290, no. 5498 (8 December 2000): 1927–1937.)
Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARC’s chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASA’s astrobiology program and to establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffen’s two loves, and that “the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.”(NASA, “NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies,” news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, “Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official,” 27 November 2000.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler appeared before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics to address the future of NASA’s space science programs. Weiler discussed NASA’s problems in the previous year, such as the loss of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, explaining that, although NASA was developing a response to those losses, it would need more funding if it were to prevent similar failures in the future. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) indicated that President William J. Clinton had proposed increasing the space science budget by US$200 million over each of the following four years. NASA’s budget reauthorization bill for FY 2001 added an additional US$19 million in funding for space science programs.(Space Business News, “Money, Management Are Key To Avoiding NASA Failures, House Panel Hears,” 27 September 2000.)
NASA announced that it planned to implement a new Mars Exploration Program over the following two decades. NASA planned six major missions during the next 10 years, launching the Mars Odyssey orbiter mission in 2001, twin Mars Exploration Rovers in 2003, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter⎯a powerful scientific orbiter⎯in 2005. Additional plans included the development and launch, possibly as early as 2007, of a “long-range, long-duration mobile science laboratory,” which would “pave the way for a future sample return mission.” NASA also proposed to create a new line of small missions called Scout missions, involving airborne vehicles or small landers. NASA would select designs for the Scout spacecraft from proposals submitted by the scientific community. Besides sending additional scientific orbiters, rovers, and landers to Mars during the second decade of the program, NASA announced its plans to launch its first sample-return mission in 2014, with a second mission in 2016. The new program incorporated “lessons learned from previous mission successes and failures” and built on recent scientific discoveries. Although NASA led the revamped program, the Mars missions also included international participants, particularly France and Italy, whose space agencies had agreed to conduct collaborative scientific orbital and surface investigations, as well as to contribute sample collection-and-return systems, telecommunications assets, and launch services.(NASA, “NASA Outlines Mars Exploration Program for Next Two Decades,” news release 00-171, 26 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-171.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
Nearly one year after the highly publicized failure of a probe to reach the surface of Mars, NASA announced plans for at least one, possibly two, robotic rovers to explore Mars by 2003. The new design plan, the outcome of an overhaul of NASA’s Mars Program in the aftermath of the unsuccessful mission, called for a rover larger than Mars Sojourner, which had successfully navigated the Martian surface in 1997. NASA planned for the new probe to continue the search for water on the surface of the Red Planet.(Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Moves To Send Robot Rovers To Explore Mars Surface,” Washington Post, 28 July 2000; Peter N. Spotts, “New Rover To Look for Signs of Water on Mars,” Christian Science Monitor, 31 July 2000; Tribune News Services, “NASA Unveils Plans for 2003 Mission to Mars,” 28 July 2000.)
NASA declared an end to its attempts to contact Mars Polar Lander, which had descended to the Red Planet’s surface on 3 December 1999. The planned 90-day mission had derailed when mission controllers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) were unable to communicate with the probe after it landed. Investigators had methodically tried different commands to reach Lander. Meanwhile, scientists and amateur space enthusiasts alike had offered a wide range of hypotheses concerning the cause of Lander’s silence, speculating that Lander had exploded before actually reaching Mars’s surface or that it had simply sunk in the Martian dust. After exhausting all means of contacting the probe, NASA had declared the US$165 million mission concluded, indicating that future missions would attempt to make up for the loss of Polar Lander. Project Manager Richard A. Cook expressed his sense of closure about the decision to stop investigating the matter: “we feel somewhat complete in the sense that we did go through the things we thought were reasonable . . . we gave it a good shot.”(Usha Lee McFarling, “NASA Gives Up Hope of Finding Mars Probe,” Los Angeles Times, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “JPL To End Search Today for Mars Polar Lander,” 17 January 2000; USA Today, “NASA Quits Trying To Contact Missing Mars Polar Lander,” USA Today, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “Report: Mars Lander May Have Touched Down in Steep Canyon,” 6 January 2000.)
In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that “in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years,” U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASA’s next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, “Red Planet Is Next Frontier,” 2 May 2000.)
Arizona State University and JPL, a division of California Institute of Technology, announced the creation of the Arizona State University Planetary Imaging Facility and Advanced Training Institute (PIF-ATI) for the study of Mars. Arizona State University and JPL would jointly fund the new facility, which the two institutions intended for scientists and students to use. PIF-ATI expanded on a facility originally planned in support of the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS), scheduled to fly on the 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft. PIF-ATI would offer scientists and students outside the project greater access to instruments and data, providing access for university students, for students of the fifth through twelfth grades, and for their teachers.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “New Mars Research Facility To Involve Scientists, Kids,” news release 2000-115, 20 November 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marsasu.html (accessed 17 April 2008).)
In the wake of the failure of the Mars Polar Lander Mission, an independent assessment team appointed by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin assembled for the first time to begin a review of NASA’s approach to the exploration of Mars. The 16-member team included aeronautics experts from NASA, aerospace industries, the U.S. Air Force, and academia. Although NASA officials held out hope that Lander would eventually respond to signals from Earth, Goldin tasked the team with evaluating NASA’s successful and unsuccessful missions to Mars. The independent investigation continued NASA’s pattern of scrutinizing all failures to improve its proficiency in the exploration of space.
NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASA’s scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers’ Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, “NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003,” news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
An independent study, commissioned by NASA in the wake of the highly public failures of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, found that cost-cutting measures had created significant risks for NASA’s Shuttle program. Although the report maintained that the overall safety of NASA’s operations remained within an acceptable range, the investigators warned that the use of contractors and the lack of oversight compromised the quality of NASA’s missions. NASA’s chief of the Office of Space Flight accepted the report’s recommendations to improve NASA’s operations, also noting, however, that NASA had already investigated and dealt with many of the weaknesses highlighted in the report. With budgetary matters always a pressing concern, NASA had made various necessary reductions in personnel, relying on companies such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin more than ever. NASA had initiated the investigation to understand more fully the impact of the changes on NASA’s highest priority⎯the safety of its astronauts.(Associated Press, “NASA Says Shuttle Cuts Have Led to Higher Risk,” 10 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Study Raises Concerns About Shuttle Safety,” 13 March 2000.)
In an article in the journal Science, a team of researchers led by Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reported that they had found compelling evidence that Mars once had a wet climate. According to Zuber, “Evidence is building of more water on the surface of Mars at one time.” The researchers had used the laser measurements taken by Mars Global Surveyor to reach their conclusions. Although Zuber indicated that scientists did not yet have enough evidence to determine whether Mars once had a surface ocean, the study did find large, buried channels beneath the planet’s crust, suggesting that an enormous flow of water once deluged the landscape. The researchers had also found further evidence of two distinct “crustal provinces” on Mars, similar to those on Earth. The team estimated that Mars’s crust was 50 miles (80 kilometers) thick beneath the planet’s southern highlands, but only 22 miles (35 kilometers) thick beneath the northernmost areas of the planet. By using Surveyor’s data to analyze thoroughly the topography of the planet, the research team had also drawn the conclusion that Mars had once been home to more water than ice. The variety of landmasses suggested that, for a period, the planet’s core had released heat, turning ice trapped beneath Mars’s surface into water. As one newspaper described the formative events estimated to have taken place approximately 4 billion years ago, “It steamed and streamed.”(Marie T. Zuber et al., “Internal Structure and Early Thermal Evolution of Mars from Mars Global Surveyor Topography and Gravity,” Science 287, no. 5459 (10 March 2000): 1788−1893; NASA, “View Inside Mars Reveals Rapid Cooling and Buried Channels,” news release 00-36, 9 March 2000; Dan Vergano, “Northern Mars Once Was Drenched,” USA Today, 13 March 2000.)
NASA reported to the public that Mars Global Surveyor had captured images depicting erosion and soil deposits consistent with the presence of flowing water on the planet in the past. Researchers had long postulated that, billions of years ago, Mars’s surface held abundant water, which had dried up as the planet’s atmosphere thinned. Because scientists had suggested that the one-time presence of water on Mars might indicate the one-time presence of life on the planet, the new evidence created significant excitement in the scientific community. In announcing the find, NASA reported that it “could turn out to be a landmark discovery,” but cautioned against drawing conclusions from the images without further analysis. Furthermore, the images suggested that water might have been present on the planet more recently than previously thought. Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler explained, “For two decades scientists have debated whether liquid water might have existed on the surface of Mars just a few billion years ago. With today’s discovery, we’re no longer talking about a distant time. The debate has moved to present-day Mars.”(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Craft Finds Evidence of Water,” Washington Post, 22 June 2000; William F. Nicholson, “Reports: NASA Finds Evidence of Water on Mars,” USA Today, 21 June 2000; NASA, “New Images Suggest Present-Day Sources of Liquid Water on Mars,” news release 00-99, 22 June 2000.)
NASA’s JPL named Thomas C. Duxbury Project Manager for JPL’s Stardust Mission, launched in February 1999 to collect a sample from Comet Wild-2 and return it to Earth. Duxbury, who had served as the Mission’s Acting Project Manager for the past year, replaced Kenneth Atkins, who had been heading a program to develop leadership for JPL’s projects. Duxbury had joined the Stardust project in 1996 as Mission Manager, responsible for navigation, mission design, the ground-data system, science-data management, and mission operations. Before working on the Stardust project, Duxbury had served on planetary mission teams, including several Mariner missions, the Mars Viking mission, Pioneer 10 and 11 to Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 and 2 to the outer planets, the Soviet Phobos Mission to Mars, the Mars Observer Mission, and the Clementine Mission to study the Moon. Concurrent with his position as Stardust Project Manager, Duxbury planned to continue to serve as a member of the science teams for Mars Global Surveyor’s laser altimeter and for the ESA’s Mars Express orbiter and lander, as well as continuing as lead scientist for geodesy and cartography in the Mars Exploration Office.
Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiter’s solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileo’s magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelson’s team had measured the moon’s magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings “best explained by a thick layer of water⎯about as salty as Earth’s oceans⎯hidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath” the moon’s surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared “to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface.” Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiter’s intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Solar System’s Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean,” news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, “Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiter’s Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life,” Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASA’s JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Mars’s surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planet’s seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASA’s chief Mars program scientist celebrated: “We’ve got a program! This is the next step . . . It’s kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. We’re bound for a new frontier.”(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, “Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars,” news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, “Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASA’s Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission,” Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists,” 8 April 2001.)
NASA’s Mars Odyssey provided its first image from its orbit around the Red Planet. Odyssey took the image as part of a calibration process for the spacecraft’s thermal-emission imaging system, which NASA had designed to observe the surface of Mars in both light and darkness. The initial image, a thermal infrared image of the planet’s southern polar carbon-dioxide ice cap, covered an area greater than 6,500 kilometers (3,900 miles) at a resolution of approximately 5.5 kilometers (3.4 miles) per pixel.(NASA, “Mars Odyssey’s First Look at Mars Is All Treat, No Trick,” news release 01-214, 31 October 2001.)
NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of Viking 1 Lander’s safe descent to the surface of Mars. The successful mission, marking the first time that humankind had sent a spacecraft to the Red Planet and the first landing of an American probe on another planet, inaugurated a series of research-oriented missions to Mars. In celebrating this banner day in its history, NASA looked forward to new challenges and opportunities for the study of Mars. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin delivered a keynote address, “Continuing the QuestCelebrating Viking and Looking to the Future of Mars Exploration,” at the National Geographic Society’s Grosvenor Auditorium in Washington, DC. Viking 1 Lander had remained on Mars for six years, gathering images and data invaluable for scientists. Following up on the success of the first probe, Viking 2 Lander had arrived on Mars’s Plain of Utopia in September 1976. The two probes had taken more than 4,500 pictures while slowly crawling over Mars’s surface. Perhaps as significant as the finds of Viking 1 and 2 on Mars was the fact that the probes did not find any evidence of life on the Red Planet. NASA’s Langley Research Center (LaRC) had equipped both probes with biological sensors, setting a precedent for future probes to other planets to continue the search for signs of life outside of Earth. As NASA celebrated the pathbreaking Viking missions, the 2001 Mars Odyssey traveled toward the Red Planet to continue the tradition of exploring Mars’s hostile but fascinating landscape.
NASA’s Mars Odyssey spacecraft maneuvered into Mars’s orbit after a six-month, 286 million- mile (460 million-kilometer) voyage from Earth. Newspapers described the event as a major success for NASA, which had lost three previous spacecraft destined for Mars during the years from 1993 to 1999. NASA planned for Odyssey to orbit Mars for two and one-half years, mapping the mineral composition of Mars and searching for evidence of water ice beneath the planet’s surface. Toward the end of Odyssey’s orbital reconnaissance mission, the spacecraft would also function as a communications satellite for two robotic landers that NASA planned to launch to Mars in 2003.(Mark Carreau, “Odyssey Slips into Orbit, Breaks String of Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2001; New York Times, “At Last a Success on a Mars Mission,” 24 October 2001.)
NASA released the first images taken by the recently launched Mars Odyssey spacecraft. Headed for the Red Planet, Odyssey pointed its camera Earthward to take calibrating shots as it traveled around the South Pole. Among the first images the vessel captured were the first thermal-infrared views ever taken of Earth and its Moon. The photographs demonstrated the technological sophistication of the instruments for the mission to Mars, which allowed close observation, producing images even with very little available light. The clarity of the images of Earth, particularly those of Antarctica, boded well for the success of the Mars mission. Mars Odyssey measured surface temperatures in Antarctica as low as minus 58°F (14°C), similar in range to temperatures the craft would experience during its survey of Mars.(NASA, “Earth Day Portrait Is First One Snapped by NASA’s 2001 Mars Odyssey,” news release 01-81, 23 April 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of Lockheed Martin to construct Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), scheduled to launch in August 2005. Under the US$145 million contract, Lockheed Martin would be responsible for building the orbiter and for integrating and testing six scientific instruments and two engineering payloads. In addition, Lockheed Martin would provide operations support for spacecraft during its five and one-half year mission. Odyssey, designed for low-altitude remote sensing of Mars, would include an atmospheric sounder; a context imager; a high-resolution camera; a shallow, subsurface, sounding radar; a visible, near-infrared imaging spectrometer; and a wide-angle color imager. NASA engineers planned to use Odyssey’s images to help determine landing sites for future Mars missions. NASA also planned for the spacecraft to provide telecommunications and navigation relay capability for future missions to the planet.(NASA, “NASA Selects Spacecraft Contractor for 2005 Mars Mission,” news release c01-w, 3 October 2001; Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Chosen by NASA and JPL to Build the 2005 Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter,” 3 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinChosenByNASAJPL Build2.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
In the midst of increased concerns over the long-term effects of the depletion of Earth’s ozone layer and concerns over global warming, scientists learned that Mars’s average global temperature had increased 50°F (10°C) in one month. A research team at Arizona State University analyzed and made public data that Mars Global Surveyor had collected, indicating the planet’s drastic change in climate. Scientists concluded that a massive dust storm, originating in Mars’s lower latitudes, had caused the increase in temperature. The researchers believed that the dust had trapped sunlight, eventually causing a heat wave to envelope the Red Planet; they predicted, however, that the planet’s temperature would cool when the dust particles began reflecting sunlight.(Los Angeles Times, “Science File in Brief; Global Warming Strikes Another Planet: Mars,” 23 July 2001.)
Herbert V. Frey of NASA’s GSFC revealed a fundamental new finding about the complexion of Mars’s surface. According to Frey and his team of researchers, data gathered by Mars Global Surveyor had corrected a commonly held belief about the topography of the Red Planet and the age of its crust. Most scientists had believed that the crust covering the relatively smooth northern lowlands of the planet was much younger than that of the rest of the planet. However, Frey’s research using Surveyor’s pathbreaking instruments had shown that the lowlands are not actually smooth at all. Using the measurements obtained by the spacecraft’s laser altimeter, Frey and his team had documented more than 600 ancient craters lying just beneath a layer of dust on the lowlands, many of the craters larger than 30 miles (48 kilometers) in diameter. From this finding, the team had concluded that the crust of the northern lowlands is older than scientists had expected. According to James W. Head of Brown University, who was not a member of Frey’s research contingent, the findings would “push the reset button” on ideas about how Mars had evolved as a planet.(Robert C. Cowen, “Red Planet Still a Mystery, but Mars Global Surveyor Makes It Less So,” Christian Science Monitor, 14 June 2001.)
NASA revealed time-lapse images of the biggest dust storm on Mars to occur in nearly 30 years. The HST and Mars Global Surveyor had captured the images, which showed that the storms had begun as a local event in the Hellas region of Mars and had rapidly propagated throughout the planet. The storms had obscured the surface of Mars and dramatically affected temperatures in the planet’s atmosphere, including heating the upper portions of its atmosphere to as much as 80°F (26.7°C). NASA scientists hoped that data about the storms would help them learn more about sediments on Mars, as well as helping them plan future missions to the Red Planet.(William Harwood, “Mars Wearing Veil of Dust; Biggest Storm in Three Decades Obscures Surface, Alters Temperatures,” Washington Post, 12 October 2001; NASA, “Scientists Track ‘Perfect Storm’ on Mars,” news release 01-193, 11 October 2001.)
The government of France named NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin as Officer of the Legion of Honor, the country’s highest award. Napoleon had created the Legion of Honor in 1802 to honor civil and military service to France. The award honored Goldin for his contribution to the cooperation of France and the United States in space endeavors. NASA and the French space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales, had collaborated on Earth observation and Mars exploration, and French astronauts had flown on the Space Shuttle. Ambassador François Bujon de l’Éstang presented the award to Goldin at the residence of the French Ambassador.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Receives French Legion of Honor Award,” news release 01-202, 31 October 2001.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his resignation, effective 17 November 2001. Goldin, who had become the head of NASA on 1 April 1992, was NASA’s longest-serving Administrator. During his tenure, Goldin had overseen numerous successes for NASA, including the launch of Mars Pathfinder, the repair of the HST, and the redesign of the ISS. Goldin stated that he was leaving for personal reasons and that he had accepted an interim position at the Council on Competitiveness, an organization promoting U.S. economic competitiveness, both at home and abroad. However, newspapers noted that Goldin had made the announcement during a time of budgetary difficulties for NASA. Moreover, media reported that White House officials had already sought candidates to replace Goldin, although, according to NASA, President George W. Bush had not yet selected his replacement.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Announces Resignation,” news release 01-191, 17 October 2001; William Harwood, “NASA Chief to Step Down,” Washington Post, 18 October 2001.)
NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft completed its primary mission, having collected more information about Mars than all of the previous missions combined had acquired. “By any conceivable measure the scientific impact of Mars Global Surveyor has been extraordinary,” said Global Surveyor Project Scientist Arden L. Albee. Since reaching the Red Planet in 1998, Global Surveyor had gathered data on Mars’s climate, topography, and geology, as well as mapping the entire planet. The orbiter, which launched in November 1996, had provided a steady stream of invaluable data. Among the most significant findings of the primary mission had been the detection of significant evidence of liquid water, the detection of a magnetized crust on the planet’s southern hemisphere, and the discovery of new information about seasonal changes on the planet. The spacecraft had gathered the data in the course of more than 8,500 orbits of the planet, during which it had collected 58,000 images. With Mars Global Surveyor still functioning effectively, NASA planned to extend its mission and continue its research.(NASA, “New Era Begins as Mars Global Surveyor Completes Prime Mission,” news release 01-14, 31 January 2001.)
Researchers at NASA’s JPL successfully demonstrated the first use of robotic rovers capable of cooperating to perform tasks together while navigating uneven natural terrain. The researchers hoped that the rovers would be able to perform sustained research on Mars and to assemble and maintain orbiting spacecraft. In outdoor tests, JPL researchers had used two rovers to simulate the deployment of a solar power station. In these simulations, the two robots had grasped and carried a container measuring 2.5 meters (8 feet) long, for more than 50 meters (160 feet). The project had used new software called the Control Architecture for Multi-Robot Planetary Outposts, which equipped the rovers with a distributed and autonomous intelligence producing instinctively reactive behaviors, shared sense and control, and collective decision making. This new technology, along with other innovations, had developed rovers―referred to as the Robotic Work Crew―capable of sharing both work and thinking. Project scientists hoped these capabilities would enable the rovers to collaborate in performing designated tasks, while coping with the unknown and unpredictable surface of Mars and encountering other scenarios unforeseen by scientists on Earth.(NASA, “Robotic Construction Crew Rolls Up Its Sleeves,” news release 02-04, 9 January 2002; NASA JPL, “TechnologyFeature: Researchers Toy with New Rover Designs,” 21 December 2001, http://jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=489 (accessed 28 July 2008).)
G. Scott Hubbard replaced Henry McDonald as Director of NASA’s ARC. Hubbard, ARC’s Deputy Director of Research at the time of the appointment, had served in a number of management roles at the Center since the beginning of his career with NASA in 1987. In addition, he had helped establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute at ARC and had originated the Mars Pathfinder program. McDonald, who had served as Director of ARC from 1996 to 2002, had left the Center to become a professor of computational engineering at the University of Tennessee in Chattanooga.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 3 October 2008); NASA ARC, “G. Scott Hubbard Named NASA Ames Research Center Director,” news release 02-103AR, 19 September 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of two proposals for space missions for its Earth System Science Pathfinder small-satellite program, developed to research Earth’s carbon cycle and the relationship of climate change and oceans. Specifically, the selected proposals would support the Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO), which would provide global measurements of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and the Aquarius mission, which would map salt concentrations on oceans’ surfaces to learn how they affect ocean circulation and global heat redistribution. NASA planned to provide up to US$175 million for each of the two proposals selected for the program. NASA appointed David Crisp of JPL as Principal Investigator for the OCO mission and Chester J. “Chet” Koblinsky of GSFC as Principal Investigator for the Aquarius mission. NASA had numerous university, corporate, and international collaborators for both missions, including the Argentine Space Program, a significant partner in the Aquarius mission.
Using data gathered by NASA’s Mars Odyssey spacecraft, scientists discovered direct evidence of water ice on Mars. NASA scientists were using the Odyssey to measure and map soils in Mars’s polar regions when the spacecraft’s gamma-ray spectrometer detected hydrogen, indicating the presence of substantial, subsurface water ice in the upper meter of soil in a region surrounding Mars’s south pole. Scientists had already suspected that Mars possessed large quantities of water near its surface, but the Odyssey’s new information was the first direct evidence supporting this hypothesis. Scientists also found that large areas in Mars’s low and middle latitudes contained “slightly enhanced amounts of hydrogen.” However, their report did not indicate whether the hydrogen was in the form of water ice or chemically bound to minerals in the soil.(NASA, “Odyssey Finds Water Ice in Abundance Under Mars’s Surface,” news release 02-99, 28 May 2002.)
167Inside Wallops, “Congratulations to Our Newest Retirees,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/ centers/wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 28 July 2008); NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Wallops Senior Manager Announces Retirement,” news release W01-29, 13 July 2001. Applications from 1982 to 1986, and in 1987 NASA had awarded him its Exceptional Service Medal. He had helped to establish and direct several programs at NASA, including missions to explore Mars and a program developing instruments for the HST. After leaving NASA, Edelson had managed the COBE (Cosmic Background Explorer) satellite program, which had received international acclaim when it began measuring radiation from the Big Bang. Edelson had won several major awards, as well as the high regard of his peers and the public, for founding international space programs such as the Japan-United States Science Technology and Space Applications Program.(NASA, “Death of Burt Edelson Highlights His NASA Legacy,” news release 02-06, 9 January 2002; Anahad O’Connor, “Burton I. Edelson Dies at 75; NASA Space Science Leader,” New York Times, 14 January 2002.)
James S. Martin, former NASA Manager of the Viking missions to Mars, died at the age of 81. Martin had led the nationwide team of 750 engineers, scientists, and technicians that had developed the Viking 1 and Viking 2 spacecraft. The two craft had launched in 1975 and landed on Mars a year later, making Viking the first mission to successfully soft-land on the surface of another planet. Martin had joined NASA in 1964 as an Assistant Project Manager for the Lunar Orbiter, and in 1967 he had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his contribution to that project. He had departed from NASA in 1976 to work for Martin Marietta Aerospace, and in 2000 NASA had asked him to leave retirement to lead its effort to restructure its Mars Exploration Program.(NASA, “Mars Viking Leader, James S. Martin Jr. Dies,” news release 02-72, 18 April 2002.)
NASA selected the University of Arizona’s Phoenix lander concept for a US$325 million mission to Mars in 2007, beating out finalists from Arizona State University, NASA’s JPL, and NASA’s LaRC. The Phoenix concept, aptly named for the mythical bird that rose from ashes, drew on the technology of past expeditions, such as the canceled 2001 Mars Surveyor Program. Phoenix’s purpose was to search for evidence of water and carbon dioxide gasa robotic arm would scoop soil samples, small on-board ovens would heat the samples, and on-board instruments would analyze them, checking the soil for organic compounds. NASA called the Phoenix mission the first of a type of mission it had designated as Scout missions. If funding remained available, NASA planned to hold competitions every four years to select relatively small missions like Phoenix as Scout missions.(Chris Kridler, “Mission Will Look for Mars Ice,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 5 August 2003)
Having received a very weak signal from the Pioneer 10 spacecraft on 22 January 2003, NASA announced that it would make no further attempts to contact the craft. On 2 March 1972, NASA had launched Pioneer 10, built by TRW Inc., on a three-stage Atlas-Centaur rocket. In just 12 weeks, Pioneer 10 had traveled beyond Mars, had become the first spacecraft to pass through the asteroid belt, and had continued to travel beyond Jupiter into deep space, “venturing into places where nothing built by humanity had ever gone before.” Pioneer 10 had last returned telemetry data on 27 April 2002. In the previous three attempts of JPL’s Deep Space Network to contact it, Pioneer 10 had emitted very weak response signals, and in the last attempt at contact on 7 February, the Deep Space Network had detected no signal from the spacecraft. Engineers reported that Pioneer 10’s radioisotope power source had decayed. Originally, NASA had designed Pioneer 10 for a 21-month mission, but the spacecraft had lasted more than 30 years.(NASA, “Pioneer 10 Spacecraft Sends Last Signal,” news release 03-082, 25 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03082.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
NASA announced that it had selected several radioisotope-based, power-conversion technologies for research and development. The awards represented the first competitive technology procurement funded entirely by NASA’s Project Prometheus. The projects covered distinct areas in power-conversion technology: thermoelectrics, thermophotovoltaics, Stirling engines, and Brayton engines. NASA intended the awards to lay the foundation for technology development enabling new classes of missions, such as networked science stations on Mars and small spacecraft capable of complex maneuvers in deep space. Each award would cover three one-year performance periods with continued support from one period to the next, contingent on the program’s needs, availability of funds, and each team’s ability to meet milestones. The total funding was US$43 million divided into various increments covering fiscal years 2003 to 2006.(NASA, “Advanced Radioisotope-Power Technologies R&D Teams Selected,” contract release c03-n, 7 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03n.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
Edward J. Weiler, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space about Project Prometheus, a proposed nuclear technology program. The proposal called for NASA to spend US$3 billion between 2003 and 2008, developing more powerful radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) to convert energy from the decay of radioactive material into electricity and to explore the use of fission to power spacecraft and their instruments. A strong supporter of the program, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, a former Secretary of the Navy, hoped to apply lessons learned from the nuclear submarine program to spacecraft. Weiler stated that nuclear fission was necessary for sending spacecraft to scrutinize the outer planets of the solar system, such as Jupiter, and could open the door to human spaceflight to Mars. NASA hoped to use the powerful RTGs developed in Project Prometheus for a robotic mission to Mars in 2009. NASA proposed to make a mission to Jupiter’s moons as its first use of fission technology in space exploration.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Advice to NASA Supports Nuclear-Fueled Spaceflight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 4 June 2003.)
JAXA spokesperson, Junichi Moriuma, announced that JAXA had failed in its final effort to return the Nozomi craft to the correct trajectory for orbiting Mars. Insufficient fuel supplies had prevented the craft’s engines from firing. Nozomi―Hope―had been traveling toward Mars for five years and was schedule to arrive in one week. JAXA had planned for Nozomi to examine the Martian atmosphere’s interaction with the solar wind, to determine whether the planet has a magnetic field. During its journey from Earth to Mars, Nozomi had experienced several malfunctions that had altered its trajectory, placing it on a course that was too low and causing concern that the spacecraft would crash into Mars, possibly contaminating the surface. JAXA officials stated that, although they had failed to place the craft on the correct trajectory, they had greatly reduced the probability of the craft’s colliding with Mars. Instead, the craft would escape Mars’s gravitational field and enter a long-term orbit of the solar system. Moriuma remarked that Japanese scientists would continue to modify Nozomi, allowing it to carry out alternative missions, such as monitoring solar activity.(Kenji Hall for the Associated Press, “Japan Quits Mars Mission as Probe Strays,” 10 December 2003; Jason Testar for Canadian Press, “Japanese Fail To Salvage Mars Mission Carrying Canadian Research Instrument,” 10 December 2003.)
Scientists studying data produced by the thermal emission spectrometer (TES) on board NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published findings in the journal Science disputing the theory that Mars once had a warm climate. Using the TES, which measured infrared light from rocks, scientists had searched for patterns of color to identify different minerals, particularly carbonates. Carbonates form only in the presence of liquid water. TES data confirmed small concentrations of carbonates in Martian dust, but no large deposits, such as those that would have formed at the bottom of a lake or ocean. Lead author of the article, Philip R. Christensen of Arizona State University, remarked that, according to the data, it was “extremely unlikely” that large bodies of water exposed to the atmosphere for an extended period had ever existed on Mars. Matthew P. Golombek of NASA’s JPL commented that the new findings directly contradicted the idea that, at one time, Mars may have been warmer and wetter with a denser carbon-dioxide atmosphere. Previously, scientists had proposed this theory to explain Mars’s apparent geological formations resembling the intricate patterns of riverbeds, carved canyons, and delta fans.(Joshua L. Bandfield, Timothy D. Glotch, and Philip R. Christensen, “Spectroscopic Identification of Carbonate Minerals in the Martian Dust,” Science 301, no. 5636 (22 August 2003): 1084; New York Times, “Study: No Past Standing Water on Mars,” 22 August 2003; Kenneth Chang, “New Data Dispute Theory That Mars Had Warm Climate,” New York Times, 22 August 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of Steven J. Dick as NASA’s Chief Historian, to succeed Roger D. Launius, who had departed in July 2002 to become Historian of the National Air and Space Museum. An astronomer and historian of science, Dick had served as the first Historian of the U.S. Naval Observatory and, just before his NASA appointment, had been Acting Chief of the Naval Observatory’s Nautical Almanac Office. As an expert in the field of astrobiology and its cultural implications, Dick had served on a panel examining the potential societal implications of the discovery of life in the Mars rock. He had received the NASA Group Achievement Award in recognition of his contributions to the establishment of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), including the definition of the field of astrobiology. Dick had authored more than 100 works, including a history of the Naval Observatory, Sky and Ocean Joined: The U.S. Naval Observatory, 1830–2000, which had won the John Lyman Award of the North American Society for Oceanic History for best book in 2002 in Science and Technology and the U.S. Naval Observatory’s Captain James Melville Gilliss Award for extraordinary dedication and exemplary service. At the time of his appointment, Dick served on the editorial boards of several journals and was an associate editor of the International Journal of Astrobiology. From 1993 to 1994, Dick had served as Chairperson of the Historical Astronomy Division of the American Astronomical Society, and between 1997 and 2000, he had been President of the History of Astronomy Commission of the International Astronomical Union.(NASA, “NASA Names New Historian,” news release 03-327, 10 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03327_new_historian.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA launched the first of two Mars Exploration Rovers from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The destination of the 384-pound (174-kilogram) rover Spirit was the Gustev Crater, a site that scientists believed had been a crater lake. NASA intended the second of the identical rovers, called Opportunity, to launch later in June and to land on the opposite side of Mars from the Gustev Crater at a site called Meridiani Planum, which had a large deposit of a type of mineral (gray hematite) that usually forms in wet environments. NASA had designed the rolling rovers to capture sharper images, explore wider regions, and examine rocks better than any previous craft that had landed on Mars, searching for evidence of wet environments on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Prepares Two Robot Rovers for Mars Exploration,” news release 03-189, 4 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03189_ROVERS.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “First of NASA Rovers En Route to Mars,” 11 June 2003.)
ESA launched its Mars Express mission from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat rocket. Mars Express consisted of ESA’s Mars Orbiter and a 65-kilogram (143.3-pound) lander, Beagle 2, named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life. The orbiter, scheduled to reach Mars in December, carried multiple cameras, spectrometers, and radar equipment. Following the launch, ESA Director of Science David J. Southwood remarked that its success signified Europe’s official entry into the interplanetary travel club.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596, 1 July 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx596.html, (accessed 12 December 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Europe Launches First Ever Mars Space Mission,” 3 June 2003.)
ESA’s Science Programme Committee (SPC) dropped the Eddington mission and scaled back the BepiColombo mission because of budgetary concerns―the SPC had determined that ESA would only have sufficient resources to fund one new mission in the next decade. For that mission, the Committee had selected the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) Pathfinder mission, which would launch in 2006 or 2007 and would test technologies and strategies for the planned 2012 LISA mission to detect gravitational waves. ESA had planned for the Eddington mission, scheduled for launch in 2008, to monitor the brightness of stars, study their interiors, and search for planetsof the size of Earth or smallerpassing in front of the stars. Japan and Europe had scheduled BepiColombo, their joint mission to Mercury, for launch in 2011 and had originally planned to send a lander to Mercury as part of that mission. Although the SPC had cancelled the lander portion of the mission, it still planned for ESA to launch two satellites to orbit the planet.(Vanessa Thomas, “ESA Axes Planet-Finding Mission and Mercury Lander,” Astronomy.com, 12 November 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “European Planet-Finding Mission Cancelled,” Space News, 10 November 2003.)
After numerous delays, NASA launched Mars Explorer Rover-B (MER-B) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in time to meet the 15 July deadline. If NASA had not met that deadline, it would have had to wait an additional four years to launch the craft. MER-B, nicknamed Opportunity, was an exact duplicate of MER-A, known as Spirit, which had launched on 10 June. Bad weather, a failed battery cell, and a problem with the cork insulation, which had failed to adhere to the aluminum rocket, had caused the launch’s delay.
ESA formally opened its first deep space ground station in New Norcia, Australia. Construction on the US$47 million (EUR 28 million) facility had begun in April 2000. The key component of the station was a massive antenna, 40 meters (125 feet) high and weighing 600 tonnes (661.4 tons or 600,000 kilograms), with a 35-meter (110-foot) dish. ESA had selected the New Norcia site because its distance from urban areas protected it from interference from other transmission devices, its latitude was perfect for deep space operations, and its weather was excellent. ESA had built and opened the station in time for it to play a key role in ESA’s Mars Express mission, scheduled for launch in June. The Mars Express craft would carry a lander dubbed Beagle 2―named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life―which would map the surface, subsurface, atmosphere, and ionosphere of Mars.(ESA, “ESA’s First Deep Space Ground Station Opens in Western Australia,” ESA news release 14-2003, 5 March 2003, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_14_2003_p_EN.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Australian Town Host to European Space Quest,” 6 March 2003.)
ESA announced that the Beagle 2, ESA’s Mars Lander, had separated from the Mars Express orbiting spacecraft. ESA had scheduled the Beagle 2 to land on Mars early on 24 December (EST), while, at approximately the same time, Mars Express would enter Martian orbit.
NASA re-extended the missions of its Mars rovers by an additional six months. The two mobile robotic geological laboratories, Spirit and Opportunity, had landed on Mars in January 2004. The robotic rovers had successfully completed their primary three-month mission in April 2004, and NASA had extended their mission by five months. Because the rovers remained operable and continued to provide important scientific data on Mars, NASA officials had decided to provide funding to cover an additional six months of rover operations.(NASA, “Rovers Missions Renewed as Mars Emerges from Behind Sun,” news release 04-307, 21 September 2004.)
NASA announced that the Mars Exploration Rover Spirit was malfunctioning because of problems related to its flash memory that could take several weeks to repair. Flash memory, a type of memory commonly installed in electronic devices, such as digital cameras, retains data when the device’s power is off. The mobile robotic geological laboratory Spirit had landed on Mars on 3 January 2004 and had performed satisfactorily until it had abruptly terminated communications with NASA on 21 January 2004. On 23 January 2004, Spirit had reestablished contact with NASA, but, according to major newspapers, NASA scientists doubted that the robotic spacecraft would regain full functionality.(Mark Carreau, “NASA Declares Spirit Rover Broken,” Houston Chronicle, 24 January 2004; NASA, “Spirit Condition Upgraded as Twin Rover Nears Mars,” news release 04-036, 24 January 2004.)
.html (accessed 14 January 2009); Justyn R. Maund et al., “The Massive Binary Companion Star to the Progenitor of Supernova 1993J,” Nature 427, no. 6970 (8 January 2004): 129–131. billion from existing space programs over the next years to fund the development of the technology to travel to the Moon and Mars. President Bush also extended an invitation to other countries to cooperate in attaining the objectives of the Vision. Major newspapers described the Vision for Space Exploration as a response to the Columbia disaster and a means of regaining public support for continued space exploration.(Patty Reinert, “Bush Aims for ‘Worlds Beyond Our Own’,” Houston Chronicle, 15 January 2004; David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson, “Bush Backs Goal of Flight to Moon To Establish Base,” New York Times, 15 January 2004; NASA, “The Vision for Space Exploration,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 55584main_vision_space_exploration-hi-res.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, “New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond,” New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
NASA succeeded in landing the first of two robotic laboratories on the planet Mars. The robotic rover Spirit was one of two mobile laboratoriesMars Exploration Roversthat NASA had designed to collect and analyze geological samples on Mars. Analysis of the samples would help scientists determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to support life. The twin rovers, part of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program, would land at sites on opposite sides of the planet, where scientists believed that liquid water might have existed in the past. To conduct geological research on the planet, NASA scientists had equipped each rover with a microscopic imager, a panoramic camera, and a variety of spectrometers. NASA had scheduled Opportunity, the second rover, to land on Mars later in January.(NASA, “Spirit Lands on Mars and Sends Postcards,” news release 2004-003, 4 January 2004; NASA, “Mars Exploration Rover Mission: Summary,” http://marsrover.nasa.gov/overview/ (accessed 11 January 2009).)
NASA approved a five-month extension of the Mars Exploration Rovers’ mission nearly two weeks before its originally scheduled end on 26 April 2004. NASA had originally planned for the mission to last three months but had decided to extend it because the robotic rovers―Opportunity and Spirit―had satisfied all of their primary mission criteria, achieving several successes, such as discovering evidence that Mars had once had water. According to officials, NASA planned to provide US$15 million to continue the rovers’ operations, doubling the mission’s duration at less than 2 percent of the overall mission’s cost.(NASA, “NASA Extends Mars Rovers’ Mission,” news release 04-122, 8 March 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the immediate appointment of James B. Garvin as NASA’s new Chief Scientist. Garvin had previously served as Chief Scientist for NASA’s lunar and Mars exploration programs. As Chief Scientist for all of NASA, Garvin would be responsible for ensuring the scientific merits of NASA’s programs, including formulating the programs’ scientific requirements. Garvin replaced former astronaut John M. Grunsfeld, who had served in the post since September 2003. NASA had selected Grunsfeld to train as an astronaut for a future long-duration mission.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Chief Scientist,” news release 04-349, 21 October 2004.)
A commission composed of officials from ESA and the British National Space Centre released the results of their investigation into the loss of the Beagle 2 spacecraft, the first European spacecraft designed to explore the surface of Mars. On 19 December 2003, the Beagle 2 had successfully separated from ESA’s Mars Express, the spacecraft that had carried the Beagle 2 to its orbit of Mars. However, subsequently, Beagle 2 had failed to send any signals to mission engineers, and its eventual fate remained unknown. Although its report did not identify any single technical issue that had caused the mission loss, the investigating panel did provide 19 recommendations for future missions. These recommendations, implicitly critical of the Beagle 2 mission, suggested that future missions should have adequate funding and adequate testing, and that an agency with appropriate capabilities and resources should manage the missions.
ESA’s Mars Express orbiter relayed information between ground-based NASA engineers and NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Spirit, the first in-orbit communication between ESA and NASA spacecraft and the first successful international communications network outside of Earth. As part of their general efforts to cooperate in space exploration, the two space agencies had planned the information relay to enable future cooperative use of their communications technologies during Mars missions. In this particular communication sequence, Spirit’s operation personnel at NASA’s JPL transferred commands for the rover to ESA’s Space Operations Centre in Germany, which then transmitted the instructions to the Mars Express. The Express successfully commanded Spirit and, subsequently, relayed telemetry information from the rover to JPL via the Space Operations Centre.(NASA, “International Interplanetary Networking Succeeds,” news release 04-060, 12 February 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bush’s exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASA’s possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, “NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort,” Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
ESA reported that Mars Express had discovered the first direct evidence of water on Mars. Whereas some previous research had suggested that water might be present on Mars, Mars Express had detected the presence of actual water ice covered by a layer of frozen carbon dioxide at the planet’s south pole. The spacecraft had also found that the amount of carbon dioxide in Mars’s atmosphere was inadequate to have warmed the planet sufficiently for the formation of liquid water and the support of life on the planet’s surface. Scientists regarded the findings as crucial in determining whether Mars could have supported life in the past.(ESA, “Mars Express Sees Its First WaterScientific Results,” ESA news release 6-2004, 23 January 2004; Jean- Pierre Bibring, “Perennial Water Ice Identified in the South Polar Cap of Mars,” Nature 428, no. 6983 (8 April 2004): 627–630.)
A commission created by President George W. Bush released its report outlining how NASA and other organizations might implement President Bush’s new policy: the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration. The President’s Commission, led by Edward C. Aldridge Jr., endorsed the Vision for Space Exploration’s goals―to explore Mars and the Moon. In addition, the commission recommended that, to meet those goals, NASA needed to make numerous changes; the federal government needed to establish a permanent council to develop and coordinate space exploration policies; and the private sector needed to become more involved in space operations. Specific changes that the commission recommended were that NASA should focus on the research and development of space technology, and that private industry should conduct operational activities, such as launching payloads to low Earth orbit. The report also recommended that NASA pursue partnerships with the scientific community and with foreign space agencies.(President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, A Journey To Inspire, Innovate, and Discover: Report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (Washington, DC, June 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/news/reports/index.html (accessed 6 April 2009); Warren E. Leary and John Schwartz, “NASA Is Urged To Widen Role for Business,” New York Times, 15 June 2004.)
NASA reported that its Mars Exploration Rovers had discovered geological evidence indicating that Mars had once had water. The rover Spirit had found a volcanic rock containing fissures filled with material that could have crystallized from water. A few days earlier, on 2 March 2004, the rover Opportunity, operating nearly 6,600 miles (10,622 kilometers) from Spirit, had found minerals and geological features that appeared to have been leached by groundwater or to have been formed by sediment in what was previously a body of water. However, scientists were unable to conclude from the two rovers’ findings when Mars had actually had water in the past or whether the water had been located above or below the planet’s surface.(Guy Gugliotta, “Mars Rover Finds Signs of Water,” Washington Post, 7 March 2004; NASA, “Opportunity Rover Finds Strong Evidence Meridiani Planam Was Wet,” news release 04-077, 2 March 2004.)
a comet’s nucleus and to place a probe on a comet’s surfaceto study the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. Rosetta, equipped with solar arrays spanning 105 feet (32 meters) and relying on solar cells for its power supply, was also the first probe designed to travel past Mars. Scientists hoped that, in studying comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenkoa remnant of a primitive nebula from which Earth’s solar system emergedRosetta would help them understand more about the role of comets in forming the solar system and contributing to the development of life on Earth.(ESA, “Rosetta Begins Its 10-Year Journey to the Origins of the Solar System,” ESA news release 14-2004, 2 March 2004; Warren E. Leary, “Intricate European Mission Goes Hunting for a Comet,” New York Times, 24 February 2004.)
NASA launched its MESSENGER spacecraft on a seven-year mission to study Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun. MESSENGER―Mercury Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, and Ranging―launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:16 a.m. (EDT). Six countries had provided equipment for the spacecraft, which would photograph Mercury’s surface and analyze the planet’s magnetic field and mineral composition. Project scientists planned to use the resulting data to determine whether Mercury’s composition is similar to that of Earth, Mars, and Venus. Although the spacecraft was not the first to photograph Mercury―NASA’s Mariner 10 had photographed the planet during flybys in 1974 and 1975―MESSENGER was the first spacecraft designed to examine Mercury while orbiting the planet.(Mark Carreau, “Messenger Leaves on 7-Year Voyage,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 2004; NASA, “NASA Sending a Messenger to Mercury,” news release 04-215, 15 July 2004.)
William H. Pickering, a former Director of NASA’s JPL, died at the age of 93. Pickering had begun his career at JPL in 1944 and had served as Director from 1954 to 1976. Soon after becoming Director of JPL, Pickering had led a project that had successfully launched the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 into Earth orbit on 31 January 1958. During the remainder of Pickering’s tenure, JPL had launched the Ranger and Surveyor missions to the Moon and the Mariner missions to Mars and Venus. Pickering had received numerous awards during his lifetime: NASA had presented him with its Distinguished Service Medal, President Gerald R. Ford had awarded him the National Medal of Science, and the Queen of England had given him an honorary knighthood.(NASA, “NASA Remembers William H. Pickering, Former Director of JPL,” news release 04-094, 16 March 2004.)
ESA and UK Science Minister Lord David Sainsbury announced that ESA and the United Kingdom would conduct a joint inquiry into the failure of the Beagle 2 Mars lander. ESA Inspector-General René Bonnefoy would oversee the inquiry, which would investigate the reasons for the mission’s failure and establish lessons that ESA could apply in future missions. Beagle 2, a component of ESA’s Mars Express mission, had failed to communicate with ESA after the time of its scheduled landing on Mars on 25 December 2003. The Beagle 2 Management Board had declared the spacecraft lost on 6 February 2004.(ESA, “UK and ESA Announce Beagle 2 Inquiry―Investigation To Learn Lessons from Mars Lander,” ESA news release 9-2004, 11 February 2004.)
NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity landed on Mars nearly three weeks after its twin rover Spirit had landed on the planet. NASA had created the two mobile robotic rovers to explore rocks and soils on Mars to determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to sustain life. NASA had designed the mission so that the rovers would explore Mars simultaneously, on nearly opposite sides of the planet.(NASA, “NASA Hears from Opportunity Rover on Mars,” news release 04-037, 25 January 2004.)
NASA launched its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) at 7:43 a.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida on an Atlas 5 launch vehicle. The occasion marked the first time that NASA had used an Atlas 5 to launch an interplanetary mission. NASA had designed the MRO to conduct highly detailed analyses of Mars’s atmosphere, surface, and subsurface. From low orbit, the MRO would evaluate landing sites for future Mars missions and search for sites where water might have previously existed. NASA planned to examine the MRO data to seek evidence of previous life on the planet and to study planetary climate change. After two years of gathering data, the MRO would relay the information to Earth, using two robotic probes scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2008 and 2010.(NASA, “NASA’s Multipurpose Mars Mission Successfully Launched,” news release 05-218, 12 August 2005; Thomas H. Maugh II, “New Mars Orbiter Embarks on Ambitious Fact-Finding Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 13 August 2005.)
NASA announced that it had awarded Rice University’s Carbon Nanotechnology Laboratory (CNL) an US$11 million contract to produce a prototype power cable constructed of carbon nanotubes. The engineers expected the so-called quantum wires to conduct electricity up to 10 times better than copper, at 1/6th the weight. NASA anticipated that the technology would help return humans to the Moon and enable travel to Mars and beyond. Richard E. Smalley, the project’s Lead Investigator, explained that the Space Shuttle’s primary power-distribution system accounted for almost 7 percent of its weight. However, NASA’s next generation of human and robotic spacecraft would need far more power to support additional instrumentation and broadband communications, requiring a copper power-distribution system that would account for up to 25 percent of the craft’s weight. Under the contract, CNL would provide NASA with a 1- meter (3.2-foot) prototype of quantum wire by 2010, a task requiring major breakthroughs in the production of nanotubes. To date, scientists had succeeded in producing wires no longer than several centimeters. At the time NASA awarded the contract, only armchair nanotubesa type comprising 2 percent of all nanotubes were suitable for use as quantum wires. Researchers at CNL planned to grow these nanotubes like crystals, placing “seeds” in a laboratory reactor and pumping in a source of carbon, such as carbon monoxide, with the hope of creating perfect, long armchair nanotubes each time. The researchers would then twist the tubes together to produce a quantum wire according to NASA’s specifications.(NASA, “NASA Awards $11 Million “Quantum Wire” Contract to Rice,” news release J05-018, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/J05-018.html (accessed 9 September 2009); Amit Asaravala, “NASA Funds ‘Miracle Polymer’,” Wired News, 28 April 2005.)
After a delay of more than one year, ESA’s Mars Express deployed the first of three booms that form the craft’s Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere Sounding (MARSIS). The MARSIS booms would search for evidence of water under the surface of Mars. The deployment marked the beginning of a 10-day sequence, originally scheduled for April 2004. NASA’s JPL had conducted an investigation that had warned of the possibility that one or more of the antenna components could swing back and hit the spacecraft, a risk that had caused ESA to delay the deployment. Although an ESA review board had concluded that, even if such an event were to occur, the risk of damaging Mars Express remained low, scientists had voiced concerns that a strike from any of the booms could damage delicate instruments on board the orbiter. According to Mars Express Mission Manager Fred Jansen, engineers had analyzed the problem over the past year to assure themselves that any existing risks would not affect the spacecraft. As deployment commenced, telemetry data indicated that the first boom, which formed half of MARSIS’s primary antenna, had deployed successfully. ESA had scheduled the second half of the antenna to deploy four days later.
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASA’s Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probes―Viking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, “Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral,” Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
NASA announced that it had approved the extension of operations for the twin Mars Rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, for up to 18 months. The robotic craft had already surprised engineers and scientists, having completed 11 months of extended activity beyond their successful three- month primary missions. Opportunity had driven more than three miles since arriving at Mars, eight times the distance originally planned, and, in March 2005, had set a new record of 722 feet (220 meters) in a single day’s drive. Spirit had driven a shorter distance but was working in a much rougher terrain than Opportunity. Both rovers were exhibiting signs of wear and exposure, and scientists recognized that either mission could end suddenly because of a random part failure. James K. Erickson, Project Manager for the rovers at NASA’s JPL, remarked that, despite the wear and the effects of exposure, both rovers remained in exceptional shape. Erickson said that NASA would work to get as much benefit as possible for as long as the craft were capable of producing worthwhile scientific results. Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program J. Douglas McCuistion added that the rovers’ successes had strengthened NASA’s commitment to achieving the ambitious goals of returning samples from Mars and eventually sending a human expedition to the planet.(NASA, “Durable Mars Rovers Sent into Third Overtime Period,” news release 05-091, 6 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05091_mer_extension.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
ESA announced that its Mars Express spacecraft had discovered ancient geological structures and ice reservoirs―but not liquid water―below Mars’s surface. Mars Express, equipped with radar capable of conducting subsurface analyses of the planet, had detected a crater approximately 250 kilometers wide (155 miles wide) below the planet’s surface, as well as 1.8 kilometers (1.1 miles) of subsurface water ice near its north pole. However, the spacecraft had not detected the liquid water necessary to support life. Even deep below the surface of Mars, the planet’s polar temperatures decline to -129oC (-200oF), preventing its ice from melting. Scientists regarded the discovery of subsurface ice as evidence that Mars’s environment was unable to harbor life.(John Johnson, “European Mars Express Show[s] That the Red Planet Was Not as Warm or Wet as Previously Thought,” Los Angeles Times, 1 December 2005; “Radar Provides Deeper View of Ice on Mars,” Nature 438, no. 7068 (1 December 2005): 545.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
ESA and the government of the United Kingdom (UK) officially published the report of the investigation into the circumstances and possible reasons for the failure of the Beagle 2 mission. Beagle 2, the Mars lander that had “piggybacked” aboard ESA’s Mars Express Orbiter, had failed to communicate after its landing date of 25 December 2005. The UK government and ESA had commissioned the report in February 2004, and the commission had completed the report in April 2004. Initially, ESA and the UK government had refused to publish the report, citing details of confidential intergovernmental agreements, as well as commercially sensitive information. Instead, they had issued a set of recommendations for future missions. However, the New Scientist had requested the report’s publication under the UK’s new Freedom of Information Act, in force since the beginning of 2005. Colin Pillinger, the planetary scientist who had first proposed the Beagle 2 project, and Mark Sims, the mission’s project managerboth at the Open University in the UKagreed that the report contained little, if any, commercially sensitive information. However, the report concluded that ESA and the UK government should never have approved the project. ESA committee investigating the loss of the probe had found several fundamental errors, such as classifying the lander as an instrument aboard Mars Express, instead of as a separate spacecraft, and making inaccurate estimates about the characteristics of the Martian atmosphere. The committee also determined that ESA and the UK had underfunded the mission from the start. Moreover, the committee found that the mission’s logistics were too complex for Pillinger’s team.(British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2”; Justin Mullins, “Beagle 2 ‘Should Never Have Been Built’,” New Scientist, 4 February 2005; BBC News, “Report Scorns Beagle 2 Decision,” 4 February 2005.)
NASA officially refuted news reports that had circulated on 16 February claiming that NASA scientists affiliated with ARC had found strong evidence that life might exist on Mars. According to the news reports, during a private meeting in Washington, DC, two astrobiologists from Ames had told a group of space officials that they had found strong evidence, in the form of methane signatures, that life currently exists on Mars, hidden in caves and sustained by pockets of water. NASA stated that it did not have any observational data from any current Mars missions to support the claim. NASA further stated that the work the scientists had conducted did not directly support any conclusion regarding the existence of life on Mars but, rather, that the scientists’ research could help formulate a strategy for searching for such life. The scientists had not submitted any research papers asserting the existence of Martian life to any scientific journal.(NASA, “NASA Statement on False Claim of Evidence of Life on Mars,” news release 05-052, 18 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05052_mars_claim.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Bloomberg News, “NASA Says Claims of Evidence of Current Life on Mars Are False,” 19 February 2005; Brian Berger, “Exclusive: NASA Researchers Claim Evidence of Present Life on Mars,” Space.com, 16 February 2005, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/mars_life_050216.html (accessed 28 August 2009).)
The U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA’s proposal to reduce spending on aviation research by 20 percent over five years, which would necessitate the closure of some wind tunnels and other centers. Overall, the Bush administration had proposed a 2.4 percent increase in NASA’s budget, with most of that increase directed toward funding travel to the Moon and Mars, initiatives requiring NASA to eliminate or reduce its other programs, such as aviation research. NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Research J. Victor Lebacqz defended the program, remarking that the United States remained a global power in aviation and had developed technologies to improve safety, reduce environmental impact, and increase efficiency of aviation operations. However, Lebacqz stated that NASA needed a clearer vision for the goals of the program. John M. Klineberg, a retired NASA official and industry executive, who had headed a National Research Council (NRC) study group in 2004, testified before the committee. The NRC study group had published a review of NASA’s aeronautics programs. Klineberg warned against using the group’s recommendations out of context to justify major cuts in programs. He testified that NASA’s proposed aviation-research budget was a disaster, putting the program at risk of becoming irrelevant to the future of aeronautics in the United States and throughout the world. In an interview following the hearing, Klineberg emphasized that the study group had suggested consolidating and focusing programs but did not support budgetary cuts eliminating entire areas of research.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Proposal To Reduce Spending for Aviation Research by 20% Dismays Experts,” New York Times, 17 March 2005; Malia Rulon for Associated Press, “Lawmakers Question Proposed NASA Cuts,” 17 March 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The Future of Aeronautics at NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 16 March 2005.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
NASA’s Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASA’s first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, “NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, “STS-114: Return to Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, “Return to Flight: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, “NASA Grounds Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
NASA’s JPL released a series of images that Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) had captured on 20 and 21 April, which showed, for the first time, NASA’s Mars Odyssey and ESA’s Mars Express spacecraft orbiting Mars. MGS had orbited the planet since 1997, Mars Odyssey had arrived in 2001, and Mars Express had arrived in late 2003. MGS and Mars Odyssey followed similar near- polar orbits, sometimes passing within 9 miles (15 kilometers) of each other, but Odyssey orbited higher than MGS to prevent collision. MGS had captured two images of Odyssey 7.5 seconds apartthe first from a distance of 56 miles (90 kilometers) and the second from 84 miles (135 kilometers). The following day, MGS had captured an image of Mars Express from a distance of 155 miles (249 kilometers).(Tariq Malik, “New Photos Are First of Spacecraft Orbiting Mars,” Space.com, 20 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050519_mgs_orbiters.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
NASA launched two meteorological satellites, CloudSat and CALIPSO (Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations), aboard a Boeing Delta 2 rocket, at 11:02 (UT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellites would eventually circle 438 miles (705 kilometers) above Earth in a Sun-synchronous polar orbit. CloudSat, an experimental mission designed to study the effects of clouds on climate and weather, was 1,000 times more sensitive than typical weather radar, using millimeter-wavelength radar to measure the altitude and properties of clouds. CALIPSO carried three instruments to study the role that clouds and atmospheric aerosols (airborne particles) play in regulating Earth’s weather, climate, and air quality. The two satellites would become part of a constellation of Earth-observing satellites known as the A-train, joining the satellites Aqua, Aura, and PARASOL.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630; NASA, “NASA Launches Satellites for Weather, Climate, Air-Quality Studies,” news release 06-190, 28 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/apr/HQ_06190_Cloudsat_ CALIPSO_launch.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2006—The Year in Review,” July 20, 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2006/us.html (accessed 3 March 2010).)
NASA announced that its Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) was likely no longer operational. The spacecraft had ceased communications with NASA on 2 November 2006, and NASA’s subsequent efforts to reestablish communications had failed. NASA did not officially terminate the spacecraft’s mission. NASA had launched MGS in November 1996 to create a map of Mars. After completing its primary mission in January 2001, MGS had remained in operation, and NASA had decided to extend the spacecraft’s mission. The MGS mission had eventually become the longest and most productive ever sent to Mars, producing nearly 240,000 images that revealed features of Mars never before seen, as well as the first strong evidence of the previous existence of water on the planet.(NASA, “NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor May Be at Mission’s End,” news release 06-357, 21 November 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/nov/HQ_06357_MGS_update.html (accessed 7 July 2010); Thomas H. Maugh II, “Missing Mars Craft Appears To Be a Lost Cause,” Los Angeles Times, 22 November 2006.)
Scientists published research based on photographs taken by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor (MGS). The images revealed the strongest evidence to date of occasional flowing water on the surface of Mars. MGS had begun orbiting Mars in 1997. NASA had used MGS repeatedly, to capture images of hundreds of sites on Mars, although in November 2006, NASA had announced that Surveyor’s mission was likely at an end. A team of scientists led by Michael C. Malin of Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego, California, had compared MGS images taken in 2004 and 2005 with previous MGS images and had discovered sediment deposits in two gullies on Mars. The deposits had not been present in earlier MGS images of the site, suggesting that water had carried the sediment through the gullies at some point in the previous seven years. However, because of Mars’s thin atmosphere and cold temperatures, liquid water is unlikely to remain on the planet’s surface. The researchers hypothesized that water emerging from an underground source could remain in a liquid state long enough to transport debris down a slope before freezing. Scientists consider liquid water necessary for the existence of life and believe that its presence on Mars would indicate the possibility of microbial life on that planet.(NASA, “NASA Images Suggest Water Still Flows in Brief Spurts on Mars,” news release 06-361, 6 December 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/dec/HQ_06362_Water_on_Mars.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Michael C. Malin et al., “Present-Day Impact Cratering Rate and Contemporary Gully Activity on Mars,” Science 314, no. 5805 (8 December 2006): 1573–1577, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/314/5805/1573 (DOI 10.1126/science.1135156; accessed 8 June 2010).)
NASA released to the public two long-term strategies for placing humans on the Moon and Mars. The first of these was the Global Exploration Strategy, which NASA had written at the request of the U.S. Congress. The Global Exploration Strategy outlined NASA’s plan for accomplishing the objectives established in NASA’s strategic plan and in President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration. In this document, NASA stated that it intended to pursue human and robotic exploration of the Moon, as well as explaining what the planned lunar exploration mission would do when it reached the Moon. The second strategic plan that NASA made public was its proposal for “lunar architecture,” documenting requirements for implementing and enabling critical exploration objectives. The proposed architecture included robotic precursor missions to
NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) began the primary science phase of its mission, a phase scheduled to continue until December 2008. NASA had designed MRO to conduct reconnaissance and exploration of Mars, while orbiting the planet, and had launched the orbiter in August 2005. During the primary science phase, MRO would produce high-resolution surveys of 15 percent of Mars’s surface. NASA planned to use the images to identify particular areas for more detailed examination. NASA anticipated that data from MRO’s surveys would enable scientists to examine changes in the surface of Mars occurring over time, including the effects of water and wind.(NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Newest Mars Orbiter Passes Communications Relay Test,” 17 November 2006, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/features.cfm?feature=1230 (accessed 16 August 2010); NASA, “Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter Arrival” (press kit, March 2006), 8–18, http://marsprogram.jpl.nasa.gov/mro/ files/mro/mro-arrival.pdf (accessed 16 August 2010).)
transport up to six persons to the ISS, and to support crew transfers for Mars missions. The contract’s estimated value was US$3.9 billion. NASA expected work on Orion to occur between 8 September 2006 and 7 September 2013. Although all of NASA’s 10 centers would provide technical and engineering support for the project, Lockheed Martin would perform the majority of the engineering work at NASA’s JSC and would complete the final assembly at NASA’s KSC. NASA planned for Orion’s first crewed launch to occur no later than 2014 and for the CEV’s
establish the operational infrastructure necessary for eventual human missions to the Moon and possibly to Mars. NASA anticipated that human journeys to the Moon would begin in 2020.(NASA, “NASA Unveils Global Exploration Strategy and Lunar Architecture,” news release 06-361, 4 December 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/dec/HQ_06361_ESMD_Lunar_Architecture.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
The Russian space agency Roskosmos announced its plans to launch dozens of spacecraft between 2006 and 2015, including probes to conduct atmospheric and surface studies of Mars and Venus. Roskosmos also intended to launch 30 fixed communications-and-broadcasting satellites and 10 satellites to provide mobile communications services. In addition, Roskosmos planned to create a pair of geostationary satellites that would provide meteorological services, part of a satellite network under the auspices of the World Meteorological Organization.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Russia Plans Space Probes To Explore Mars, Venus,” 30 August 2006.)
Opportunity—one of NASA’s robotic Mars rovers—began exploring the Victor Crater, an area of Mars that NASA scientists hoped would provide researchers with the most useful data yet acquired about the planet’s history. Arriving at the crater’s rim, Opportunity began sending a volley of color panoramic images. However, before Opportunity actually entered the crater, NASA scientists planned for the robotic rover to circle it, determining a good location to enter and eventually to exit the site. The crater, which measures nearly 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) wide and 200 feet (61 meters) deep, is five times larger than any of the five craters the two Mars rovers, Opportunity and Spirit, had visited previously. Because of the crater’s size and depth, it has many layers of exposed rock. The images that the rover captured would enable scientists to view and analyze the rock layers. The study of these layers would provide clues to the planet’s geological and meteorological history, such as indications of when Mars had liquid water.(Marc Kaufman, “Opportunity Panoramas of Martian Crater Thrill Scientists,” Washington Post, 7 October 2006; Mark Carreau, “On Mars, NASA Finds a ‘Tremendously Important Scientific Discovery,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 2006.)
NASA announced the completion of the first systems requirements review (SRR) for its Constellation Program, a human spaceflight program aimed at sending astronauts to the Moon and possibly to Mars. NASA was conducting SRRs of human spacecraft systems to establish a foundation for the design, development, construction, and operation of those systems. NASA had completed its last review in August 1973 for the Space Shuttle program. The Constellation Program SRR examined the systems intended to replace the Shuttle systems, including the Orion spacecraft and the Ares I and Ares V launch rockets. The review confirmed numerous parameters of those systems, including Orion’s launch weight for lunar missions (61,000 pounds, or nearly 27,700 kilograms) and the Ares rockets’ capacity to provide sufficient thrust to launch Orion into orbit. NASA also announced that it was preparing detailed project-level reviews of the Constellation Program’s systems, scheduled for completion in early 2007. After completing those reviews, NASA would conduct another full review to reconcile information gained in the project-level reviews with the data from the first SRR.(NASA, “NASA Completes Milestone Review of Next Human Spacecraft System,” news release 06-354. 16 November 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/nov/HQ_06354_Constellation.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
NASA’s KSC selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services to build the Atlas V rocket that would launch the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission. The mission, scheduled for launch in fall 2009 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, would carry to Mars a six-wheeled rover, equipped with cameras mounted on a mast. Twice as long and three times as heavy as the Mars Exploration rovers Spirit and Opportunity, MSL would explore Mars for two years, collecting Martian soil samples and rock cores and analyzing them for organic compounds and for environmental conditions capable of supporting microbial life, now or in the past. Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which had entered Mars’s orbit in March 2006, had transmitted to Earth images that NASA scientists would use to select a landing site for MSL. MRO would serve as a communications relay for MSL after the rover landed on the Martian surface.(Chris Bergin, “Another Mars Rover—Atlas V Chosen,” NASASpaceflight.com, 2 June 2006, http://www. nasaspaceflight.com/2006/06/another-mars-rover-atlas-v-chosen (accessed 9 August 2010); Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin’s Atlas V Selected To Launch Mars Science Laboratory in 2009,” news release, 6 June 2006, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2006/LOCKHEEDMARTINSATLASVSELECTEDLAUNCH. html (accessed 9 August 2010).)
After a seven-month, 310-mile (498.9-kilometer) journey, NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) completed the crucial step of entering orbit around Mars. To achieve initial capture by the planet’s gravity, the orbiter fired its main propulsion engines for 27 minutes, thereby reducing its speed by 3,540 kilometers per hour (2,200 miles per hour). This placed the US$720 million spacecraft in a highly elliptical orbit. The next phase of the orbiter’s mission would involve a seven-month “aerobraking” process. The spacecraft would dip into Mars’s atmosphere hundreds of times, using the friction of atmospheric drag to move from an approximately 35- hour orbit, extending almost 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) above the planet, to a 2-hour polar orbit that skims only 190 miles (300 kilometers) above Mars’s surface. A two-year phase of scientific study would follow the aerobraking phase. During those two years, the orbiter would use six instruments to study every level of Mars, from underground layers to the top of the atmosphere. The instruments would include the most powerful telescopic camera ever sent to another planet, an advanced mineral mapper to identify water-related areas, radar to probe beneath the surface for buried ice and water, and a weather camera that would monitor the planet daily. MRO Project Manager James Graf predicted, “this spacecraft will return more data than all previous Mars missions combined.”(NASA, “Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter Arrival,” press kit, March 2006, http://marsprogram.jpl.nasa.gov/ mro/files/mro/mro-arrival.pdf (accessed 30 July 2010); Damian Carrington, “New Mars Probe Safely Enters Orbit,” New Scientist, 10 March 2006; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. Spacecraft Enters Orbit Around Mars,” New York Times, 11 March 2006.)
NASA’s JPL awarded Lockheed Martin a preliminary start-up contract for the design and concept of the aeroshell system for Mars Science Laboratory (MSL). Scheduled for launch in the fall of 2009, MSL would support NASA’s exploration for water on Mars, in preparation for human exploration missions. The aeroshell system, which Lockheed Martin had built, included the thermal protection system (heat shield) that would encapsulate and protect the MSL rover from the intense heat and friction generated during the system’s descent through the Martian atmosphere. In addition, the aeroshell system included a parachute system and a crane, which would lower the rover to a soft landing on the surface of Mars.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Design the Mars Science Lab Aeroshell,” 29 March 2006, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2006/LOCKHEEDMARTINAWARDEDCONTRACT DESIGN.html (accessed 21 April 2010); Associated Press, “Lockheed Martin Making Mars Heat Shield,” 30 March 2006.)
During a ceremony rededicating its Glenn Research Center (GRC) Plum Brook site in Ohio, NASA announced its intention to use the Plum Brook Station’s Space Power Facility (SPF) to test the CEV Orion. NASA had designed Orion, which was in development, to enable research on the Moon, Mars, and other destinations in Earth’s solar system. NASA intended for the SPF—the only facility in the world large enough to undertake full-scale testing—to conduct environmental tests of the Orion spacecraft, using simulations of conditions during launch, in- orbit operations, and reentry. The facility would also conduct thermal, acoustic, mechanical- vibration, and electromagnetic-interference tests.
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the People’s Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russia’s Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, “China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars,” 28 March 2007.)
NASA’s JPL announced that the Phoenix Mars Lander flight-operations team had successfully tested the craft’s descent-monitoring radar and UHF radio on 24 August. During its flight to Mars, Phoenix had communicated with Earth via an X-band radio unit, but the craft would switch to UHF radio after landing on Mars. Because the X-band radio unit was mounted on a part of the craft that would jettison shortly before Phoenix reached the Martian atmosphere, the UHF radio would become critical to communications once the craft reached Mars.(NASA JPL, “Phoenix Mars Lander Status Report: Radar and Other Gear Pass Checkouts,” news release 2007- 094a, 4 September 2007, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2007-094a (accessed 9 August 2010); Dave Mosher, “Phoenix Spacecraft Passes In-Flight Tests,” Space.com, 5 September 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/070905_phoenix_update.html (added 9 August 2010).)
The journal Science published a special issue about water on Mars. The issue included five reports that had used the scientific results derived from the detailed images that NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) had captured during the first 100 days of its mission. MRO’s primary mission was to study Mars’s hydrologic history, using six scientific instruments, including the High-Resolution Imaging Science Experiment camera (HiRISE), which provided 10 times the resolution of any previous Mars imager. The papers published in this special issue of Science indicated that evidence for liquid water on Mars was rare and difficult to discern. NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor (MGS), which had visited Mars in 1999, had raised researchers’ hopes that the probe had detected modern flows of liquid water on Mars. However, MRO’s observations suggested otherwise—that landslides of loose, dry materials had created the deposits that scientists had interpreted as evidence of liquid water. In addition, MRO had captured images suggesting that flowing lava, rather than water, had shaped some Martian landforms, such as branched channels and fan-like deposits. Moreover, MRO images indicated that, although certain gullies and rims of craters did indeed contain liquid water, the presence of water at these locations did not reveal the presence of a water table. Rather, the images suggested that objects impacting Mars had triggered trickles of water at these sites. Radar and gravity data indicated that the cap on Mars’s south pole held the largest reservoir of water ice on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Orbiter Provides Insights About Mars Water and Climate,” news release 07-206, 20 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07206_Mars_Water.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Joanne Baker, “Introduction to Special Issue: Water, Water, Not Everywhere?” Science 317, no. 5845 (21 September 2007): 1705, http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/summary/sci;317/5845/1705?maxtoshow=&hits=10&RESULT FORMAT=&fulltext=Mars+Reconnaissance+Orbiter&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&resourcetype=HWCIT (DOI: 10.1126/science.317.5845.1705; accessed 10 August 2010); Jeanna Bryner, “Hope for Water on Mars Dims with Sharp New Images,” Space.com, 20 September 2007, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/070920_mars_tale. html (accessed 10 August 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Roskosmos head Anatoly N. Perminov signed agreements in Moscow allowing two Russian scientific instruments to fly aboard NASA spacecraft. According to the agreement, the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) would fly aboard NASA’s LRO, which was scheduled to begin a yearlong mission in October 2008. In addition, the Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) instrument would travel to Mars aboard NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), a robotic rover scheduled to launch in 2009. Designed to search for evidence of water ice, LEND would map concentrations of hydrogen at the lunar surface, or just below it. The DAN instrument would conduct similar investigations on Mars— measuring hydrogen to analyze the interaction of neutrons with the Martian surface.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft To Carry Russian Science Instruments,” news release 07-219, 3 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07219_combined_Russian_MOU.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA’s JPL announced that, after entering the Victoria Crater on 13 September, Opportunity had reached its first destination inside the crater, driving 7.45 meters (24 feet) on 18 September and 2.47 meters (8 feet) further on 22 September. On 25 September, the rover had descended 2.25 meters (7.38 feet) down the inner slope of the 800-meter-wide (2,625-foot-wide) crater to a band of relatively bright bedrock, positioning itself to examine a selected slab of rock composed of three distinct layers. After the science team had conducted safety checks, Opportunity would examine the rock, using the tools at the end of its robotic arm. Safety checks were necessary because Opportunity was sitting on the slope at a 25° tilt. Victoria was the largest crater that Opportunity had visited during its nearly four Earth years of Mars exploration. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, the Rover Science Principal Investigator, explained that, through the several planned stops along the band of rock, scientists hoped to 141 figure out the processes that had led to Victoria’s formation and to its distinctive appearance.
NASA awarded Scripps Institution of Oceanography a grant valued at US$750,000, to develop an instrument to detect signs of biological compounds on Mars. European Space Agency (ESA) selected the Urey Mars Organic and Oxidant Detector (Urey), named for the late Nobel Laureate, Harold C. Urey, to fly aboard its ExoMars rover mission in 2013. Jeffrey L. Bada, Lead Investigator on the Urey team and Director of the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Exobiology at Scripps, explained that Urey would be the first instrument with the capacity to detect amino acids, as well as other possible biomolecules. To search for trace levels of amino acids and for some components of DNA and RNA, Urey would heat and analyze spoon-sized amounts of Martian soil, collected from 2 meters (6.6 feet) beneath Mars’s surface. Urey would then trap and condense any molecules released from the heated soil and probe them with a laser. If the laser detected amino acids in the soil, another instrument, developed at the University of California at Berkeley, would examine the amino-acid composition to determine whether the molecules came from biological or nonbiological sources.(Scripps Institution of Oceanography, “NASA Funds Scripps Instrument for Probing for Life on Mars: Detector To Hunt for Organic Molecules During Proposed 2013 Mission,” Scripps News, 9 January 2007, http://scrippsnews. ucsd.edu/Releases/?releaseID=768 (accessed 9 November 2009).)
NASA announced that, for the fifth time, it would extend the missions of the Mars Exploration Rovers Spirit and Opportunity. The twin rovers had landed on Mars in January 2004, embarking on missions originally planned to last 90 days. John L. Callas, Mars Rover Project Manager at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, remarked that, although Spirit and Opportunity were showing some signs of aging, they remained “in good health” and capable of continuing to collect scientific data. At the time of the announcement of the missions’ extension, Spirit had driven 4.5 miles (7.3 kilometers) and had returned more than 102,000 images. Opportunity had driven 7.2 miles (11.6 kilometers) and had returned more than 94,000 images.(NASA, “NASA Extends Operations for Its Long-Lived Mars Rovers,” news release 07-208, 15 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_072088_Mars_Rovers_Funding_Ext.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawn’s mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and Jupiter—Vesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawn’s instrument suite to measure the asteroids’ elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, “NASA’s Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt,” news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, “Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, “NASA’s Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids ‘Frozen in Time’,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, “NASA’s Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids,” Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
NASA’s Phoenix Mars Lander launched aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:36 (UT). The 350-kilogram (772-pound) Lander carried scientific instruments and a robotic arm that would vertically penetrate the icy soil of the Vastitas Borealis, an arctic plain bearing similarities to central Greenland or northern Alaska. Phoenix’s instruments included eight on- board ovens designed to analyze vapors from soil samples to identify the presence of organic compounds, which would indicate whether biological processes had occurred. To avoid contamination, Phoenix would use each oven just once. Phoenix also carried multi-spectral instruments that would collect data revealing the composition of Mars’s surface minerals and of its atmosphere, to an altitude of 20 kilometers (12.4 miles).(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 646, 1 September 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx646.html (accessed 14 June 2010); John Johnson Jr., “Phoenix Spacecraft Launches to Mars,” Los Angeles Times, 6 August 2007.)
NASA announced that its solar-powered Mars rover duo, Spirit and Opportunity, had survived severe dust storms and were ready to continue their mission. Spirit had awakened and, on 5 September, had climbed onto a plateau of layered bedrock, its long-term destination. On the plateau, known as Home Plate, Spirit would examine clues about an explosive mixture of lava and water. Meanwhile, Opportunity had begun preparing for its descent into Victoria Crater, where it would examine an exposed layer of bright rocks. The rocks might provide preserved evidence of an ancient interaction between the Martian atmosphere and surface. Dust storms in July had delayed Opportunity’s scheduled descent into the crater, blocking significant amounts of sunlight and causing researchers to become concerned that the rovers’ daily energy supplies might plunge too low for recovery.(NASA, “Mars Rovers Survive Severe Dust Storms, Ready for Next Objectives,” news release 07-187, 7 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07187_Mars_Rovers.html (accessed 4 August 2010).)
NASA announced that the chemical analyzer at the end of the arm of the Mars rover Spirit had measured a concentration of pure silica in a soil sample at Gusev Crater, providing the strongest evidence to date that Mars was much wetter in the ancient past than at present. At 90 percent, the concentrated deposit of silica could only have formed in the presence of water. Spirit’s discovery had been the result of a mechanical failure. One of the rover’s six wheels, which had become incapable of rotating, had gouged a deep impression as it moved through the soil. The scraping had exposed patches of bright soil, leading to the discovery of the silica. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, Principal Investigator for the Mars rovers’ scientific instruments, underscored the significance of the discovery, stating, “the fact that we found something this new and different after nearly 1,200 days on Mars makes it even more remarkable.” J. Douglas McCuistion, Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program, added that the unexpected discovery was a reminder that Spirit and Opportunity were still conducting cutting-edge exploration more than three years into their extended mission.
for designing the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon and, eventually, to transport human explorers to Mars. Gilbrech had joined NASA in 1991 and had played a key role in helping NASA solve the problem of the Shuttle’s dangerous foam debris, which had caused the Columbia tragedy in 2003. Griffin also named Robert D. Cabana, Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC in Houston since 2004, to replace Gilbrech as Director of NASA’s SSC, where he would oversee all operations of NASA’s primary center for rocket-propulsion testing and of the Applied Research and Technology Project Office. NASA had selected Cabana as an astronaut in 1985. He had flown twice as a Space Shuttle pilot and twice as a Shuttle commander, accumulating more than 1,000 hours in space.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Announces Senior Leadership Appointments,” news release 07-175, 10 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07175_Gilbrech_Cabana.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Mark Carreau, “NASA Names New Leader for Moon Exploration,” Houston Chronicle, 12 August 2007.)
A team of researchers, led by Roger J. Phillips of the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, announced in the online version of the journal Science that NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) had gathered evidence indicating that Mars’s lithosphere is colder and thicker than scientists had previously thought. Using the Shallow Radar (SHARAD) on the MRO, the researchers had produced the most precise pictures to date of the Martian crust and upper mantle below the polar ice cap. The ice cap on Mars is 1.2 miles (1.93 kilometers) deep and 310,000 square miles (802,896.31 square kilometers) wide. On Earth, the force of a similar weight would cause the lithosphere to sag, but the Martian lithosphere remains level and even. The crust’s rigidity implies that the planet’s interior is colder than scientists had previously thought, indicating that any aquifers of liquid water that may exist on Mars would lie deeper below the surface, closer to the planet’s warm core. The radar pictures also showed that the crust is composed of layers of icy dust, interspersed with layers of almost pure ice. The researchers believed that vacillations in Mars’s orbit had caused the planet’s climate to change, resulting in these layers. ASI, the Italian space agency, had produced the SHARAD. NASA’s JPL managed MRO for NASA’s SMD.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Finds Interior of Mars Is Colder,” news release 08-128, 15 May 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_08128_MRO_Mars_Temp.html (accessed 16 March 2011); Charles Q. Choi, “Brrr! Mars Colder Than Expected,” Space.com, 16 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5347-brrr-mars-colder- expected.html (accessed 16 March 2011); see also Roger J. Phillips, “Mars North Polar Deposits: Stratigraphy, Age, and Geodynamical,” Science 320, no. 5880 (30 May 2008): 1182−1185.)
NASA announced that officials had ceased operations on the Phoenix Mars Lander after Lander stopped communicating with mission engineers on 2 November 2008. The project team had originally scheduled Phoenix for three months of operations, launching Phoenix on 4 August 2007 and landing it on Mars on 25 May 2008. NASA had extended its mission twice until, with the seasonal decline in sunlight, Phoenix’s solar arrays could no longer charge its batteries. During its mission, the US$428 million Lander had taken more than 25,000 pictures of Mars and had observed the planet’s soil and weather, looking for indications that Mars might have had an environment suitable for microbes in the past. Phoenix had documented falling snow on Mars; had found calcium carbonate, perchlorates, and salts deposits; had observed alkaline soil; and had verified the presence of two distinct types of water ice. The University of Arizona had led the Phoenix mission, and NASA’s JPL had managed the project.(NASA, “Mars Phoenix Lander Finishes Successful Work on Red Planet,” news release 08-284, 10 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-284_Phoenix_Finishes_ Mission.html (accessed 22 August 2011); Kenneth Chang, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Lander and Ends Its Mission,” New York Times, 11 November.)
NASA’s Phoenix spacecraft made a successful landing in the Martian northern polar region, beginning a three-month mission to burrow into the soil of Mars in search of water ice and carbon-based compounds. Phoenix had launched on 4 August 2007 and had completed a 422- million-mile (679.14- kilometer) journey to reach Mars. Phoenix was the sixth spacecraft to land safely on Mars and the first craft since the 1976 Viking 2 to land without airbags. The spacecraft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems, was 7 feet (2.13 meters) tall and weighed 904 pounds (410.05 kilograms). It contained seven scientific instruments, including cameras, small chemistry labs, an 8-foot-long (2.44-meter-long) robotic arm, and a weather station. The Phoenix mission, which cost US$457 million, would be the first to collect water samples on another planet. The University of Arizona was leading the mission, in partnership with NASA’s JPL and Lockheed Martin in Denver. International contributors to the mission included CSA; the University of Copenhagen and the University of Aarhus, both in Denmark; the Max Planck Institute in 65 Germany; the University of Neuchatel in Switzerland; and the Finnish Meteorological Institute.
94NASA, “NASA Tests Moon Imaging Spacecraft at Goddard,” news release 08-194, 31 July 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08194_LRO_Environment_Tests.html (accessed 18 May 2011). stickier than scientists had expected. After allowing some of the water to evaporate from a sample measuring 3 cubic centimeters (0.18 cubic inches), scientists had used Phoenix’s whirling rasp to grate the soil into the TEGA. The TEGA had analyzed the vapor that the sample released when heated to the melting point of 32°F (0°C), confirming the presence of water in the soil. The analyzer had also examined the sample while it was heating to 1,800°F (982.22°C). Although the Mars Odyssey spacecraft had first sighted ice on the planet’s surface while orbiting Mars in 2002, Phoenix’s test was the first chemical analysis to prove the existence of water ice on Mars. NASA announced that it planned to add 90 days to Phoenix’s original mission, extending the mission through 30 September 2008.(Kenneth Chang, “Test of Mars Soil Sample Confirms Presence of Ice,” New York Times, 1 August 2008; NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Confirms Martian Water, Mission Extended,” news release 08-195, 31 July 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08_195_Phoenix_water.html (accessed 18 May 2008); David Perlman, “NASA Craft Probes Ice on Mars,” San Francisco Chronicle, 1 August 2008.)
Researchers led by Mikki M. Osterloo of the University of Hawaii announced in the journal Science that their team had found evidence of salt deposits on the surface of Mars. The scientists explained that the existence of salt deposits would provide evidence that Mars had once had an abundant supply of near-surface water, which could have sustained life. NASA’s Mars Odyssey Thermal Emission Imaging System, a camera capable of producing images in visible light and infrared wavelengths, had made the discovery. The images showed spectral features consistent with chloride minerals, located at approximately 200 sites in the southern hemisphere. The salt deposits ranged in size from 0.5 square miles (1.3 square kilometers) to 25 times that size, with a thickness ranging from 3 to 10 feet (0.9 to 3 meters). Scientists believed that the mineral sites, which were approximately 3.5 to 3.9 billion years old, had formed when groundwater seeped to the surface and evaporated, leaving behind salty deposits.(NASA, “NASA Mission Finds New Clues To Guide the Search for Life on Mars,” news release 08-084, 20 March 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/mar/HQ_08084_Mars_Deposits.html (accessed 13 January 2011); David Mosher, “Newly Found Martian Salt Deposits Suggest Ancient Life,” Space.com, 20 March 2008, http://www.space.com/5150-newly-martian-salt-deposits-suggest-ancient-life.html (accessed 13 January 2011); M. M. Osterloo et al., “Chloride-Bearing Materials in the Southern Highlands of Mars,” Science 319, no. 5870 (21 March 2008): 1651−1654.)
A team of scientists led by John W. Holt of the University of Texas at Austin announced in the journal Science that they had discovered large buried glaciers of water ice in the Hellas Basin on Mars. Using the Shallow Radar instrument on NASA’s MRO, the team had made radar soundings of the gently sloping geographical features known as aprons. Scientists had long puzzled over these features. The radio waves had passed through the aprons without a significant loss of strength, indicating that the area contains a thick layer of ice, covered by a thin layer of rocky debris. The velocity of the radio waves was consistent with the composition of water ice. The researchers believed that these glaciers are the largest deposits of ice on Mars outside the polar caps. Besides providing a possible source of water for human explorers, the glacial ice may have scientific value: on Earth, buried glacial ice has preserved a record of ancient organisms and a history of the planet’s climate.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Detects Buried Glaciers on Mars,” news release 08-304, 20 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-304_MRO_BuriedGlaciers.html (accessed 22 August 2011); see also John W. Holt et al., “Radar Sounding Evidence for Buried Glaciers in the Southern Mid-Latitudes of Mars,” Science 322, no. 5905 (21 November 2008): 1235−1238.)
Andrews-Hanna, Mary T. Zuber, and W. Bruce Banerdt, “The Borealis Basin and the Origin of the Martian Crustal Dichotomy,” Nature 453, no. 7199 (26 June 2008): 1212–1215. Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics. At NASA, Shank had served as Director of Strategic Investments for the Office of Program Analysis and Evaluation.(NASA, “Strategic Communications Chief Hopkins Leaving NASA,” news release 08-164, 30 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08164_Hopkins_leaving_NASA.html (accessed 21 April 2011). 81 NASA, “NASA Reveals New Discoveries from Mercury,” news release 08-166, 3 July 2008, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08166_Messenger_Mercury.html (accessed 26 May 2001); Andrea Thompson, “Volcanoes on Mercury Solve 30-Year Mystery,” Space.com, 3 July 2008, http://www.space.com/5589-volcanoes- mercury-solve-30-year-mystery.html (accessed 26 May 2011).)
A team of scientists led by Janice L. Bishop of the SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute announced in the journal Science that they had found geological evidence that water, and possibly microorganisms, had been present in Mars’s Mawrth Vallis region in the past. Using NASA’s MRO’s Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM), the scientists had studied the layers of sediment comprising the 4 billion-year-old clay deposits of that region. The top layer of clay, which contained many aluminum deposits, had probably formed in a wet environment when other minerals were leached from the soil leaving large amounts of aluminum behind. Immediately below the top layer containing aluminum-rich clay was a layer of silica opal. Clay rich in reduced iron formed a still lower layer. A large body of water interacting with a lakebed of basaltic ash or rock probably formed the lowest layer, which is composed of iron and magnesium smectites. Bishop’s team noted that, on Earth, the actions of microorganisms frequently cause iron reduction in the soil. However, the team also stated that other forces could have been responsible, on Mars.(Andrea Thompson, “Clays Shed Light on History of Mars Water and Possibly Life,” Space.com, 7 August 2008, http://www.space.com/5709-clays-shed-light-history-mars-water-possibly-life.html (accessed 20 July 2011); see also Janice L. Bishop et al., “Phyllosilicate Diversity and Past Aqueous Activity Revealed at Mawrth Vallis, Mars,” Science 321, no. 5890 (8 August 2008): 830−833.)
A team of scientists reported in the journal Nature that they had gathered new evidence to support the theory that Mars’s Borealis Basin is a large impact crater. After NASA’s Viking spacecraft had captured the first clear images of the Martian surface in the 1970s, scientists had puzzled over the dichotomy of the planet: the roughly cratered southern highlands have an altitude 2.5 to 5 miles (4.02 to 8.05 kilometers) higher than the smooth plains of the northern lowlands. One theory that scientists had advanced to explain this dichotomy was that the impact of a foreign object had created the lowlands of the Borealis Basin. However, many in the scientific community had doubted this theory because the images from the 1970s suggested that the basin did not have the typical shape of an impact crater. In the article in Nature, NASA’s MRO and NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor teams reported that they had gathered new topographical and gravitational data, showing that the basin has an elliptical shape consistent with that of impact craters. Moreover, two other studies published in the same Nature issue had used computer models to demonstrate that a meteor might conceivably have created the Borealis Basin. Scientists estimated that an object 1,250 miles (2,011.68 kilometers) wide, traveling at a speed of approximately 20,000 miles (32,186.88 kilometers) per hour, could have formed the crater when it crashed into Mars. If this theory proved correct, the Borealis Basin would be the largest known impact crater in the solar system.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Reveal Largest Crater in Solar System,” news release 08-159, 25 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08159_Mars_crater.html (accessed 21 April 2011); Kenneth Chang, “Astronomers Explain Mars’s Lopsided Shape,” New York Times, 26 June 2008; see also Jeffrey C.)
A team of researchers announced in the journal Science that they had found on Mars soil deposits composed of more than 90 percent silica. NASA’s Spirit rover had found the deposits in the Columbia Hills in Mars’s Gusev Crater. Initially, scientists had used Spirit’s Miniature Thermal Emission Spectrometer (Mini-TES) and Alpha Particle X-Ray Spectrometer to identify a pure silica deposit in the groove that Spirit’s broken front wheel had made as it dragged through the dirt. Subsequently, they had found other silica deposits nearby. On Earth, pure silica forms from the interaction of hot water and rock. Therefore, the scientists believed that these deposits might indicate that Mars had possessed hydrothermal vents in its ancient past. Because hydrothermal vents support microbial life on Earth, scientists believed that similar vents on Mars might also have hosted life.(Andrea Thompson, “Hydrothermal Vents on Mars Could Have Supported Life,” Space.com, 23 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5374-hydrothermal-vents-mars-supported-life.html (accessed 16 March 2001); see also S. W. Squyres et al., “Detection of Silica-Rich Deposits on Mars,” Science 320, no. 5879 (23 May 2008): 1063−1067.)
At the American Geophysical Union’s Fall Meeting, a team of scientists led by Bethany L. Ehlmann of Brown University announced that they had found carbonate minerals in Martian bedrock. The team had used the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer (CRISM) on NASA’s MRO to observe carbonate exposures in the Isidis basin, particularly along the trough system known as Nili Fossae. Carbonates form when carbon dioxide and water interact with calcium, iron, or magnesium in volcanic rocks. Because carbonates dissolve quickly in acid, their presence indicated that Mars had once possessed neutral or alkaline water. A nonacidic environment would have favored ancient life forms. Previous researchers had found carbonates in Martian soil or dust, but the presence of carbonates in bedrock indicated that they might have formed over extended periods during Mars’s early history. The journal Science planned to publish the study’s findings in its 19 December 2008 edition.(NASA, “Scientists Find ‘Missing’ Mineral and Clues to Mars Mysteries,” news release 08-331, 18 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-331_Mars_minerals.html; see also Bethany L. Ehlmann et al., “Orbital Identification of Carbonate-Bearing Rocks on Mars,” Science 322, no. 5909 (19 December 2008): 1828−1832.)
NASA announced that its Phoenix Mars Lander had verified the presence of water ice in the Martian soil. Phoenix, which landed on Mars on 25 May 2008, had collected a soil sample from a 2-inch-deep (5.08-centimeter-deep) trench. Phoenix Mars Lander had dug the trench in the Martian polar region. The spacecraft had experienced difficulty moving the soil into the Thermal and Evolved-Gas Analyzer (TEGA) for testing, because the freshly dug soil samples had been
NASA announced that it had selected a proposal for a robotic mission to Mars, a mission that would study the planet’s atmosphere, climate history, and potential habitability. Out of 20 proposals submitted, NASA had accepted the proposal of the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at the University of Colorado at Boulder to build the US$485 million Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) spacecraft. According to the proposal, MAVEN would begin orbiting Mars in the fall of 2014. Over the course of one Earth year, the craft would use its eight instruments to gather data, including a study of the upper atmosphere 80 miles (128.75 kilometers) above the Martian surface. Scientists would also be able to use MAVEN to relay support for robotic missions on the ground on Mars. NASA would provide the University of Colorado with US$6 million for mission planning and technology development, and Lockheed Martin would build the spacecraft. NASA’s GSFC would manage the MAVEN mission. MAVEN would be the second mission conducted by the Mars Scout Program—NASA’s series of small, low-cost, principal investigator−led missions to Mars.(NASA “NASA Selects Mission To Study Mars Atmosphere,” news release 08-233, 15 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08-233_MAVEN_Mars_mission.html (accessed 26 July 2011).)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
Participants in a simulated mission to Mars, the Mars-500 project at the Russian Institute of Biomedical Problems (IMBP) in Moscow, completed a 105-day session locked in a series of hermetically sealed tubes. The project was a joint venture between ESA and the IMPB. In addition to the isolation, the simulation experiment included communication delays of up to 20 minutes and unexpected emergency situations. Since 31 March 2009, the Mars-500 crew, comprising four Russians, a German soldier, and a French airline pilot, had conducted approximately 70 experiments testing psychological and physical reactions to long-term isolation. The international team of scientists, representing Europe and the United States, was seeking ways to help subjects avoid mental breakdowns and other consequences that could result from prolonged monotony. For this experiment, researchers locked participants into a Soviet-era isolation chamber and observed their responses. Mission physician Aleksei V. Baranov described daily life for the crew members participating in the experiment, explaining that their work did not stop from day to day. During the rare moments when a crew member was free to relax, he remembered that he was away from home, far from loved ones, and that the schedule required that he wake up early to work every day. Baranov added that individuals find preparing for unceasing, monotonous work psychologically difficult. The experiment was the precursor to a longer simulation planned for early 2010, in which the researchers planned to isolate another six- member crew in the same capsule for 520 days.
NASA announced that a team of NASA and university scientists had achieved the first definitive detection of methane in the Martian atmosphere, confirming that Mars is either biologically or geologically active. Using NASA’s Infrared Telescope Facility and the W. M. Keck telescope at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the team had detected three spectral features called absorption lines—a definitive signature of methane. Michael J. Mumma of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, lead author of an article in Science Express, explained that the Martian atmosphere quickly destroys methane in a number of ways. According to Mumma, the discovery of substantial plumes of methane in the northern hemisphere of Mars in 2003 indicated that an ongoing process was releasing the gas. The plumes had dispersed, covering the entire planet, and had dissipated within three years. Mumma explained further that the research team did not have enough information to determine whether a biological process, a geological process, or a combination of the two was producing the methane.(NASA, “Discovery of Methane Reveals Mars Is Not a Dead Planet,” news release 09-006, 15 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-006_Mars_Methane.html (accessed 14 January 2011); Dan Vergano, “Methane Plumes Spotted on Mars May Be a Sign of Life,” USA Today, 16 January 2009.)
Global Aerospace Corporation announced that it had received funding through NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program to develop a Hypersonic Control Modeling and Simulation Tool (HyperCMST) focusing on a type of ballute (balloon plus parachute). Goodyear Aerospace had invented the large, inflatable devices in 1958, to enable the use of atmospheric drag to decelerate spacecraft. However, unlike most ballute concepts, HyperCMST would encompass more than a drag-only device with no steering capability. Global Aerospace intended to use the HyperCMST to develop a new type of ballute, called a lifting-towed-toroidal ballute. A spacecraft could be able to steer the toroidal ballute using tethers between the spacecraft and the ballute. For example, a ballute-assisted orbit capture of a lander vehicle above the surface of Mars would use a toroidal ballute and inflation tubes connected to the lander via multiple tethers. The spacecraft would tow the ballute using tethers, rather than using some form of rigid attachment device. The spacecraft would jettison the ballute once it had achieved the desired capture orbit. The tethers, which the spacecraft could manipulate, would create aerodynamic lift, making control of the ballute system possible.(Global Aerospace Corporation, “Control of Hypersonic Vehicles for Planetary Capture and Entry Missions,” news release 15 April 2009, http://www.gaerospace.com/press-releases/apr2009.html (accessed 23 May 2011); Bill Christensen, “Ballutes Studied for Hypersonic Space Vehicles,” Space.com, 21 April 2009, http://www.space.com/ 6602-ballutes-studied-hypersonic-space-vehicles.html (accessed 24 May 2011).)
NASA announced that it had selected the two scientific investigations that NASA would undertake in partnership with ESA. NASA and ESA planned to use NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN) of radio telescopes to track part of ESA’s ExoMars mission, scheduled to launch in 2016. ESA’s ExoMars mission consisted of a fixed lander and a rover that would collect soil samples on Mars for detailed analysis. The Lander Radio-Science on ExoMars (LaRa) would relay data from the lander back to the DSN, enabling scientists to measure and to analyze variations in the length of the day and in the location of the planet’s rotational axis. The ExoMars mission data would help researchers further dissect the structure of the Martian interior, including the size of Mars’s core. For the second investigation, named Strofio, ESA and NASA would use a unique mass spectrometer. Part of ESA’s BepiColombo mission, scheduled for launch in 2013, Strofio would determine the mass of atoms and molecules, helping to reveal the composition of Mercury’s atmosphere. NASA had selected LaRa and Strofio from among eight proposals that researchers had submitted in December 2008, in response to NASA’s new Stand Alone Mission of Opportunity (Salmon). NASA had required Salmon proposals to address planetary scientific research objectives for nonagency missions and to accomplish scientific research goals, including data archiving and analysis, for less than US$35 million. Scientists expected LaRa to cost US$6.6 million and Strofio, US$31.8 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Future Projects To Study Mars and Mercury,” contract release C09-020, 4 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09_020_NASA_Salmon_Awards.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the system’s artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Division’s Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASA’s Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
NASA and Google announced the release of the new Mars mode in Google Earth, the latest benefit to result from a Space Act Agreement that NASA’s ARC had signed with Google in November 2006. The Agreement established a collaborative effort intended to make NASA data sets available to the world. The Mars mode provided a rich, immersive three-dimensional view of Mars, to help the public understand Mars science while simultaneously providing researchers with a platform for sharing data, much as Google Earth did for Earth scientists. NASA and its partners—Google, Carnegie Mellon University, Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), and other institutions—had produced the data to make the Mars mode in Google Earth possible.(NASA, “NASA and Google Launch Virtual Exploration of Mars,” news release 09-024, 2 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-024_Google_Mars_map.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
Based on data that NASA’s rover Opportunity had collected in the Victoria impact crater, researchers reported new findings in the journal Science, providing further evidence that water had once existed on Mars. Before arriving at Victoria, Opportunity had explored the Eagle and Endurance craters, revealing distinctive sediment layers in Endurance, along with evidence that water had been a factor in actively shaping those layers. Scientists had decided to send Opportunity to Victoria because of the crater’s 400-foot (122-meter) depth. They hoped that exploration of Victoria would shed more light on the Meridiani Planum region. Opportunity had spent two years driving along the crater’s edge and then had traveled down into the crater. The rover had found layers of sulfate-rich sandstone like that of the Endurance crater, “with evidence that water had weathered away minerals in the rocks, then evaporated, leaving behind salts that eventually solidified into rocks again.” The findings indicated that water had acted at both the Endurance and the Victoria sites, suggesting that water had acted across the entire Meridiani region. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Lead Scientist for the Mars Exploration Rover Project, remarked that this evidence was probably the most significant finding of the Victoria expedition.(Andrea Thompson, “Entire Region of Mars Likely Shaped by Water,” Space.com, 21 May 2009, http://www. space.com/6739-entire-region-mars-shaped-water.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Jessica Berman, “NASA Scientists Find More Evidence of Water on Mars,” Voice of America, 22 May 2009.)
NASA and Microsoft Corporation announced plans to make planetary images and data available to the public via the Internet under a Space Act Agreement. The project required NASA and Microsoft jointly to develop the technology and infrastructure necessary to enable the public to explore NASA content using the WorldWide Telescope, Microsoft’s online virtual telescope for exploring the universe. Online since 2008, WorldWide Telescope combined images from ground- and space-based telescopes to simulate the experience of peering into the cosmos. The agreement directed NASA’s ARC in Moffett Field, California, to process and host more than 100 terabytes of data, which WorldWide Telescope would incorporate later in 2009. The data would feature imagery from NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which NASA had launched in 2005 to examine Mars using several instruments, including a high-resolution camera. Since 2006, MRO had returned more data than all other Mars missions combined. NASA planned to launch its Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) in May 2009. After LRO images became publicly available later in 2009, NASA intended to include those images in the WorldWide Telescope project. The agreement built on a prior collaboration with Microsoft, in which NASA had developed three-dimensional, interactive Microsoft Photosynth collections of the Space Shuttle launchpad and other KSC facilities.(NASA, “NASA and Microsoft To Make Universe of Data Available to the Public,” news release 09-067, 24 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-067_Microsoft_WorldWide_ Telescope.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Microsoft’s WorldWide Telescope To Focus on Mars,” 25 March 2009.)
