Mitsuyuki Ueda of the Aeronautics and Space Development Division of Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced that Japan had decided to freeze the development of an unpiloted space shuttle, which was four years behind schedule, because of problems in Japan’s shuttle program, as well as in its H-2 rocket program. Japan had originally conceived its planned 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18.1-tonne) shuttle in the 1980s, modeling it after the U.S. Space Shuttle, and designing it to conduct scientific experiments and to carry into space payloads of up to 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes). Technical and financial setbacks within Japan’s shuttle program contributed to the freeze. In addition, because the original plan had called for Japan to launch the space shuttle aboard a Japanese-designed H-2 rocket, a launch failure of an H-2 rocket had influenced the decision to halt Japan’s shuttle program. In the failed launch of November 1999, officials had to destroy the rocket in midair, leading an advisory panel to suggest that Japan’s planned shuttle should launch from a reusable high-speed jet plane, rather than atop a rocket.(Associated Press, “Japan Freezes Plans To Make Unmanned Space Shuttle,” 2 August 2000.)
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after completing the 11-day Mission STS-97 at the ISS, where the crew had installed and deployed the station’s new solar array. Shortly before touchdown, the ISS sailed above KSC, a “reminder of the pressure” on NASA to support more flights to the ISS as the station’s assembly accelerated. Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore remarked that the successful mission of Endeavour to the ISS was “a good way to end this year⎯a very successful five missions.”(William Harwood, “Endeavour Returns from Station Work,” Washington Post, 12 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. successfully unfurled the second panel of the solar array (colloquially referred to as a solar wing) that the crew had deployed on the ISS on 3 December. Jett used computer commands to unfold the panel a few feet at a time, a process that took nearly 2 hours. No problems occurred until the crew had extended the panel almost fully, when it became clear that a panel on each blanket was stuck to a neighboring section. Endeavour’s crew turned the Shuttle to allow the Sun to warm the blankets and fired thrusters to shake the array, snapping the wing into place. The panel began generating electricity before it reached its full 115 feet (35 meters). To NASA’s relief, the panel was stretched tight. Once the crew had completed the process, Commander Jett radioed to Mission Control that they had two tensioned blankets, and Mission Control replied, “Great work, gentlemen. We think you’ve earned your solar wings.”(Associated Press, “Astronaut Manages To Spread Station’s 2nd Wing,” USA Today, 5 April 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Finnish Adding Solar Wing to Station,” New York Times, 5 December 2000.)
The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASA’s special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Voss’s mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the class’s trip to NASA to watch Endeavour’s launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”(Billy Cox, “Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
Hatches between the ISS and Space Shuttle Endeavour opened for the first time, and the three members of the space station crew, who had been living aboard the ISS for five weeks, received their first visitors. ISS Commander William M. Shepherd commended Endeavour’s crew for their installation of the giant solar array on the space station. The two crews spent their day together transferring supplies, such as food, water, mail, and gifts, to the space station and removing trash, damaged items, and unneeded items for return to Earth.(Reuters, “Hatch Is Opened; Endeavour, Space Station Crews Become One,” Chicago Tribune, 9 December 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Crew Visits Space Station,” 9 December 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Crew Greets First Visitors,” New York Times, 9 December 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another record⎯the oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, “Scientific Results of Glenn’s Mission Released by NASA,” 28 January 2000.)
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum for “its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built.” NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists’ knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners,” news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
Space Shuttle Endeavour docked successfully with the International Space Station (ISS), the first Shuttle docking at an inhabited ISS. William M. Shepherd, Commander of the ISS, noted the festive mood at the space station, even though the two crews would not meet in person until later in the mission. Soon after Endeavour docked, Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to lift the 49-foot-long (15-meter-long) tower containing the solar array out of the cargo bay, where it would remain suspended 10 feet (3 meters) above the Shuttle while the crew slept.(Steven Siceloff, “Endeavour Docks at Station: Astronauts To Attach Arrays Today,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 December 2000.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report discussing workforce and safety issues of NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. The report assessed the impact of workforce reductions on the Shuttle program; the challenges that NASA would face as it addressed its workforce issues; and the status of planned safety and supportability upgrades to the Space Shuttle. GAO identified 26 technical skills needed at JSC in Houston, Texas, as well as at other facilities in Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi. In addition, GAO found that the decrease from 3,000 to 1,800 federal employees in the Shuttle program workforce since 1995 had placed NASA at a “critical juncture.” The Shuttle launch rate had dropped from eight launches in 1997 to three in 1999, a trend on the cusp of reversing itself in the aftermath of the July 1999 launch of Russia’s Zvezda module. Moreover, GAO reported signs of overwork and stress among NASA staff. Worker demographics⎯twice as many workers over age 60 as under age 30⎯had compounded the problem of a declining workforce. NASA officials welcomed the report, although the results reflected “a much harsher assessment of [S]huttle safety issues [than the assessment] prepared by NASA itself in response to an electrical short that accompanied the July 1999 launching of the [S]huttle Columbia.” GAO also reported that NASA had terminated downsizing plans in December 1999 and had initiated efforts to begin hiring new staff. Although it was developing safety and supportability upgrades, which it would implement over the next five years, NASA still faced programmatic and technical challenges, such as a demanding schedule and undefined design and workforce requirements.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Human Capital and Safety Upgrade Challenges Require Continued Attention” (report no. GAO/NSIAD/GGD-00-186, Washington, DC, August 2000), http://www.gao.gov/ archive/2000/n200186.pdf (accessed 9 May 2008); Mark Carreau, “Undersized Work Force Puts NASA at ‘Critical Juncture’,” Houston Chronicle, 31 August 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, “20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers,” 3 December 2000.)
Despite unexpected problems, astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery installed a 9-ton (8,200-kilogram or 8.2-tonne) structural truss on the Unity module of the ISS, completing one of the major objectives of the mission. The Z1 truss held four mass gyroscopes and the station’s main Ku-band and S-band communications antennas. In addition, the truss provided a temporary attachment point for a set of solar arrays scheduled to arrive during a December Shuttle mission. The astronauts faced several obstacles during the installation process. A short in the Shuttle’s payload circuitry disabled the computerized camera system needed to orient the truss for attachment, causing a 21⁄2-hour delay. However, the astronauts were able to wire a backup computer into an alternate power source, restoring power to the Space Vision System, which NASA had programmed to “determine the truss’s precise location and orientation with respect to the station by measuring the locations of the targets on its surface as viewed from different payload bay cameras.” The astronauts had to delay their work again when the Space Vision System failed to generate reliable data during certain orbital lighting conditions, requiring astronaut William S. McArthur to recalibrate the system.(William Harwood, “Structural Truss Added to Spine of Space Station: Shuttle Astronauts Overcome Camera System’s Short Circuit,” Washington Post, 16 October 2000.)
Science and business leaders from the United States and Singapore signed an agreement to collaborate on biotechnology research conducted in space. The pact, focused on improving drugs and crops, outlined experiments planned for a 2001 Shuttle Columbia mission. U.S. Senator Christopher Bond (R-MO) called the agreement an “important step toward increasing scientific knowledge.”(Associated Press, “Singapore, U.S. Scientists Sign Accord on Outer Space Research,” 14 January 2000.)
NASA awarded Lockheed Martin Space Systems a US$1.15 billion six-year contract to produce 35 additional super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle Program, the sixth production of tanks and the first composed entirely of super-lightweight tanks. The contract covered the manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of the tanks, as well as the operations and maintenance of NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans and activities at MSFC and KSC. Jerry W. Smelser, Manager of MSFC’s External Tank Project Office, described the contract as designed to “assure the delivery of a quality product and to reward the contractor and employees on the basis of performance.”(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.15 Billion Contract for Shuttle External Tanks,” news release C00-p, 30 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-p.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
The U.S. Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Rockwell International Inc., Boeing North American Inc., and United Space Alliance for concealing millions of dollars in fraud committed by a subcontractor. According to the suit, the subcontractor had used funds from the Shuttle program to purchase homes, jewelry, and vacations. The subcontractor accused of the fraud had pled guilty to all charges five years earlier, and the culpability of the major aerospace companies in concealing the theft was the last significant legal matter to come to trial. The three companies claimed that they had cooperated with government investigations into the 180 felony fraud violations and were not liable for the actions of the rogue subcontractor.(Associated Press, “Government Sues Three Companies, Including Boeing North American, over Space Shuttle Program Fraud,” 12 January 2000.)
NASA Director of Media Services Brian D. Welch died after suffering a heart attack. Welch, who had led many of NASA’s public outreach efforts, was responsible for its news operations, for NASA Television, and for NASA’s Internet efforts. Welch had begun his career as a cooperative-education student of public affairs at LARC in 1979. In 1981 he had become editor of Space News Roundup, the newspaper of NASA’s JSC. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Welch had worked as a public affairs mission commentator, Deputy News Chief at Mission Control Center, Manager of JSC’s Mission Commentary Team, and Newsroom Manager during Shuttle flights. NASA had appointed Welch as Chief of News and Information in 1994, and he had become Director of Media Services in 1998. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke of how Welch’s sudden death had stunned NASA, saying that Welch’s “love and enthusiasm for spaceflight and exploration” was “infectious,” and describing Welch’s passionate approach to his work as the true embodiment of “the spirit of this agency.”(NASA, “Brian Welch, NASA Director of Media Services, Dies,” news release 00-187, 27 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-187.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending the 100th mission of the Shuttle program. Poor weather conditions had prevented the Shuttle’s scheduled landing in Florida on 22 October. Edwards had opened as a backup site on 23 October, but wind and rainy weather had prevented a landing at either site until 24 October. The landing was the first Shuttle landing at Edwards since poor weather had prevented a Shuttle landing in Florida in March 1996. In the early years of the program, Shuttles had typically landed at Edwards Air Force Base, but later, both launches and landings became the functions of KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Lands at Edwards for First Time since 1996: Marks 100th Mission of U.S. Program,” 25 October 2000; Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Discovery Lands in California,” 25 October 2000.)
SkyCorp signed a commercial Space Act agreement with NASA providing that SkyCorp deploy into orbit, either from the Space Shuttle or from the ISS, a satellite containing an Internet server. NASA and SkyCorp planned to test the idea as a “proof of concept” for a Low Earth Orbit 544 satellite constellation, offering Internet access on a global scale. SkyCorp chose to launch an Apache server on a small satellite containing an Apple 500 MHz Power Mac G4. The agreement with NASA outlined SkyCorp’s novel idea of launching a partially assembled satellite aboard a Space Shuttle. Astronauts would assemble the craft in space before tossing it from a Shuttle or ISS airlock into an independent orbit. SkyCorp named its concept Gossamer. Typically, engineers assemble a satellite fully on Earth, and it must withstand the stress of launch. A satellite built according to the Gossamer concept would only need to retain structural integrity in microgravity, greatly simplifying guidance, navigation, and control requirements.(SkyCorp, “SkyCorp Announces Space Act Agreement with NASA To Fly First Internet Webserver in Space,” news release, 20 October 2000; Keith Cowing, “SkyCorp Signs Agreement with NASA To Fly the First Webserver in Space⎯and It Will Be a Mac G4,” SpaceRef.com, 23 October 2000.)
United Space Alliance finalized its investigation into the loose pin that had delayed the October launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, reporting that the pin had come from the Vehicle Assembly Building. Technicians had incorrectly installed the pin, intended to secure a platform above part of the Shuttle’s fuel tank. During the Shuttle’s transport to the launchpad on 8 September, the 4- inch (10-centimeter) metal pin had fallen 73 feet (22 meters), landing on a fuel line near one of the tank’s connections to the Shuttle. After inspectors had found the pin on 10 October, NASA officials had delayed Discovery’s launch 24 hours, so that technicians could remove the pin, preventing damage during liftoff.(Kelly Young, “Pin Found on Shuttle from VAB,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 November 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery arrived at the ISS. Shuttle Commander Brian Duffy successfully executed the rendezvous without the Shuttle’s radar, relying on a star-tracking system and on handheld lasers operated by his crew. The Ku-band antenna had failed after launch, disrupting the radar and television link. The Shuttle docking was NASA’s first conducted without radar.(Associated Press, “Bad Antenna Blacks Out Shuttle’s Television,” Charleston Gazette (SC), 13 October 2000; New York Times, “Astronauts Rendezvous with Space Station,” 14 October 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Discovery Docks Safely with Space Station,” 14 October 2000.)
As a part of its “Celebrate the Century” program, the U.S. Postal Service unveiled a stamp commemorating the Space Shuttle Program. The stamp with the Shuttle’s image joined 12 other stamps with images recalling significant American memories of the past century, such as video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall, personal computers, and Cabbage Patch Dolls. The Space Shuttle stamp was part of the celebration of the 1980s portion of the millennium. Kennedy Space Center Director Roy D. Bridges Jr. issued a statement thanking the Postal Service for the honor.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Joins American Icons in Commemorative Stamp Collection,” news release 00- 12, 12 January 2000.)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
