As part of its first efforts to meet the objectives of President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, NASA awarded contracts to 11 companies to provide research on human lunar exploration and the development of a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. The Vision for Space Exploration called for NASA to engage in human and robotic exploration of the solar system and regions beyond. NASA awarded three contracts of approximately US$1 million each to Raytheon, Science Applications International Corporation, and the SPACEHAB Corporation for preliminary studies of human lunar exploration. An additional eight companies―Andrews Space, The Boeing Company, Draper Labs, Lockheed Martin, Northrup Grumman, Orbital Sciences Corporation, Schafer, and Transformational Space Corporation―received contracts of approximately US$3 million to conduct preliminary research on human lunar exploration and on the development of a new crewed exploration vehicle.
NASA announced its approval of a new design of the particular part of the Space Shuttle that may have critically contributed to Space Shuttle Columbia’s accident. The part―called a bipod fitting―connects a Shuttle’s external fuel tanks to the orbiter during launch. The newly designed bipod fitting eliminated the use of foam covering in favor of four rod-shaped heaters, reducing the risk of falling debris during launch. Investigators believed that the Columbia disaster might have resulted from the impact of insulating foam, which had fallen from the bipod fitting, damaging the orbiter’s left wing. According to NASA, the approval of the redesigned bipod fitting was a significant step in its efforts to resume safe Shuttle flights. Engineers would begin using the new fitting on the external tanks for the next Space Shuttle mission.(NASA, “NASA Approves New Design for Shuttle External Tank Fitting,” news release 04-240, 26 July 2004.)
An independent panel of experts provided its interim assessment of NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s requirements for resuming Space Shuttle flights. NASA had chartered the Stafford- Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) to assess independently its implementation of the CAIB’s preflight recommendations―mandatory for NASA’s resuming Space Shuttle flights. The 26-member Task Group, headed by former astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, stated that it had approved NASA’s compliance plans for eight of the CAIB’s 15 requirements. The task force did not see any major obstacles to NASA’s resuming Shuttle flights by May or June of 2005. The Task Group also noted, however, that NASA continued to have difficulty developing methods to repair the exterior heat tiles and thermal-resistant carbon-fiber material damaged during Shuttle flights.(Warren E. Leary, “Panel Sees Shuttle Flights Resuming Soon,” New York Times, 17 December 2004.)
The GAO released an analysis of NASA’s budgetary outlays for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Under Pub. L. No. 106-391, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, GAO was required to verify NASA’s accounting of its funds obligated against established budgetary limits for the ISS and for Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the Act, NASA’s obligations were limited to US$25 billion for the ISS and US$17.7 billion for Shuttle support. GAO’s report noted that NASA had not provided sufficient documentation for the amounts it had reported as obligated against budgetary limits. Thus, GAO could not verify the amounts that NASA had reported to Congress in its budget requests for fiscal years 2002 through 2004. Similarly, NASA had not reported any documentation of its FY 2004 budget obligations in its FY 2005 budget request to Congress. NASA officials acknowledged that NASA’s accounting system presented some difficulties for GAO’s auditors, but explained that those difficulties were the result of NASA’s having reported budgetary figures based on the amount it was authorized to spend rather than on the amount it was obligated to spend.(Patty Reinert, “GAO Says Lax Bookkeeping Thwarts Space Agency Audit,” Houston Chronicle, 7 April 2004; U.S. General Accounting Office, “International Space Station and Shuttle Support Cost Limits” (report no. GAO- 04-648R, Washington, DC, 2 April 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04648r.pdf (accessed 19 March 2009). 623 British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2” (report, ESA/UK Commission of Inquiry Swindon, UK, 5 April 2004), http://www.bnsc.gov.uk/assets/channels/resources/press/report.pdf (accessed 31 March 2009), 3–7; ESA, “Beagle 2: Lessons Learned and the Way Forward,” ESA news release 27-2004, 20 May 2004.)
Engineers at NASA’s SSC successfully completed the first test of the redesigned Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME). NASA planned to use the redesigned SSME in the first Shuttle mission after the Columbia tragedy―the mission that NASA often called the Return to Flight Mission. The test of the SSME lasted for 520 seconds, the amount of time a Space Shuttle requires to reach orbit. Each Space Shuttle has three SSMEs―reusable rocket engines capable of generating 400,000 pounds (181,000 kilograms) of thrust.(NASA, “Engineers Test the First Engine for NASA’s Return to Flight Mission,” news release 04-231, 19 July 2004.)
In an internal review, NASA concluded that the ISS program suffered from many of the same problems as the Space Shuttle program and that the ISS partners needed to make improvements in the station’s management. NASA had drafted the 172-page report to apply lessons learned from the Columbia disaster to NASA’s other programs. The report identified seven areas of concern, such as inconsistencies in monitoring the ISS’s hardware, lack of training for personnel administering equipment problems, and an incomplete set of blueprints for hardware. In their response to the report, NASA managers stated that the ISS program had no major problems and that NASA was already pursuing measures to improve the station’s operations. For example, NASA had worked to minimize the sources of debris that could hit the ISS. In addition, NASA had expanded an existing agreement with U.S. intelligence agencies to use intelligence satellites to examine the ISS for damages. Managers also noted that they planned to install additional cameras to the station’s exterior and that, during future spacewalks, astronauts would photograph the ISS more extensively.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Report Says Problems Plague Space Station Program,” New York Times, 28 February 2004; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Safety Problems Noted,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2004.)
NASA announced its findings concerning how and why a piece of insulation had separated from a fuel tank on Space Shuttle Columbia, an event that had later contributed to Columbia’s destruction upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. According to NASA official William F. Readdy, NASA had determined that extremely cold fuel had liquefied air or nitrogen, which subsequently had seeped into a portion of the foam or had collected on nuts and bolts below the foam, eventually expanding and explosively jettisoning a piece of the foam. The foam had shot from the fuel tank, hitting the orbiter and creating a large―and ultimately fatal―gash in its left wing. Before the Columbia tragedy, engineers had believed that when the fuel tanks shed foam, it fell away from the body of the orbiter. Readdy stated that NASA had redesigned the fuel tanks and improved techniques for applying the foam to remedy the problem that had caused the accident to Columbia.(Warren E. Leary, “Repairs and Need for Rescue Craft Pushed Back Shuttle Timetable, NASA Says,” New York Times, 21 February 2004.)
Major media reported details of a NASA internal document, which stated that a proposed plan to use the ISS as a safe haven for Space Shuttle astronauts would likely have a high risk of failure. The NASA document was a response to a proposal that the ISS should temporarily house the Shuttle crew if a problem arose that prevented an orbiting Shuttle from returning its crew to Earth safely. In the internal document, NASA objected that the ISS had neither sufficient supplies nor support systems to keep both ISS and Shuttle crew members alive longer than a few months. NASA officials responded to the publication of the document, stating that the provisional contingency plan had been one of many ideas considered for improving Space Shuttle safety.(John Schwartz, “NASA Rescue Plan Is Reported To Have High Risk of Failure,” New York Times, 9 July 2004.)
The GAO released its assessment of NASA’s efforts to upgrade the Space Shuttle fleet in the wake of the Columbia tragedy. NASA planned to implement the recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, as well as those of its own Space Shuttle Service Life Extension Program (SLEP). The GAO report stated that before NASA determined the upgrade requirements and priorities for the Shuttles, it should first determine the Shuttles’ operational life and the requirements for meeting the objectives of the Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP). Before the announcement of the new Vision for Space Exploration, the ISTP had encompassed the space policy of the United States. However, GAO noted that the establishment of President Bush’s new Vision for Space Exploration, which formally changed the duration of operations for both the Space Shuttles and the ISS, had largely invalidated the recommendations offered in GAO’s assessment.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Further Improvements Needed in NASA’s Modernization Efforts” (report no. GAO-04-203, Washington DC, 15 January 2004), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04203.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe officially informed HST Program staff that he had decided to eliminate all future servicing missions to the space telescope. NASA had conducted previous HST servicing missions to replace aging or inoperable components and to install new technologically improved equipment. According to NASA, O’Keefe had made the decision to halt the missions in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, based on assessments of the risk to astronauts performing HST servicing missions.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope: Program News Archive,” http://hubble.nasa.gov/news/archive.php (accessed 31 January 2004).)
NASA’s Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which was overseeing NASA’s efforts to resume Shuttle flights, announced that NASA would not launch another Space Shuttle before March 2005. NASA had delayed a Shuttle launch because of a new requirement that launches occur during daylight hours, to enable photographing the liftoff from multiple angles. Because of the limited number of days available in which a launch could take place in daylight, the next Shuttle launch could occur no earlier than March 2005. In addition, NASA announced that, when Shuttle launches recommenced, one Shuttle would function as a standby rescue vehicle in case the Shuttle carrying the crew sustained damage during flight. NASA announced that, although rescue vehicles would not necessarily be positioned on the launchpad, they would be ready for launch within 45 to 90 days, the maximum length of time that seven astronauts could survive on the ISS before their supplies ran out.(NASA, “NASA Updates Space Shuttle Return to Flight Plans,” news release n04-065, 19 February 2004; Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Won’t Fly Before March Next Year,” New York Times, 20 February 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe and families of the Space Shuttle Columbia crew unveiled a commemorative monument for the Columbia crew at Arlington National Cemetery. The crew had died when Columbia broke apart during reentry into Earth’s atmosphere on 1 February 2003. The marble monument was 66 inches (1.7 meters) tall, 48 inches (1.2 meters) wide, and bore two bronze plaques portraying the crew and the shoulder patch they had worn on the mission.(NASA, “NASA Dedicates Space Shuttle Columbia Memorial,” news release 04-049, 2 February 2004.)
NASA’s MSFC and KSC provided law enforcement agencies with analysis of video and imagery relevant to their investigation of the abduction of an 11-year-old girl in Sarasota, Florida. When law enforcement officials asked the two centers to examine security camera footage showing the girl’s abduction by an unknown individual, MSFC provided assistance using its Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR), an image-stabilization software program developed for space program research. KSC examined the security camera footage using its Image Analysis Facility, which NASA had developed for visual analysis of Space Shuttle launches. Although this was not the first time that the two centers had assisted law enforcement in this manner, the case garnered major press coverage throughout the United States.(NASA, “NASA Technology Helps Investigators in Florida Abduction Case,” news release 04-055, 5 February 2004; Fred Barbash, “Fla. Police Find Body of Abducted Girl,” Washington Post, 7 February 2004.)
Maxime A. Faget, who had contributed to the designs of every U.S. spacecraft built to transport humans from Mercury to the Space Shuttle, passed away at age 83 in Houston, Texas. Born on 26 August 1921 in British Honduras, Faget had graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering from Louisiana State University in 1943. He had begun his career with NASA in 1946 as a research scientist at the NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia. In 1958 he had joined the Space Task Group―later, NASA’s JSC―where he had helped to design the spacecraft for the Mercury project and had led a team studying the feasibility of a lunar mission. Faget had also worked on the original feasibility study for the Space Shuttle, later contributing to the development of the Shuttles. After retiring from NASA in 1981, Faget had helped found Space Industries Incorporated, a private space company that had developed a Shuttle project for processing material in a near-perfect vacuum.(NASA, “Legendary Spacecraft Designer Dr. Maxime A. Faget Dies at 83,” news release 04-350, 10 October 2004.)
NASA released pieces of the debris from Space Shuttle Columbia to a nongovernmental agency for study and testing. The release of the materials was the first implementation of NASA’s new policy for the use of materials from a destroyed Space Shuttle. Henceforth, instead of burying Space Shuttle materials, as it had done after the Challenger accident, NASA would use materials from destroyed Space Shuttles for research. The company that received the partsthe Aerospace Corporation of El Segundo, Californiawas one of several organizations that had requested NASA’s permission to study Columbia’s debris. Under the terms of the release, the company would keep the Shuttle parts for one year, using them to analyze the effect of atmospheric reentry on materials.(NASA, “First Columbia Debris Loaned for Research,” news release 04-165, 20 May 2004; James R. Asker, “In Orbit,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 22 (31 May 2004): 19.)
The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report calling for NASA to send a Space Shuttle mission to service the HST. The report challenged Administrator Sean O’Keefe’s earlier decision that NASA would not conduct a Shuttle servicing mission for the HST because of potential safety risks. According to the NRC report, if NASA did not service the orbiting telescope, it would eventually become dysfunctional and fall out of orbit. Although the report acknowledged that a Shuttle mission would pose some risks for astronauts, the NRC stated that the scientific value of continuing HST operations merited a mission, both to maintain the orbiting telescope and to upgrade its components. The report recommended that NASA should consider sending a robotic servicing mission for the HST instead of a Shuttle mission, but should not rule out sending a Shuttle servicing mission, if NASA determined that the robotic option was too costly or complex.(Guy Gugliotta, “Scientists Say Shuttle Can Service Telescope; Report Counters NASA Stance on Repairing Hubble,” Washington Post, 14 July 2004; Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board and Space Studies Board, “Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope” (letter report, National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 13 July 2004), http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=11051#toc (accessed 28 April 2009).)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
Former astronaut Robert D. Cabana became Deputy Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Brock R. Stone, who had retired after a 36-year career with NASA. Cabana had previously served on four Space Shuttle missions and in many management positions supporting the Astronaut Office and the ISS Program. Before becoming Deputy Director of JSC, Cabana had served as Director of Flight Crew Operations. NASA had appointed former astronaut Kenneth D. Bowersox to fill that position.(NASA JSC, “NASA Fills Key Space Flight Positions,” news release I-I04-080, 3 March 2004.)
Thomas Q. Donaldson replaced Michael U. Rudolphi as Director of NASA’s SSC. Donaldson had previously served as Commander of the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command headquartered at SSC. Rudolphi had served as interim Director of SSC since May 2003 but had left the Center in December 2003 to become Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office at NASA’s MSFC.(NASA, “Stennis Space CenterMichael U. Rudolphi,” http://www.nasa.gov/centers/stennis/about/ history/personalities/rudolphi.html (accessed 11 January 2009); NASA, “Stennis Space CenterRear Admiral)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe presented the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to the families of the crew members of Space Shuttle Challenger. O’Keefe presented the honor in the name of the U.S. Congress and on behalf of President George W. Bush. The seven astronauts on board Challenger had died when the Shuttle exploded soon after launching on 28 January 1986.(NASA, “Challenger Crew Honored with Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” news release S04-238, 23 July 2004.)
NASA awarded a US$814 million contract to Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International (HSSSI) to provide equipment and services supporting spacewalks performed by Space Shuttle and ISS crew members. Under the contract―formally called the Extravehicular Activity (EVA) Systems Contract―Hamilton Sundstrand would provide EVA hardware, training support, real- time mission support, and other products and services related to spacewalks. The contract had a five-year base period and five additional one-year options.
An independent panel of experts released an interim assessment of NASA’s progress implementing recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB). The U.S. Congress had chartered the group―formally called the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG)―to provide independent evaluations of NASA’s progress in meeting the CAIB’s recommendations. The CAIB had enumerated safety and operational practices that NASA must implement before resuming Space Shuttle flights. In its interim assessment, the Task Group stated that NASA had successfully implemented two of the CAIB’s recommendations: to define foreign-object debris and to create computer-accessible digital images of Shuttle hardware, taken at various stages of development and launch preparation. The Task Group would assess NASA’s progress toward satisfying the other CAIB recommendations in future reports.(NASA, “Stafford-Covey Task Group Announces July 22 Public Meeting,” news release N04-108, 19 July 2004; NASA, “Statement of Sean O’Keefe, Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Before the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, United States Senate” (statement of testimony, Washington, DC, 8 September 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf64686main_aok_/ 64686main_aok_ testimony_090804.pdf (accessed 28 April 2009).)
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASA’s JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSC’s Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASA’s JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, “Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director,” Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, “NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy,” news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
The National Research Council (NRC) issued a report outlining recommendations for servicing the HST. The issue of servicing the HST had initiated a public discussion in January 2004, when NASA had decided to cancel a Shuttle mission to service the HST because of concern for astronaut safety. The debate had erupted again after April 2004, when NASA had announced that it would conduct an unpiloted servicing mission for the HST. In response to criticism for those decisions, NASA had requested that the NRC evaluate servicing options for the HST. The NRC recommended that NASA service the HST using a piloted Shuttle mission, because a robotic mission would be too complex for NASA to complete before 2007, when NASA anticipated that the HST’s machinery would wear out. According to the guidelines recommended by the CAIB, astronauts would be able to service the HST by 2007. The NRC also reported that, if NASA carefully planned and conducted the piloted Shuttle mission, the mission would be far more likely to extend the telescope’s operational life at a relatively lower cost.(Guy Gugliotta, “Astronauts Acceptable, Panel Says,” Washington Post, 9 December 2004; National Research Council, Assessment of Options for Extending the Life of the Hubble Space Telescope: Final Report (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2005).)
