Operators of Biosphere 2, the world under glass experiment, named John B. Corliss, a NASA consultant, to head research for the $150 million private venture. (AP, Mar 1/93)
John Bolton, a pioneer in radio astronomy, died  at Buderim in Queensland, Australia.  He was 71. Bolton was credited with having discovered, in 1947, the first radio "stars," galaxies that broadcast incredibly strong signals in radio wave length. (NY Times, Jul 20/93)
Writing in the New York Times, author John Lukacs called the proposed $8.4 billion Super Collider in Texas "super nonsense." He labelled as outdated the view held by proponents of the Super Collider that science might discover the smallest building block of the universe and that the universe could be explained by a Grand Unified Theory. (NY Times, June 17/93)
Dr. John Peoples Jr., director of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois, was appointed to take over direction of the dismantling of the Superconducting Super Collider in Texas. Dr. Peoples was to replace Dr. Ray F. Schwitters, the Super Collider's founding director, who resigned last week after Congress decided to terminate the $11 billion project. (NY Times, Nov 9/93)
Joseph George Sobala, 60, a retired chief of the communications systems branch of NASA, died of cancer January 29 at his home in Washington.
G. Joseph Minetti, 85, died of heart failure on March 13. He served on the Civil Aeronautics Board for 22 years, leading the panel during years of enormous expansion and change in the aviation industry. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
In a letter to the editor of the Washington Post, Michael Oppenheimer, senior scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund in New York, took issue with an April 5 Washington Post article on ozone depletion. Oppenheimer charged that the article failed to "convey the seriousness of the ozone depletion problem." (W Post, Apr 25/93)
Edward Frieman, who served as chairman of the White-House-led Earth Observing System Engineering Review Committee, said that NASA needed to institute an outside review process for its science missions. NASA's internal review process tended to bloat rather than streamline science missions, he said. "They're really not review teams, they're the advocates, said Frieman, director of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in LaJolla, California. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)
Responding to an Op-Ed piece by John Lukacs in the New York Times that attacked both the Super Collider and the field of particle physics, Edward Farhi, Professor of Physics, M.I.T.,
Writing in the Washington Post, Michael Schrage, a columnist for the Los Angeles Times, suggested that a dramatic and effective way to boost the nation's industrial competitiveness while sending a signal that the Cold War was over would be to cut in half the budget of the national laboratories. The move might shock the labs into more energetically redefining their mission, according to Schrage. The national labs include the University of California's Lawrence Livermore Lab, Los Alamos in New Mexico, and Brookhaven in New York. (W Post, Feb 19/93)
