                      [COMMITTEE PRINT]




   AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL
                     EVENTS OF 1961



                          REPORT
                               OF THE

         NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
                 ADMINISTRATION
                               TO THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND ASTRONAUTICS
   U.S. HOUSE O F REPRESENTATIVES
                                        CONGRESS
              EIGHTY-SEVENTH
                        SECOND SESSION




                           JUNE 7, 1962




   Printed for the use of the Committee on Science and Astronautics

                  US. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                          WASHINGTON : 1962
 82634
               OOMMITTEE ON SCIENCE A N D ASTRONAUTICS
                     QEORQE P. MILLER, Califomis, Chairman
OLIN E. TEAQUE, Texas                        JOSEPH W. MARTIN,~JR.,          Massachusetts
VICTOR L. ANFUSO, New York                   JAMES Q. FULTON, Pennsylvania
JOSEPH E. KARTH, M b e s o t a               J. EDGAR CHENOWETH, Colorado
K E N HECHLER, West Virginia                 WILLIAM K. VAN PELT, Wisconsin
EMILIO Q. DADDARIO, Connecticut              PERKINS BASS, New Hampshire
WALTER H. MOELLER, Ohio                      R. WALTER RIEHLMAN, New York
DAVID S. KING, Utah                          JESSICA McC. WEIS, New York
J. EDWARD ROUSH, Indiana                     CHARLES A. MOSHER, Ohlo
THOMAS Q. MORRIS, New Mexico                 RICHARD L. ROUDEBUSH, Indiana
BOB CASEY, Texas                             ALPHONZO BELL, California
WILLIAM J. RANDALL, Missouri                 THOMAS M. PELLY, Washington
JOHN W. DAVIS, Georgia
WlLLIAM F. RYAN, New York
JAMES C. CORMAN, California
THOMAS N. DOWNINQ, Virginia
JOE D. WAQQONNER, JR., Louisiana
CORINNE B. RILEY, South Carolina
                                        Executive Director and Chief Counsel
                        F.
               OHARLES DUCANDER,
                         8PENCER M. BEBESFOaD, .Sp8dd C4mSel
                                              Special Consultant
                           P ~ I B. YEAOER,
                                   P
                         JOHN A. CARSTARPHEN, Chief Clerk
                                                  Jr.,
                               FRANK HAMMILL, Counsel
                                     R.            Jr.,
                                             Technical Consultani
                         EARLQ. PEACOCK,
                            RICHARD HINES, Staff Consultant
                                     P.
                                      WILCOVE, staff f&kEUltanl
                           RAYMOND
                          JOSEPH . FELTON,
                                  M            Publieations Clerk
                              FOREWORD
  A chronicle of scientific and technological events in the exploration
of space offers useful perspective. To those of us engaged in these
activities, it provides an inventory of the crowded kaleidoscope of
swift-moving domestic and foreign events. To others interested in
space exploration, it helps provide a sense of pace and a clearer aware-
ness of genuine achievements as well as greater things to come.
   Events of 1961 are mingled with the past and the future. The
groundwork of this year’s milestones was laid several years ago. The
scientific discoveries of Explorers IX, X, and X I I ; the suborbital
Mercury flights of Alan B. Shepard and Virgil I. Grissom; the attain-
ment of neardesign speed (mach 6) and altitude (50 miles) of the
X-15 rocket research airplane; the impact of Tiros satellites on global
weather forecastin ;and the successful f h t flight of the Saturn booster
                     P
for large space pay oads of the future-these were among the highlights
of 1961. The decisions and programs undertaken this year will come
to fruition in the months and years ahead.
   The national character of the space program is evidenced in the
contributions by American industry, the scientific community, the
military services, and other Government agencies. Growing public
recognition of the value of increased scientific knowled e and the
                                                            f
ultimate benefits for society of the total space effort was a so evident.
Known and unpredictable promises of tomorrow spur everyone ahead
in attaining the high oals of the national space pro
   As our broad-basecf scientific program and the g z o p m e n t of a
space transportation technology underwrote the events of 1961, I t was
also the year in which man himself first flew in space. Such was a
thrilling reminder that the best interests of all mankind must ever
provide the purpose and application of space exploration.
                                               JAMES WEBB,
                                                   E.
    Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
                                                                 iri




                                                        1
                 I        I
                             PREFACE
   This chronology represents but a first step in the historical process
of fully recording and explaining the myriad activities, accomplish-
ments, and problems of the National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration in the exploration and exploitation of space for the benefit of
all mankind. It, was prepared from open public sources. Since
science and technology are fundamentally indivisible, events of
space-related efforts by other governmental agencies including the
Department of Defense, as well as international itcms of a non-NASA
character, have been included to help provide the fuller context of
current history. We are appreciative of the generous help of NASA
offices and centers and interested members of the historical com-
munity.
   This chronicle for 1961 is supplemental to “Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 1915-1960,” published by NASA (Government Printing
Office, Superintendent of Documents). Appendix A: “Satellites,
Space Probes, and Manned Space Flight, 1961,” prepared by D .         r
Frank W. Anderson of the NASA Historical Office, is an updating of
Appendix A of “Aeronautics and Astronautics.”
   A chronology is but a preliminary tool of the historical process
and cannot be regarded as being definitive. Historical bookkeepin
                                                                     i
and auditing are a continuous process prefatorial to full-fledge
analysis. Additional comments and criticism are welcome at any time.
                                                     M.
                                            EUGENE EMME,
                                               The NASA Historian.
                                                              V




                         I                             1
                I
CONTENTS


            1
            5


           24
           31
           37
   AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

                              JANUARY 1961
January 1: White House statement of President Eisenhower issued,
    stating that “the early establishment of a communication satellite
    system which can be used on a commercial basis is a national
    objective.”
       Project Ice Way was established near Thule by the Geo-
    physics Research Directorate of the Cambridge Research Labora-
    tories to test the feasibility of landing heavy aircraft on ice
    runways. The tests, completed in June 1961, demonstrated the
    strength and other engineering qualities of the ice runways con-
    structed of natural sea water or reinforced with strands of Fiber-
    glas.
Early January: Because of the danger of a power drain in connection
    with remote (tape recorder) operation, the wide-angle camera of
    Tiros I1 was turned on only for direct readout, while satellite
    passed over Fort Monmouth and Point Arguello.
January 3: NASA’s Space Task Group, charged with carrying out
    Pro’ect Mercury and other manned space flight programs, offi-
    cially became a separate NASA field element.
       NASA awarded contract to General Electric for an investi-
    gation of means of storing solar heat energy in satellites.
January 4: Ablation model test with electric arc attained 4,OOOO F.
    for 105 seconds at Langley Research Center, one of a series of
    tests be n in September 1960.
January 5: g b o f a n - owered B-52H Boeing bomber, with two proto-
                      E
    type Douglas S ybolt air-launched 1,000-mile-range ballistic
    missiles under each wing, was rolled out of the factory a t Wichita,
    Kans.
January 7: USAF Blue Scout I reached near 1,000-mile altitude
    with 90-pound data capsule from Atlantic Missile Range.
January 9: Jet Propulsion Laboratory awarded contract to Beckman
    Instruments for design studies on equipment to analyze the
    surface of the Moon.
       Japanese scientist associated with Radio Research Laboratories
    of the Japanese Ministry o Communications began studies of
                                  f
    space communications at NASA’s Goldstone, Calif., Deep Space
    Tracking Station.
January 10: President-elect Kennedy received report of special nine-
    man committee on the national space program. Chairman of the
    committee was Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner of MIT.
       A Polaris missile of the advanced A-2 design was fired from
    Cape Canaveral 1,600 miles down the Atlantic Missile Range.
    It was the third success in as many firings for the new Polaris
    designed to operate a t a range over 1,700 miles.
                                                                 1




                          I
                I                                      I
2      AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

January ii: President-elect Kennedy announced that Jerome B.
    Wiesner of M I T would be special assistant to the President for
    science and technology.
January 12: President Eisenhower in his state of the Union address
    to Congress reviewed U.S. progress in space exploration, stating,
    “These achievements unquestionably make us pre-eminent in
    space exploration for the betterment of mankind.”
       Joint DOD-NASA release outlined actions of the Aeronautics
    and Astronautics Coordinating Board (AACB) since its creation
    in September 1960.
       First Italian launching of scientific sounding rocket in coopera-
    tive program with United States, a Nike-Cajun launched from a
    range in Sardinia to a height of over 100 miles, and released a
    cloud of sodium vapor visible for many miles.
January 13: Convair B-58 Hustler, jet bomber powered by four G E
    5-79 engines, broke six world speed records, Maj. H. J. Deutsch-
    endorf, U S . Air Force, as pilot. On first closed-course run,
    the Hustler averaged 1,200.194 miles per hour, and it averaged
    1,061.808 miles per hour on both runs carrying a payload of
    4,408 pounds and a crew of three.
       NASA announced that a Life Sciences Research Laboratory
    would be established on February 1 a t NASA Ames Research
    Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
January 15: NASA began negotiations with French Commission for
    Spatial and Scientific Research for conducting a cooperative
    Franco-American space program.
January 16: FCC first allocated radio frequencies to private industry
     (ITT) for experiments in bouncing signals off the Moon and
    artificial satellites.
       I n the messa e of President Eisenhower accompanying his
                     ff
    budget for fisca year 1962, it was said: “ I n the program of
    manned space flight, the reliability of complex booster capsule
    escape and life support components of the Mercury system is now
    being tested to assure a safe manned ballistic flight into space, and
    hopefully a manned orbital flight in calendar year 1961. Further
    test and experimentation will be necessary to establish if there are
    any valid scientific reasons for extending manned space flight
    beyond the Mercury program.”
       Final assembly of first Saturn flight vehicle (SA-1) was com-
    pleted.
January 17: First invention award under the authority of the National
    Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 given to Dr. Frank T.
    McClure of the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins
    for his satellite Doppler navigation system, the $3,000 award
    being presented by NASA Administrator Glennan at NASA
    headquarters.
January 19: Report of the Space Science Board of the National
    Academy of Sciences stated that life in some form on other
    planets of the solar system may possibly exist, but that evidence
    of this is not available today.
       Iris rocket, new solid-propellent single-stage sounding rocket,
    failed to attain programed fight from Wallops Island, reaching
    only 86 miles’ altitude instead of 160 miles.
                                                                     3
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

January 19: NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Go. for placing of a major
    subcontract by Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build seven Surveyor
    spacecraft designed for soft landings on the Moon.
       Marshall Space Flight Center awarded contract to Douglas
    and Chance Vought, to study launching manned exploratory
    expedition into lunar and interplanetary space from Earth orbits.
       Federal Communications Commission allocated a radio fre-
    quency to the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to estab-
    lish the first space satellite communications link between Europe
    and the United States on an experimental basis, a program calling
    for NASA launching of a series of experimental communication
    satellites capable of relaying telephone calls, television programs,
    and other messages across the Atlantic.
       NASA announced indefinite suspension of the programing of
    the wide-angle camera in Tiros 11, the experimental weather
    observation satellite launched on November 23, 1960.
January 20: United States and United Kingdom signed formal agree-
    ment covering minitrack station a t Winkfield, England.
       Under NASA contract, United Technology Corp. successfully
    completed ground tests of three 15,000-pound thrust segmented
    solid-propellent rockets. Each was made up of three 1,000-
    pound sections which were joined prior to firin ,
       NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSF8) awarded con-
    tracts to North American Aviation and Ryan Aeronautical to
    develop paraglider recovery system for the Saturn booster, based
    upon concept developed by Francis M. Rogallo of NASA’s
    Langley Research Center.
       Headline news in Moscow was detailed Tass announcement
    that Strelka, one of two female dogs recovered from orbiting
    Spacecraft I1 in August 1960, had given birth to six puppies in
    good health. Pravda had announced 3 weeks earlier that one of
    the satellite-passenger dogs had given birth.
January 2 : Final test flight of USAF Atlas D traveled 5,000 miles
          3
    to target down Atlantic Missile Range, representing 35 succ~sses,
    8 partials, and 6 failures in 49 test launchings for D model.
       NASA selected United Aircraft to make feasibility study of ion
    rocket application for long space flights.
January 24: NASA outlined specifications for a low-altitude active
    communications satellite Project Relay a t Goddard Space Flight
    Center.
January 26: NASA awarded contract to Lockheed for a spaceship
    refuelin study.
-N A S I distributed to the world scientific community, through
    COSPAR, a detailed description of the next planned Beacon
    satellite experiment.
       NASA revealed it had selected 12 women airplane pilots to
    undergo tests to determine space flight research capability.
       Assembly of Ranger I was completed a t Jet Propulsion
    Laboratory.
       Titan I1 selected as launch vehicle for Dyna-Soar I by USAF.
January 29: NASA announced establishment of Goddard Institute
    for Space Studies (GISS) in New York City, which would be an
    extension of the Theoretical Division of Goddard Space Flight
    Center, Greenbelt, Md. It will be headed by Dr. Robert
    Jastrow.
4      AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

January SO: President Kennedy stated in his state of the Union
    address to Congress: “This administration intends to explore
    promptly all possible areas of cooperation with the Soviet Union
    and other nations ‘to invoke the wonders of science instead of its
    terrors.’ Specifically, I now invite all nations-including      the
    Soviet Union-to join with us in developing a weather prediction
    program, in a new communication satellite program, and in
    preparation for probing the distant planets of Mars and Venus,
    probes which may some day unlock the deepest secrets of the
    universe.”
       James E . Webb noininated as Administrator of NASA by
    President Kennedy.
January SO-February 2: Conference of 12 European nations held a t
    Strasbourg to discuss a British and French proposal for a Euro-
    pean satellite launcher development program.
January Si: USAF Samos 11, a 4,100-pound test satellite containing
    photographic equipment, placed in orbit by Atlas-Agena A from
    Point Arguello, Calif.
       Mercury-Redstone (MR-2) flight l’rorn Atlantic Missile Range
    shot Mercury capsule containing chiinpanzee named Ham to 157
    miles altitude and 418 miles down range. Capsule with life-
    support equipment functioned well but flight was 42 miles higher
    and 125 d e s farther than programed. Ham was recovered in
    good health.
       An eight-engine static test firing of the Saturn test booster
    (SA-TI) for 113 seconds WAS coinpleted a t Marshall Space Flight
    Center.
During January: International Committee on Geophysics, successor
    organization to the IGY, meeting in Paris, endorsed proposal for
    Quiet Sun Year during 1964-65. (IGY had been selected for
    its intense sunspot activity.)
       NASA internal studies of a manned lunar landing program
    were completed. Studies considered both the direct ascent based
    on a large Nova-type launch vehicle and the rendezvous method
    of earth orbit using a number of Saturn C-2’s.
       Experiments with Echo I were discontinued except for occa-
    sional checks, having provided for innumerous communications
    since launch on August 12, 1960.
        Wind tunnel testing of model of the first Saturn (SA-1) began
    a t Arnold Engineering Development Center a t T ~ i l l a h ~ i ~ ~ ~ ,
                                                                Tenn.
       Explosions of Centaur engines a t Pratt & Whitney led to
    suspension of testing.
                          FEBRUARY 1961
February 1: Life Sciences Laboratory established by NASA a t Ames
     Research Center to augment , lead, direct, encourage, and coordi-
     nate biomedical research related to the space program.
        X-15 fNo. 1) flown to 49,780 feet by John B. McKay, NASA
     test pilot, a t Edwards, Calif.
        USAF Minuteman successful on first test launch from AFMTC,
     a three-stage solid-propellent ICBM with full guidance, all
     tested on its first launching.
    __
- The space surveillance system (Spasur) was formally commis-
     sioned a t the Naval Weapons Laboratory, Dahlgren, Va., under
     the operational control of the North American Defense Command.
February 2: NASA-AEC Space h’uclear Propulsion Office invited
     industry to submit proposals for participation in development
     of Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application), a part
     of Project Rover initiated in 1955 by WAF-AEC.
--      Nomination of James E. Webb to be Administrator of NASA
     reported favorably by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical
     and Space Sciences.
        Dr. T . Keith Glennan was named consultant to the Senate
     Commit tee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences.
        NASA announced that it would negotiate with Boeing Co.,
     Chance Vought Corp., and Martin Co., for tanks for five first-
     stage Saturn launch vehicles. It later announced additional
     selection of Chrysler Corp.
February 4: Sputnik TV launched into orbit by U.S.S.R., a 7.1-ton
     payload, but mission of flight was not announced.
        Plans to launch a Japanese Kappa 6 sounding rocket within
     a year announced by Yugoslavia.
February 6: Orientation of Tiros I1 made it impossible to obtain
     Northern Hemisphere pictures and malfunctions made remote
     picture taking undesirable, so that use of satellite’s cameras was
     suspended until orbit precession again made Northern Hemisphere
     pictures ossible.
             R
February 6: ASA Aerobee-Hi successfully reached 96 miles above
     Wallops Station in test of behavior of liquid hydro en in zero
     gravity for Lewis Research Center hydrogen propulg      sion devel-
     opment.
February 7: X-15 flown to unofficial record 2,275 miles per hour by
     Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force.
February 7-8: Meeting of NASA and contractor personnel held at
     NASA headquarters to review Centaur development program.
February 8: When asked a t press conference about US.man-in-space
     plans, President Kennedy stated: liWe are very concerned that
     we do not put a man in space in order to gain some prestige and
     have the man take a disproportionate risk * * * even if we
     should come in second in putting a man in space, I will still be
                                  z
     satisfied if when we &ally ut a man in space his chances of
     survival are as high as I thin they must be.”
                                                                5
6      AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

February 8: NAA delivered x-15 No. 2 with XLR-99 engine to NASA
    for the initiation of the NASA flight research program.
February 9: Sinithsonian Astrophysical Observatory reported that
    Earth is a slightly irregular ellipsoid according to new calculations.
       James E. Webb confirmed by the Senate as Administrator of
    NASA.
       Gen. Thomas D. White, USAF Chief of Staff, ordered space
    surveillance functions transferred from Air Research and Devel-
    opment Command to the Air Defense Command a t E n t Air
    Force Base, Colo., as technology in this field moved from research
    and development to an operational stage. The ADC established
    Spadats (space detection and tracking system).
February 10: Voice messa e sent from Washington to Woomera,
    Australia, by way of t7le Moon. NASA Deputy Administrator
    Dryden spoke on telephone to Goldstone, Calif., which “bounced”
    it to the deep space instrumentation station a t Woomera. The
    o eration was held as part of the official opening ceremony of
     g
    t e deep space instrumentation facility site in Australia.
       First static test of prototype thrust chamber of F-1 engine
    achieved a thrust of 1,550,000 pounds for a few seconds, a t
    Edwards, Calif.
       Three-day meeting of Satellite Panel of the World Meteor-
    ological Organization concluded a t Washington, D.C., minus
    participation by the Soviet member.
Februury io-ii: Space Science Board of the National Academy of
    Sciences worked out recommendation that “Scientific explora-
    tion of the Moon and planets should be clearly stated as the
    ultimate objective of the U.S. space program for the foreseeable
    future.” This report was submitted to the President on March
    31 and was released publicly on August 6.
Februury 12: Sputnik VI11 launched into Earth orbit by U.S.S.R.,
    from which it placed 1,419-pound Venus probe on its course.
February 13: USAF Gam-83B, modification of Navy Bullpup, a
    solid-propellent air-to-surface missile, was successfully launched
    a t supersonic speed by an F-100 Supersabre.
February i4: NASA Nike-Cajun rocket launched from Wallops Sta-
    tion, carrying 60-pound payload ejecting explosive charges, which
    fired at intervals from 20- to 80-mile altitude to provide data
    on density of the atmosphere.
       Last of second series of static firings of Saturn completed a t
    Marshall Space Flight Center for 110 seconds, approximately
    full duration.
       President Kennedy congratulated Premier Khrushchev on
    the Soviet Union’s “impressive scientific achievement” in launch-
    ing a space probe toward the planet Venus.
       NASA selected Flight Propulsion Department, General Elec-
    tric, for negotiation of 18-month contract to study heatflow
    characteristics of fluids in nuclear powerplants.
       NASA and United Kingdom agreed to establish joint program
    to test communications satellites to be launched by NASA in
    1962 and 1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
February 15: U.S.S.R. reportedly made first photos of solar eclipse
    from a vehicle in space, in report later released on May 28.
       James E. Webb was sworn in as NASA Administrator.
                                                                      7
                       AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1
       AERONAUTICAL

February 16: NASA Explorer IX placed in orbit by four-stage Scout
    booster from Wallops Station, the first satellite launching from
    Wallops, and the first satellite boosted by a solid-fuel rocket.
    Explorer IX was a 12-foot diameter sphere after inflation at
    orbital altitude.
       NASA and France agreed to establish joint program to test
    communications satellites to be launched by NASA in 1962 and
    1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
F b u r 17: “Polka dot” Explorer I X found in orbit by visual and
 eray
    photographic means after failure of radio beacon delayed con-
    firmation of orbit.
       USAF’ Discoverer XX placed in polar orbit with 300-pound
    recovery capsule from Vandenberg A r Force Base.
                                            i
       NASA negotiated $400,000 contract with G. T. Schjeldahl Co.
    to design, develop, fabricate, and test rigidized inflatable spheres
    for Project Echo, the passive communications satellite program.
       The last successful communication with the U.S.S.R. Venus
    probe was made.
February 18: USAF Discoverer X X I fired into polar orbit, and Agena
    B restarted in flight after h s t orbit.
F b u r $0: Navy told the House Committee on Science and Astro-
 eray
    nautics that Polaris could be used as a mobile satellite launch
    vehicle.
F b u r $1: NASA Space Task Group selected John H. Glenn, Jr.,
 eray
    Virgil I. Grissom, and Alan B. Shepard, Jr., to begin special
    training for first manned Mercury space flight.
       Navy Transit 111-B with Lofti piggyback satellite placed into
    orbit by Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle, but satellites did not
    separate.
       USAF canceled recovery operations of Discoverer XX capsule
    due to technical difliculties.
       NASA awarded contract to G. T . Schjeldahl Co. for nine
    inflatable spheres for Echo program.
       Titan ICBM completed 5,000-mile flight, the 20th success in
    29 tests.
       MA-2 launch from Cape Canaveral, trajectory providing
    rugged test of the Mercury ca sule.
February $2; French Veroni ue yaunched capsule containing rat
                              8
     (Hector) to 95-mile altitu e, recovered successfully.
F b u r $ : NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Deputy
 eruy 3
    Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric signed letter of under-
    standing confirming the national launch vehicle program, the
    inte ated development and procurement of space boosters by
    N A B and DOD. It was agreed that neither DOD nor NASA
    would initiate the development of a launch vehicle or booster for
    use in space without written acknowledgment of the other
    agency.
       Proposed DOD Directive entitled “Development of Space
    Systems” was submitted to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the
    military services for comment by March 2.
       Tiros I1 completed 3 months in orbit, continuing useful obser-
     vations beyond original estimate of useful life.




                I                                      1
                          I
8     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

February 24: NASA Juno I1 launched S-45 I ionosphere beacon satel-
    lite which did not achieve orbit due to malfunction shortly after
    booster separation.
February 25: Paul F. Bikle set world glider altitude record of 46,267
    feet in Schweizer 1-23-E sailplane, beating record of 42,100 feet
    set by W. S. Ivans in 1950. Bikle is Director of NASA Plight
    Research Center, Edwards, Calif., which is conducting the X-15
    flight research program.
February 26: Sputnik IV,launched on February 4, reentered the
    Earth’s atmosphere.
February 27; FCC-NASA memorandum of understanding for de-
    lineating and coordinating civil communication space activities
    signed. It stated that “earliest practicable realization of a com-
    mercially operable communication satellite system is a national
    objective.”
       NASA released “Evaluation of U.S.S.R. versus U.S. Output
    in Space Science,” a study prepared for the House Committee
    on Science and Astronautics.
February 28: NASA Administrator James E. Webb stated that Presi-
    dent Kennedy had ordered a thorough review of the Nation’s
    space programs.
During February: Acoustic test chamber for recording sound of rocket
    operations and to study human stress limits completed a t En-
    vironmental Simulation Laboratory, Naval hfissile Center, a t
    Pacific Missile Range.
       Japanese space science survey team toured NASA facilities.
       Bell Telephone Laboratories and General Electric conducted
    a “phase stability” experiment on Echo I, the results indicating
    that the sphere was keeping its “roundness” much longer than
    anticipated.
       NASA-USAF returned x 1 No. 1 to contractor (NAA) for
                                   -5
    installation of final engine of 57,000-pound thrust.
                           MARCH 1961
March 2 Tass announced that radio contact with the Soviet Venus
        :
   probe could not be established on February 27.
       The fourth firing of an advanced Polaris A-2, and the first
   from a ship, was made by the U.S.S. Observation Island as she
   cruised a t 8 knots, 10 miles offshore from Cape Canaveral.
       The President’s Scientific Advisory Committee on Project
   Mercury visited Atlantic Missile Range for a briefing.
March 3: USAF Blue Scout I1 carried 172-pound payload to 1,580
   miles altitude from Atlantic Missile Range.
March 6: First NASA Agena B vehicle entered checkout of systems
   and subsystems a t Lockheed, Sunnyvale, Calif. ;vehicle scheduled
   to launch Ranger I.
       Department of Defense decision indicated that perfected mili-
   tary space vehicles would be assi ned to each service which
                                        f
    demonstrated an operational need or them, thus giving USAF
   major responsibility for military space development.
       Direct-mode pictures by Tiros I1 camera were resumed after a
   month of inoperation. The quality of the pictures showed some
   slight improvement, supporting the theory that foreign matter may
   have been deposited on the lens and was gradually evaporating.
       Equipped with turbofan engines, B-52H made its first flight
    a t Wichita, Kans.
March 7: First flight model of Saturn booster (SA-1) installed on
   static test stand for preflight checkout, Marshall Space Flight
   Center, Huntsville.
       NASA Marshall Space Fli h t Center selected Chance Vought
                                 k
    Corp. to build 42 fuel and iquid oxygen tanks for the Saturn
   booster rogram.
       Maj. Eobert White, U.S. Air Force, ffew X-15 a record speed
   of 2,905 miles per hour, topping his mark of 2,275 miles per hour
   set on February 7 with interim engine.
March 9: U.S.S.R. launched 540n Sputnik IV into orbit and recovered
   do passenger, the second time this feat was performed.
_- garold B. Finger was a pointed Assistant Director for Nuclear
    Applications in NASA’s 8ffice of Launch Vehicle Programs, and
    continued as Manager of the AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propul-
    sion Office (SNPO).
       Dr. Harold Brown, of Universit of California’s Lawrence
    Radiation Laboratories, was namedy Director of Research and
   Engineering for the Department of Defense, to succeed Dr.
    Herbert E’. York.
MarchIU: NASA announced first success in immediate detection in
    real time of radar signals off planet Venus by Jet Propulsion Lab-
    oratory Goldstone, as part of 2-month research program.
       NASA and Navy jointly established development program to
    increase payload capability of Scout vehicle by 40 percent by
   improved performance of third- and fourth-stage engines.
                                                              9
     82534-62-2
10     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

       NASA awarded contracts to Convair, Lockheed, and North
___
    American for studies of space vehicles beyond the Saturn class,
    having fist-stage thrust of 6 to 12 million pounds.
       National Meteorite Symposium held a t Arizona State Univer-
    sity, Tempe, Ariz.
March 13: Soviet astronomers claimed to have discovered the presence
    of oxygen in the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Brian Warner of the
   London Observatory correlated and reinterpreted spectrographic
    data gathered earlier by Soviet Astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev.
       An Atlas intended for 9,000-mile flight into the Indian Ocean
    plunged into the Atlantic only 200 miles from Cape Canaveral.
March 14-15: United States and United Kingdom signed formal agree-
    ment covering Mercury tracking stations on Bermuda.
Mid-March: Up to this time, approximately 78 percent of the wide-
    angle photographs relayed from Tiros I1 (weather satellite) were
   considered usable for current weather analysis.
March 15: NASA and United Kingdom’s Space Sciences Committee
    agreed on experiments to be included in the second United
    Kingdom satellite (launched by NASA’s Scout), the experiments
    being galactic noise, atmospheric ozone, and micrometeoroids.
March 16: Scientists from Fordham University and Esso Research
    announced that they had discovered waxy compounds inside a
   fragment of a meteorite found near Orgueil, France, in 1864.
       NASA Robert H. Goddard Space Flight Center officially dedi-
    cated a t Greenbelt, Md., dedication address delivered by Dr.
   Detlev Bronk, President of the National Academy of Sciences.
   It was the 35th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s successful launching
    of the world’s first liquid fuel rocket. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard
   accepted the congressional medal honoring her husband.
March 17: Vanguard I completed third year in orbit and was still
   transmitting. Vanguard I provided much useful data on orbits,
   including the slight pear-shape of the Earth and the effect of solar
   pressure. Vanguard also provided the second stage for the Able,
   Delta, and Able-Star, as well as the third stage of Scout, pioneering
   solid-propellent stages used in Polaris and Minuteman.
       First Northrop T-38 supersonic jet trainer was delivered to
   USAF Air Training Command a t Randolph Air Force Base, Tex.
March 18: Little Joe 6 f i e d Mercury spacecraft from Wallops,
   resulted in limited test of escape system because of unprogramed
   sequence.
March 19: Problems with the shutter of the wide-angle camera of the
   Tiros I1 were noted, but later disappeared and did not signifi-
   cantly affect data from this camera.
      Tiny particle of matter from another galaxy hit upper atmos-
   phere of the Earth over New Mexico a t a speed close to that of
   light and split with great force. Resultant particle shower
   numbered between 20 and 40 billion pieces, according to scintil-
   lation counters a t the Volcano Ranch Cosmic Ray Research
   Center near Albuquerque, N. Mex.
March 20: Charles J. Dolan named Associate Director of NASA’s
   Langley Research Center. He had been associated with the
   NASA Space Task Group since its formation a t Langley in
   November 1958.
                                                                     11
                                                        OF 1961
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS

March ,%l-21: Representatives of NASA and the French Committee
   for Space Research agreed on cooperative space science program
   in meeting at Washington, D.C.
March 2 : National Academy of Sciences’ Geophysics Research Board
        2
    announced preliminary plans for an International Year of the
   Quiet Sun (IQSY) during 1964-65.
       Dr. Edward C. Welsh, a former aid to Senator Symington,
   was nominated by the President to be the Executive Secretary
   of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
               a
March 23: Res onding to inquiry by the chairman of the House
   Science an Astronautics Committee, President Kennedy stated
   in a letter: “It is not now nor has it ever been my intention to
   subordinate the activities of [NASA] to those of the De artment
                                                              f
    of Defense * * * there are legitimate missions in space or which
    the militaxy services should assume responsibility * * * [and
   there are] major missions, such as the scient& unmanned and
   manned exploration of space and the application of space tech-
    nology to the conduct of peaceful activities, which should be
    carried forward by the civilian space agency.”
-      The h t World Meteorological Day was observed by 50 nations
    under s onsorship of the World Meteorological Organization.
March 24: bercury-Redstone successfully flew capsule in 115-mile
        h t test at Atlantic Missile Range.
-   ?? I1 completed 4 months in orbit and continued to rovide
       I iros
    useful cloud picture and radiation data. Signal from &os I1
    was used on 1,763d orbit to trigger dynamite to break ground
    for new RCA Space Environment Center a t Princeton, N.J.
-      NASA and United Kingdom’s Department of Science and
    Industrial Research signed agreement covering data acquisition
    unit in Falkland Islands for “topside sounder,” a joint United
    States-Canada roject.
March 66: NASA fhor-Delta Sred E lorer X (P-14) into highly
                                        ?i
    elliptical orbit (apogee of 148,000 m’ es, perigee of 100 miles) with
    instruments to transmit data on the nature of the magnetic fields
    and charged articles in this region of s ace where the Earth’s
                                               P
    magnetic fie1c f merges with that m interp anetary space.
-      Prof. Martin Schwarzschild, of Princeton University, named
    by the National Academy of Sciences to receive the Henry Draper
    Medal for his work a director of ONR’s Project Stratoscope
                             s
     (produced clear photos of the structure of the surface of the Sun).
       U.S.S.R. launched Spacecraft V, a more than 54011 payload,
    and recovered capsule containing a dog named Little Star. This
    was apparent1 a repeat of the March 9 shot.
March 26: NASA zerobee research rocket with University of Michigan
    payload shot to 252-mile altitude from Wallops Station.
-       Pravda article stated that the day was ((not far distant when
     a Soviet human being will rocket into space.”
March 2 : Budget Director David E. Bell made known to Joint Eco-
         7
    nomic Committee of Congress that the new administration would
     re uest for fiscal year 1962 $125.67 million more for NASA (in
     ad% to previous $1,110 million) and $65 million more for the
         ‘tion
            I
    National Science Foundation (additional to $210 million).
12     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

March 27: President Kennedy initiated actions to speed up the de-
   velopment of large boosters.
      Dr. Carl Sagen, of the University of California, suggested that
    the seeding of the atmosphere of Venus with algae might alter
   its atmosphere to support human life.
      Its instruments recording a magnetic impulse, Explorer X
   became the first satellite to measure the shock wave generated
   by a solar flare.
Murch 28: USAF Dyna-Soar System Project Office personnel visited
    NASA headquarters for review of technical and management
   programs.
___ President Kennedy requested Congress for $2 million so that
    NASA could aid FAA in development of supersonic transport
   aircraft. President also asked for $12 million increase in FAA
   budget.
      NASA Goddard scientists reported that Explorer X had en-
   countered magnetic fields considerably stronger than expected
   in its elongated orbit which carried it 112,500 miles from Earth
    (almost halfway to the Moon), although it would take several
   weeks to analyze acquired data.
      Soviet press conference a t Soviet Academy of Sciences in
   MOSCOW,t which Biochemist N. M. Sisakian announced that
              a
   all six of Strelka’s pups, on exhibit, were developing normally:
    “Our research on these animals, just completed, has proved that
   no dangerous consequences to the functioning of their organs
   have stemmed from the space flight. This problem has an
   important bearing on our preparations for man’s orbiting.”
      Alexander Topchiev, Vice Chairman of the Soviet Academy of
   Science, stated in Moscow that Western reports that some Soviet
   astronauts had perished in space flight attempt were “a complete
   fabrication * * * entirely and absolutely unfounded.” Occasion
   was press conference a t the Academy of Science on the subject
   of the imminent flight of man into space, a t which four space dogs
   and six offspring were televised.
      Draft DOD directive on “Reconnaissance, Mapping, and
--
   Geodetic Programs” (5160.34), relative to development of
   military space systems, was sent to the services for comment.
March 29: At 280th session of disarmament conference a t Geneva,
   Arthur H. Dean presented U.S. proposal that a system of space
   satellites for patrolling a ban on nuclear testing be fully opera-
   tional 6 years after ratification of such a ban. Such a space
   patrol could “open up a new frontier of knowledge for the benefit
   of mankind.”
March SO: Reactor-in-flight-test system (Rift) study, a part of the
   NASA-AEC program on nuclear rockets, was briefed by con-
   tractors a t NASA headquarters.
      USAF Discoverer XXII failed to achieve orbit.
      NASA-USAF-USN rocket research X-15 flown to 169,600 feet
   by Joseph A. Walker, NASA pilot, the highest altitude ever
   reached by man and which included 2 minutes of weightlessness
   a t the top of his climb. The x-15, powered by XLR-99 rocket
   engine designed to thrust it to 50 miles altitude and speeds of
   up to 4,000 miles per hour, was only run a t three-quarters throttle.
                                                                   13
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

March SO: USAF announced reduction of the B-70 program contract
    commitments to North American, Westinghouse, and other
    firms. Five major subcontracts were canceled and four others
    sharply reduced.
March 31: NASA selected GE’s Space Sciences Laboratory and
    Avco Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study feasibility of
    magneto gas dynamic electric rocket or thermal arc jet rocket
        -     -
    engines.
       By this date, all stations of NASA’s worldwide Mercury track-
    ing network were operational.
       Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences
    submitted its recommendation of February 10-1 1 that “scientific
    exploration of the Moon and planets should clearly be stated as
    the ultimate obiective of the U.S. space program for the foresee-
                                                --
    able future.”
Durinu March: Announced that National Institutes of Health
    scientists were growing organisms found inside of a meteorite
    that fell a t Murray, Ky., around 1950; first reported instance of
    living material, perhaps extraterrestrial, grown in a laboratory.
       In an experiment a t Boeing, biologist J. D. McClure spent
    26 hours in a sealed environment with atmosphere recycled
    through algae to retain 21 percent oxygen content.
       Marine helicopter crews conducted extensive tests to perfect
    water recovery of Mercury capsule a t Langley Air Force Base.
       Personnel of NASA’s technical and international programs
    participated in task force study of methods for increasing effec-
    tiveness of U S . international scientific activities.
       It was reported that the Institute of Space Technology a t
    Stuttgart, Germany, had developed inexpensive static test stand
    and fired steam motors producing 30 tons of thrust.
                           APRIL 1961
April I : Dr. Charles A. Roadman named as Acting Director of the
    NASA Office of Life Sciences to succeed Dr. Clark Randt, who
    resigned effective this date.
___- Secretary of Defense McNamara issued directive (5160.34)
    assigning research, development, and operational responsibilities
    for DOD reconnaissance, mapping, and geodetic programs. The
    USAF was assigned responsibility for reconnaissance satellite
    systems as well as research and development of instrumentation
    and data processing associated with these satellite systems. The
    U.S. Army was assigned responsibility for establishment and
    management of a worldwide master geodetic control system, and
    necessary R. & D. and library support, while the USAF was made
    responsible for launch and recovery of geodetic payloads. The
    U.S. Navy was assigned responsibility for R . & D. and operation
    of all oceanographic and geodetic programs a t sea.
       USAF reorganized its research and development activities,
    creating the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) to replace
    parts of the Air Research and Development Command and the
    Air Materiel Command, to be commanded by Lt. Gen. Bernard
    Schriever. Also separately created was the Office of Aerospace
    Research (OAR) to function as a separate air command report-
    ing directly to Chief of Staff, USAF.
April 3: Naval Research Laboratory reported that Lofti, small piggy-
    back satellite on Transit 111-B launched on February 21, demon-
    strated that very low frequency radio signals pass through the
    ionosphere into space, thus opening new area for communications
    development.
April 4: Three astronauts selected for Mercury-Redstone flight
    (MR-3) were ordered to take refresher course in Navy centrifuge
    a t Johnsville, Pa.
April 6: Six hundred mice placed in altitude chamber for 6-week envi-
    ronmental exposure a t Armour Research Foundation.
       Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 1,640,000 pounds
    thrust was achieved in test of F-1 rocket engine thrust chamber
    static firing a t Edwards, Calif., a record thrust for a single
    chamber.
       United States and United Kingdom signed formal agreement
    covering tracking station on Canton Island.
April 7-14: NASA participated in Committee on Space Research
    symposium held in Florence, Italy.
April 8: USAF Discoverer XXIII placed into polar orbit from Pacific
    Missile Range but reentry capsule stayed in orbit.
April IO: President Kennedy requested Congress to approve legislation
    making the Vice President Chairman of the National Aeronautics
    and Space Council.
     14
                                                                    15
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

April 10: Radar tracking of planet Venus for 7 weeks by Jet Propul-
    sion Laboratory scientists had proved ((astronomical yardstick”
    of 93,498,125 miles as the distance between the Earth and the
    Sun (within 1,000 miles of error).
       Attempt to recover capsule from Discoverer XXIII unsuccessful.
       Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory reported that Echo I
    satellite may remain in orbit another 3 years.
       Rumors swept Moscow that U.S.S.R. had placed a man into
    space.
April 12: U.S.S.R. announced that Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had success-
    fully orbited the Earth in a 108-minute flight in a $ton Vostok
    (East), the f i s t man to make a successful orbital flight through
    space.
       President Kennedy, in his regular press conference, stated
    that “no one is more tired than I am” in seeing the United States
    second to Russia in the space field. “They secured large boosters
    which have led to their being first in Sputnik, and led to their
    first putting their men in space. We are, I hope, going to be able
    to carry out our efforts, with due regard to the problem of the
    life of the men involved, this year. But we are behind * * *
    the news will be worse before it is better, and it will be some time
    before we catch up * * * ”
       USAF Blue Scout I1 w& fired with test equipment for detection
    of high-altitude nuclear tests.
       Announced in Moscow that a new State Committee for Co-
    ordinatin Research Work was created, to be headed by Lt. Gen.
             f.
    Mikhail      Khrunichev.
April i3: A.T. & T. stated that it hoped to orbit experimental com-
    munications satellite by May 1962, and would share use or owner-
    ship of a satellite system with other common carriers.
April i4: In response to questioning by the House Science and
    Astronautics Committee, Associate NASA Administrator Sea-
    mans repeated the general estimate of $20 to $40 billion as the
    cost for the total effort required to achieve a lunar landing, that
    an all-out program might cost more, and that 1967 could be con-
    sidered only as a possible planning date at this stage of such a
    complex task.
       Gigantic ceremon i Red Square in Moscow honoring Maj.
                             n
                         L
    Y. A. Gagarin, the       t cosmonaut.
April i7: Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Government
    Operations, Senator Hubert H. Humphrey as chairman, submitted
    report on “Coordination of Information on Current Research
    and Development Supported by the US. Government.” It
    recommended innovations be developed to aid the management
    and conduct of research.
       Construction of dynamic test stand for Saturn completed at
    Marshall Space Flight Center.
       USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories’ balloon was launched
    from Vernalis, Calif., maintained constant altitude of 70,000
    feet for 9 days with payload of 40 pounds.




               I                                       1
                         I
16     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

A p r i l 19: Preliminary data from Explorer X disclosed a t NASA
        indicated that solar winds blow the Sun’s magnetic field out
        past the orbit of the Earth.
           Dr. Thomas Gold, of Cornel1 University, submitted that water
        exists on the Moon, perhaps shielded from evaporation by a
       layer of ice below the surface, in a paper given a t American
        Physical Society.
__- Lincoln Laboratory’s radar system near El Campo, Tex.,
        began 32-day radar contact with the Sun, ending on July 7.
        Variations in solar activity were determined to have a correspond-
        ing effect upon the reflectivity of radio waves transmitted to the
        Sun from Earth.
__- Scientists from the United Kingdom and NASA announced
        a reeinent on the scientific instrumentation of a second United
        Zngdom satellite to be launched by NASA with a Scout
        vehicle.
           Polaris fired more than 1,100 miles from submerged U.S.S.
        Robert E. Lee.
A p r i l 20: National Academy of Sciences issued report by its Space
        Science Board which stated that “the history of geographic
        exploration on Earth tells over and over again of the deaths of
        bold explorers. * * * To ignore this in the far more dificult
        and hazardous areas of man in space is foolish. Men will perish
        in space as they have on the high seas, in the Antarctica, in the
        heart of Africa, and wherever they have ventured into unknown
        regions.”
-__ House and Senate approved bill to permit Vice President of
        the United States to serve as Chairman of the National Space
        Council.
__- Dr. John R . Winckler, of the University of Minnesota, reported
        a t the American Geophysical Union, that the first direct sampling
        of a Cross section of solar material had revealed that particles
        of heavier elements of the sun ejected by solar flares have been
        captured in the vicinity of the Earth in study of emulsions
        flown by balloons and rockets during the solar activity of the
        fall of 1960. Tracks of helium, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen
        had been detected.
A p r i l 21: USAF-USN-NASA x 1 flown to controlled-flight record
                                      -5
        speed of 3,074 miles per hour by Maj. Robert White (USAF)
        a t Edwards, Calif. This was the first flight of x1 with full
                                                              -5
        throttle.
__- NASA fired Nike-Asp rocket carrying aluminum thermite and
        sodium pellets to an altitude of 34 miles, one of a series of sodium
        cloud firings in connection with similar launchings in Italy.
            Dr. IV. 0. Roberts, Director of the National Center for Atmos-
___
        pheric Research (NCAR), announced that a national balloon
        flights facility would be established to encourage upper
        atmospheric research.
A p r i l 22.- NASA fired first seven-stage Trailblazer rocket from Wallops
         Station, first three stages firing meteorite to 175-mile altitude
        and next four stages back through the atmosphere in a high-speed
        reentry experiment.
            Italian Air Force personnel fired Jupiter IRBM in training
        launch a t Cape Canaverrtl.
                                                                     17
       AIRONMlJTICWi ‘&NR..ASTRONATJTICAL EVENTS OF.1 Q41

A d 28: Tirm I1 mmpl’lehed 5 months in orbit. Useful rtdiatim
     observatiom ceased due to detector malfunctions, but fadiation
     electronics and tape recorder continued to function, and TV
     cameras continued to operate as well as on day of launch.
A p d 24: Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold, director of applied research at
     Sylvania Electronic Systems, was named by the President to be
     Chief Scientist, USAF.
Ap-2 25: Mercury-Atlas (MA-3) launched unmanned Mercury space-
     craft in orbital test from Atlantic Missile Range, which was
     destroyed a t 16,000 feet by range safety officer, while Mercury
     capsule was boosted by escape tower rockets above Atlas and
     subsequently recovered intact.
        President Kennedy signed legislation making the Vice President
--
     Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
__- Official Soviet report described preliminary weightlessness
     training of the Soviet cosmonauts as follows: “It was established
     that all selected cosmonauts possess a good ability to endure
     weightlessness up to 40 seconds, the cosmonaut can eat food
     liquid, semiliquid, and solid; can perform delicate coordinated
     acts, such as writing or purposeful hand motions; can maintain
     communication by radio; can read; and, besides, can orient him-
     self visually.”
April 27: Javelin launched 70.6-pound payload to an altitude of 475
     miles in beginning of Goddard Space Flight Center program to
     measure the density of electrons in the ionosphere.
        Explorer XI, a gamma-ray satellite, was successfully launched
     into orbit by NASA Juno I1 from Cape Canaveral.
        NASA Ames Research Center measured the intensity of radi-
     ation from the hot gas over the nose of a model flying through the
     air a t 42,300 feet per second. This speed was in excess of para-
     bolic atmospheric entry speed and the data are significant in re-
     lation to development of luna: spacecraft. The speed, 11,100
     feet per second hi her than maxlmum air speed obtained previous-
                      %
     ly, was achieved y firing the model from a light-gas gun into a
     highspeed jet of air flowing in the opposite direction from a shock-
     driven wind tunnel.
        F. W. Reichelderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, testi-
     fied before the House Appropriations Committee that getting
     the same information contained in the cloud structure photo-
     graphs taken by the Tiros I weather satellite would have required
     thousands of weather ships over the Pacific. With Tiros I, he
     said, “for the first time man had a complete look a t the weather
     over a large segment of the Earth’s surface.”
April 68: Little Joe 5-B launched Mercury spacecraft from Wallops
     Station, which provided abort test under severe atmospheric
     fli h t conditions.
        simulated countdown of Mercury-Redstone 3 was completed
~




     successfully.
        First manned balloon launched from and landed back aboard a
     naval vessel, a Stratolab High test flight over U.S.S. Antietam
     in the Gulf of Mexico (6,000 feet).
18     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

April %3: Final NASA report on the study proposed for Saturn for use
    as Dyna-Soar booster was presented to the Air Force.
       World altitude record for aircraft of 113,891 feet (34,714
    meters) flown by G. Mussolov in Soviet E-66A.
April 29: Saturn booster firing of 30 seconds using timer a t predeter-
    mined settin was successful in fli h t qualification test.
                                      d
                 f
During April: T e Navy reactivate the former NACA hydrody-
    namic research facilities a t Langley Research Center, to conduct
    R. & D. on hydrofoils, air-cushion vehicles, hydroskis, cata-
    marans, STOL seaplanes, torpedoes, and underwater rockets.
    NASA continued investigations a t other facilities of Langley of
    ditching and water landing of space vehicles.
                             MAY 1961
May 1: NASA Administrator Webb issued a statement concerning
   the 2-year Mercury manned space flight program, which said, in
   part: “NASA has not attempted to encourage press coverage of
   the fist Mercury-Redstone manned flight. It has responded to
   press and television requests, with the result that over 100 repre-
   sentatives of the press, radio, and TV are now a t Cape Canaveral.
   * * * We must keep the perspective that each flight is but one
   of the many milestones we must pass. Some will complete1
   succeed in every respect, some partially, and some will f a i l
   From all of them will come mastery of the vast new space environ-
   ment on which so much of our future depends.”
      May Day parade in Red Square, MOSCOW,           reviewed by Maj.
   Yuri Gagarin beside Premier Khrushchev.
      Tiros operations a t Belmar, N.J., terminated to begin move of
   equipment to Wallops Station, Virginia.
May 2: Manned Mercury-Redstone (MR-3) launch postponed be-
   cause of rain squalls in the recovery area.
      USAF Bomarc B area defense missile destroyed Regulus I1
   target missile flying a t mach 2, in test a t Eglin Gulf Test Range.
May 3: First silo launching of an ICBM, a USAF Titan a t Vanden-
   berg Air Force Base.
May 4: ONR Stratolab High V balloon launched from carrier
   Antieturn in Gulf of Mexico reached world altitude balloon record
   of 113,600 feet, remaining above 104,000 feet for 2 hours 11 min-
   utes, Comdr. Malcolm D. Ross, US. Naval Reserve, as pilot, and
   Lt. Comdr. Victor G. Prather, Medical Corps, U S . Navy, as
   observer.
      House Science and Astronautics Committee approved $126.6
   million additional to the President’s space budget, marking most
   of the increase for the Apollo program.
      First part of MR-3 firing countdown be an at T-640 minutes
                                               7
   (7:30 a.m. eastern standard time) and he d a t T-390 minutes
   until h a 1 countdown be an a t 11:30 p.m. eastern standard time.
May 6: Freedom 7, mannef Mercury spacecraft (No. 7) carr ng
   Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as pilot, was launched ?        rom
                                                                     l
   Cape Canaveral by Mercury-Redstone (MR-3) launch vehicle,
   to an altitude of 115.696 miles and a range of 302 miles. It was
   the first American manned s ace flight. Shepard demonstrated
                                  P
   that man can control a vehic e during weightlessness and high G
   stresses, and significant scientific biomedical data were acquired.
   He reached a speed of 5,100 miles per hour and flight lasted 14.8
   minutes .
      Saturn static firing of 44.17 seconds’ duration to test-fire
   detection system at engine position No. 2 was successful, the
   second SA-1 flight qualification test a t Marshall Space Flight
   Center.
                                                               19
20    AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 1

M a y 5: In-house testing of Ranger I spacecraft completed at Jet
     Propulsion Laboratory.
M a y 8: Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Mercury astronaut, was awarded
     NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal by President Kennedy in
     a special White House ceremony. It was followed by an in-
     formal parade to the Capitol by the seven astronauts for lunch,
     and a press conference at the State Department auditorium.
M a y 9: Senator Robert S. Kerr, chairman of the Senate Aeronautical
     and Space Sciences Committee, told a group a t the National
     Radio and Television Convention that President Kennedy ac-
     cepted the views of NASA and congressional leaders in approving
     the manned Mercury-Redstone flight of May 5.
M a y 9-10: Twenty-four Arcas-Robin weather sounding rockets fired
     within 24 hours by AFPGC a t Eglin Air Force Base, Pla.
.May 1 1 : Jet Propulsion Laboratory briefed NASA headquarters on
     the Venus radar tracking experiment, after 2 months of intensive
     study begun on March 10.
__- U.S.S.R’s Izvestia headlined the result of Soviet radar probes
     of planet Venus, a report which said that the Venusian day was
     from 9 to 11 Earth days, and that the astronomical unit (mean
     distance from the Earth to the Sun) was computed at 149,457,000
     kilometers (92,812,797 miles). These figures were a t variance
     with detailed study by scientists of J P L and MIT.
        Static test of 111 seconds’ duration of Saturn booster was suc-
     cessful, the final SA-1 flight qualification test of the S-I stage.
-‘May 12: USAF announced plans to institute special course for the
     instruction of space pilots at Edwards Air Force Base, and it
     was activated in June.
M a y I S : NASA legislative program for the 87th Congress was sub-
     mitted (S. 1857 and H.R. 7115), asking for authority to leasc
     property, authority to acquire patent releases, elimination of
     the CMLC, replacement of semiannual reports to Congress with
     an annual one, and authority to indemnify contractors against
     unusually hazardous risks.
 iMay 14: AEC’s Tory IT-A-1 experimental powerplant for atmos-
     pheric ramjet vehicles underwent first power tests, a part of
     USAF Project Pluto.
M a y 15: Tn testimony before House Appropriations Committee,
     Hugh L. Dryden revealed that simulated free-flight speeds just
     under 30,000 miles per hour had been achieved at NASA Ames
     Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
        National Aeronautic Association announced selection of Vice
     Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr., to receive the Robert J . Collier
     trophy for his direction of the Polaris missile program.
 ___ Test firing of GE plug-nozzle engine developed 50,000 pounds
     of thrust.
 Aday 15-17: Final reports of study contracts on Project Apollo pre-
     sented by the three contractors at Langley Research Center and
      Space Task Group.
 &lay 17: An HSS-2 helicopter, flown by Comdr. Patrick L. Sullivan
      and Lt. Beverly W. Witherspoon, set a new world class speed
     record of 192.9 miles per hour for 3 kilometers at Bradley Field,
     Windsor Locks, Conn.
                                                                     2:
                                                                      1
            f i s a o ~ ~ ~ ~ r -BSTRONAUQEAL
                          INIT n ~ . ~ ~                OF“ 1661-
May €8: $irSt %est iail         of 135-foot rigidized inflatable balloon
                              g5r, conducted by NASA Langley Re-
   gatelite b i v ’Cfirigi
   search Center an’d G. T. Schjeldahl Co. a t Weeksville, N.C.
       NASA selected RCA to construct the Relay experimental
   communications satellite to test the feasibility of transoceanic
   telephone, telegraph, and television communications using an
   active repeater satellite.
       Announced by NASA Institute of Space Studies in New York
   that first major project, a 2-month seminar on the origin of the
   solar system, would be held in fall 1961.
May 19: Soviet Academy of Sciences revealed that the pulse rate of
   Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had risen to 158 beats a minute in his
   Vostok fli ht, according to a report circulated by Tass.
       Second%inUteman test launch was destroyed by range safety
   officer 90 seconds after lift.
May 19-90: Cape Canaveral opened to the general public for the
   first time in its history.
May 20: Unconfirmed signals were received on the frequency used by
   Soviet Venus probe launched February 12, according to Sir
   Bernard Lovell, of the Jodrell Bank Experimental Station.
May 22: Gen. Curtis E. LeMay nominated by the President to be
   Chief of Staff, USAF.
May 2 : Tiros I1 completed 6 months in orbit, transmitting over
      3
   31,000 photographs of which over 75 percent have been classified
   as fair to good for meteorological analysis.
-- I n a brief ceremony, a bust of Samuel P. Langley was pre-
   sented by Paul Garber, Curator of the National Air Museum, to
   the NASA Langley Research Center, during which Dr. Langley’s
   first demonstration of mechanical flight with his “Aerodrome”
   model in 1896 and his scientific contributions to astrophysics
    (i.e., the thermopile and the bolometer) were reviewed by Garber
   and Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden.
       “Workshop : Telemetry in Europe” a t National Telemetering
   Conference in Chicago brought seven European representatives
   together with American scientists in working out unofficial pre-
   liminary standardization planning on bands, means, and fre-
   quencies.
       New 20-inch wind tunnel a t the Aeronautical Research Lab-
   oratory a t Wright-Patterson Air Force Base announced as capable
   of testing a t mach 14, a t 200,000-foot altitude, and a t 2,500’
       F.
May 24: FCC endorsed the ultimate creation of a commercial satellite
   system to be owned jointly by international telephone and
   telegraph companies and announced that it was calling a meeting
   on June 5 to explore “plans and procedures looking toward
   early establishment of an operable commercial communication
   satellite system.”
      Launching of NASA ionosphere beacon satellite (S45 11) a t
   Atlantic Missile Range unsuccessful when Juno I1 power supply
   failed and prevented ignition of second stage.
   I


      Operational Atlas raised from emplacement and fired in an
_I




   operational test exercise a t Vandenberg Air Force Base.
22     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

May 24: Three Navy F4H Phantom I1 fighters, competing for the
   Bendix Trophy, bettered the existing record for transcontinental
   flight from Los Angeles to New York. The winning team of
   Lt. R. F. Gordon, pilot, and Lt. (jg.) B. R. Young, RIO, averaged
   870 miles per hour on the 2,421.4-mile flight and established a
   new record with a time of 2 hours 47 minutes.
      Comdr. P. L. Sullivan, U.S. Navy, and Lt. B. W. Witherspoon,
   flying an HSS-2 helicopter, set another new world class speed
   record with a mark of 174.9 miles per hour over a 100-kilometer
   course between Milford and Westbrook, Conn.
      National Rocket Club President H. A. Timken announced
   proposal to Secretary of the Treasury Dillon to consider a
   special series of savings bonds and savings stamps to finance the
   U.S. space program, to be known as series S bonds for space.
May 25: In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy
   reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the
   advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National
   Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are
   strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where
   we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides-
   time for a great new American enterprise-time for this Nation
   to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in
   many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President
   Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the
   long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and
   returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover
   nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide
   communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a
   satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An addi-
   tional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new admin-
   istration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested
   for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster
   of the Nova class.
May 65: At NASA press conference following President Kennedy’s
   call to Congress for an accelerated space program, NASA Admin-
   istrator Webb pointed out that the long-range and difficult task
   of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth
   before the end of the decade offered a chance to beat Russia.
      X-15 flown to record speed of 3,300 miles per hour by NASA
   test pilot, Joseph Walker, a t Edwards Air Force Base.
      Kaman H 4 3 - B Huskie helicopter flown to claimed altitude
   record of 25,814 feet by Capt. W. C. McMeen (USAF), bettering
   Russian record of 24,491 feet established on March 26, 1960.
      Prerecorded voice message successfully transmitted from NRL
   to BTL via Echo I, the quality of the transmission being virtually
   as good as previous experiments.
May 66: USAF B-58 Hustler flown from Carswell Air Force Base,
   Tex., to Le Bourget, Paris, in record 6 hours 15 minutes, covering
   distance from New York to Paris in 3 hours 20 minutes. This
   flight commemorated the 34th anniversary of Charles A. Lind-
   bergh’s transatlantic crossing on May 20-21, 1927, and the open-
   ing of the 24th Paris International Air Show.
      Atlas E fired successfully from Atlantic Missile Range.
                                                                   23
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

May Z - ? : First National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space,
     627
   held a t Tulsa, Okla., at which leading American space scientists
      and technsbgists appraised the current and future applications
     of space science and technology for human welfare. It was
     sponsored by NASA and the Tulsa Chamber of Commerce, with
     the Aerospace Industries Association, Aerospace Medical Asso-
     ciation, American Astronautical Society, American Institute of
     Biological Sciences, the American Rocket Society, the Electronic
     Industries Association, Frontiers of Science Foundation (Okla-
     homa), and the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences as cosponsors.
May 26-June 4: Freedom 7 , Mercury spacecraft in which Alan B.
     Shepard, Jr., made his space flight on May 5, was a major drawing
     card a t the Paris International Air Show. Details of the space-
     craft and of Shepard’s flight were related to about 650,000
     visitors.
M a y 27: Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, Chairman of the Space Science Board
     of the NAS, stated: “Since, as space activity becomes more d s -
     cult and advanced, the space effort will be limited by our knowl-
     edge of space a t any time, leadership in space science must soon
     become one of the controlling factors in acquiring space leader-
     ship generally.” Berkner spoke a t the first National Conference
     on the Peaceful Uses of Space held a t Tulsa, Okla.
May 69: Atlas booster 111-D, to be used for Ranger I, was erected
     on the launch pad a t Cape Canaveral.
M a y SO: U.S.S.R. revealed first details concerning Cosmonaut Ga-
     garin’s orbital space flight on April 12, when application was
     made to the International Aeronautical Federation (FAI) to
     have flight made an official world record: Duration, 108 minutes;
     maximum altitude, 203 miles; launch site, cosmodrome a t Baiko-
     nur (near Lake Aral) ; landing site, near village of Smelovka in
     Seratov region; launch booster, six-engine rocket with total
     boost of 20 million horsepower.
M a y SI: Three-week meetin of the executive council of the U.N.
                            6
     World Meteorological rganization in Geneva concluded, a t
     which 18 national representatives (including A. A. Zolotoukhin of
     the U.S.S.R.) discussed general basis for international use of
     weather satellites. Dr. Francis W. Reichelderfer, Chief of the
     U.S. Weather Bureau, was a U.S.representative.
During May: Army Chemical Corps Biological Laboratories com-
     pleted preliminary tests of microor anisms in a simulated space
                                       8
     vacuum a t the National Research orp.
        Complete system studies of the Apollo spacecraft system that
     were begun in November 1960 were completed by three industrial
     contractors.
                             JUNE 1961
June 1 : NASA awarded contract for developing means of sterilizing
    space vehicles to Wilmot Castle Co.
       ADC and NASA jointly announced plans for Kiwi B reactor
    test a t Jackass Flats test site in Nevada.
       NASA announced that a two-stage Saturn C-1 will be used for
~-
    the first 10 research and development flights.
June 2: Collapse of a lock in the Wheeler Dam below Huntsville on
    the Tennessee River interdicted the planned water route of the
    first Saturn space booster from Marshall Space Flight Center to
    Cape Canaveral on the barge Palaemon.
       Deputy Premier Mikhail Khrunichev, chief coordinator of the
    Soviet Union’s man-in-space program, died in Moscow.
June 3: Dr. Edward R. Sharp, former Director of Lewis Research
    Laboratory (1942-61), was presented NASA’s first Outstanding
    Leadership Medal by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden.
       USAF B-58 which established Atlantic crossing record to Paris
    of 3 hours 19 minutes crashed after takeoff from Le Bourget
    Airport, killing its three-man crew. Maj. Elmer E . Murphy,
    pilot, had recently been awarded the Louis Bleriot Speed Trophy
    for record speed flight of 1,302 miles per hour in January.
       Aerojet-General test-fired large solid-propellent rocket motor
    which generated a half million pounds’ thrust, a t Sacramento,
    Calif.
       A leading Istanbul newspaper, Milliyet, reported Turkish
    newsmen’s reactions after seeing movies of both the Shepard and
    Gagarin space flights: “When the film was over the journalists
    asked the Soviet consul general: ‘In the Shepard film we followed
    all phases of his space flight, but in yours we followed only
    Khrushchev. * * * Why don’t you show your space flight too?’
    The Tass correspondent on behalf of the consul general answered:
    ( * * * We are mainly interested in people’s excitement and
    reaction. This is what we wanted you to see.’ Gagarin may have
    gone into space, but this is not the impression of the journalists
    who saw both films: Shepard really went into space, not Gagarin,
    and in front of the whole world, too.’’
June 4: Nationwide Gallup poll released which showed that 38 percent
    of those questioned thought the United States led in space re-
    search, while 38 percent thought the U.S.S.R. led. The same
    balance also was tabulated on which Nation will be the first to
    place a man on the Moon.
       Northrop disclosed “porous wing” plane under development
    for USAF, modified version of WB-66D based on inhalation
    concept (eliminating up to 80 percent of the frictional drag)
    proposed by Werner Pfenninger. Work on drag reduction by
    means of increasing the laminar flow by boundary layer suction
    had been performed a t Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in the
    late 1930’s by Albert E. Doenhoff and Ira H. Abbott.
      24
                                                                  25
      AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

June 5: Huge Saturn launch complex a t Cape Canaveral dedicated ia
    brief ceremony by NASA, construction of which was supervised
    by the Army Corps of Engineers. Giant gantry, weighing 2,800
    tons and being 310 feet high, is largest movable land structure in
    North America.
       Two pilots sealed in 8- by 12-foot simulated space cabin for
    17-day round trip to the Moon, a t the School of Aerospace
    Medicine, San Antonio, Tex.
June 6: Biomedical results of Mercury-Redstone space flight of
    Alan B. Shepard, Jr., publicly reported a t a special conference
    in Washington sponsored by NASA, National Institutes of Health,
    and the National Academy of Sciences. Shepard’s heart reached
    a maximum of 138 beats per minute during the flight.
        NASA Agena B management meeting was held a t Marshall
    Space Flight Center with representatives from MSFC, NASA
    headquarters, AFSSD, LMSD, JPL, and GSFC.
        USAF Aerobee-Hi with Cambridge Research Laboratory pay-
    load designed to trap sptice dust, reached 101 miles over White
    Sands Missile Range.
June 7’: I n address u t George Washington University, NASA Admin-
    istrator Webb stated that the exploration of space was an im-
    portant part of man’s “driving, restless, insatiable search for
    new knowledge.”
        Research Analysis Corporation established by U.S. Army as
    a nonprofit advanced research organization to replace O R 0 of
    Johns Hopkins University.
        AEC-NASA jointly announced plans to negotiate with an
    industrial team for a first-phase contract for the development of
    the Nerva nuclear rocket engine. Team selected for the Nerva
    part of Project Rover consisted of Aerojet-General Corp. and
    Westinghouse Electric Corp.
        NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced creation of
    a new Office of Programs to be headed by D. D. Wyatt, and the
    renaming of the Office of Administration under Albert F. Siepert.
June 8: Small rocket lift device demonstrated publicly for the first
    time a t Fort Eustis, Va., a rocket belt developed by Bell Aero-
    systems, which lifted Harold M. Graham in a controlled free
    flight to an altitude of 15 feet and-a standup landing 150 feet
    from his starting point.
        USAF Discoverer X X I V failed to achieve orbit.
        NASA announced accelerated recruiting of qualified scientists
     and engineers a t its field centers to fill anticipated manpower
    requirements in the expanded space exploration program.
     During 1960 NASA interviewed 3,000 persons on 100 college
     campuses.
        Astronomers of Lick Observatory positioned 36-inch refractor
     telescope so as to intersect the path of Echo I a t its predicted
     point of maximum elevation. Prediction of Goddard Space
     Flight Center was confirmed a t exact time and within 10 minutes
    of am.



     82534-62-3
26     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 1

June 9: NASA press conference revealed that data from Vanguard
    I11 (during November 15-17, 1960) and Explorer VI11 (also
    during November 1960) indicated that high-velocity clouds of
    micrometeorites moved near the Earth, perhaps in a meteor
    stream around the Sun. This new data was just revealed from
    completed analysis.
__- Echo I completed its 3,697th orbit after 9 months. When
    this first passive communications ‘Lballoon satellite” was launched
    on August 12, 1960, it was not expected to have a long life span.
June I O : National Bureau of Standards broke ground Sor new re-
    search facility a t Gaithersburg, Md., which will include a mcga-
    pound deadweight testing machine to provide measurement
    standards €or multimillion rocket thrust requirements.
       NASA Ad Hoc Task Group, created on May 25 to survey
    launch vehicles and their development schedules pertinent to the
    manned lunar landing program, reported its findings.
June 12: British and Soviet scientists were still unable to identify
    signals received since May 17 as being transmitted from the
    Soviet Venus probe launched on February 12.
       Reuters reported that the United States pays about $140 per
    hour for use of the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England, while
    the U.S.S.R. pays nothing. Sir Bernard Love11 explained that
    “the Americans occupy the telescope for long periods, where the
    Russians scarcely use it.”
       NASA’s Incentive Awards Committee determined that Dr.
    Henry J. E. Reid, Director Emeritus of the Langley Research
    Center, would receive NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal.
June 13: NASA Engineer Test Pilot Joseph A. Walker, who hit
    record altitude of 169,600 feet on March 30 and record speed of
    3,300 miles per hour on May 25 in the X-15, received the 1961
    Octave Chanute Award a t IAS meeting in Los Angeles.
June 13-95: Freedom 7 Mercury capsule displayed to approximately
    750,000 visitors at the Rassegna International Electronic and
    Nuclear Fair a t Rome, Italy.
June 14: NASA’s Plum Brook nuclear test reactor a t Sandusky,
    Ohio, went critical for the first time. This reactor was begun
    in September 1956, and the facility presently has a staff of 100
    persons, headed by Dr.. Theodore M. Hallman.
       NASA and the Argentine Comision Nacional de Investigaciones
    Espaciales signed a memorandum of understanding for a coopera-
    tive space science research program using sounding rockets.
       Four-stage Javelin fired to 560-mile altitude from Wallops
    Island, testing extension of two 75-foot antenna arms on radio
    command a t altitude, a test flight in the United States-Canadian
    Alouette satellite development.
June i5: Search for U.S.S.R. Venus probe “lost” since February was
     ended a t Jodrell Bank radiotelescope, as visiting Soviet space
    scientists, Alla Masevitch and Jouli Khodarev, prepared to
    leave. The U.S.S.R. Venus probe was last commanded on
    February 12.
       President Kennedy presented the Robert J . Collier Trophy to
    Vice Adm. William E”. Raborn, Jr., who had directed the devel-
    opment to the Polaris IRBM.
                                                                      27
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

June 15: President Kennedy directed the National Aeronautics and
    Space Council to undertake a full study of the Nation’s com-
    munications satellite policy, stated that leadership in science and
    technology should be exercised to achieve worldwide communi-
    cations through the use of satellites at the earliest practicable
    date. While no commitments as to an operational system should
    be made, the President stated that the Government would “con-
    duct and encourage research and development to advance the
    state of the art and to give maximum assurance of rapid and
    continuing scientific and technological progress.”
June 16: USAF Discoverer XXV placed into polar orbit by Thor-
    Agena B, a t Vandenber Air Force Base, Calif.
       NASA Ad Hoc Task &roup, established to determine the main
    problems, the pacing items, and the major decisions required to
    accomplish the manned lunar landing mission, reported its find-
    ings. The direct ascent mission was used in thls intensive study
    with less detailed consideration of the rendezvous method.
June 18: Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on National
    Policy Machinery released report on (‘Science Organization and
    the President’s Office.” This study recommended that a new
    Office of Science and Technology be created in the Executive
    Office of the President.
       Skindivers parachuted north of Hawaii to recover the capsule
    of Discoverer XXV, which carried samples of common and rare
    metals.
       Presidium of the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet awarded 7,026 honors
    to those associated with the flight of the spaceship satellite Vostok
    I: Nikita S. Khrushchev received the Order of Lenin and a third
    Gold Hammer and Sickle Medal for “guiding the creation and
    development of the rocket industry, science, and technology”
    which “opened up a new era in the conquest of space”; 7 out-
    standing scientists and designers received a second Gold Hammer
    and Sickle Medal; 95 designers, officials, and technicians received
    the title of Hero of Socialist Labor; and 6,924 workers, designers,
    scientists, and technicians received various orders and medals
    (Order of Lenin, 478 persons; Order of the Red Banner of Labor,
    1,218; Order of the Red Star, 256; Order of the Badge of Honor,
    1,789; and medals to 3,183 other persons).
June 19: Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1961 announced
    as going to three winners for the first the-X-15     rocket research
    airplane pilots: A. Scott Crossfield, of North American; Joseph A.
    Walker, of NASA, and Maj. Robert A. White, US.Air Force.
       NASA announced contract with the National Research Corp.
    to determine whether six types of microbes can sustain simulated
    exposure to the space environment including ultrahigh vacuum,
    ultraviolet radiation, and fluctuating temperatures.
       Yuri Gagarin reported in Pravda that “I was in the center of
    a whirl of flames” when his Vostok spacecraft reentered the
    atmosphere on April 12. His book, “Road to Outer Space,” was
    being serialized in Pravda.
       Legislature of the State of Alabama considered investment of
    $3 million in establishing a Space Research Institute a t Hunts-
    ville as a joint University of Alabama and Auburn University
    center.
28     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 1

June 20: Nuclear Vehicles Project Office established a t Marshall Space
    Flight Center, Col. Scott Fellows, U S . Air Force, named as Chief.
June 21: Five-year agreement on scientific cooperation signed in
    Moscow by representatives of the academies of science of tlie
    U.S.S.R. and Red China, according to Tass.
       NASA Adniinistrator Webb accepted one 01 the lhrecb Presi-
    dent’s Safety Awards for accident prevention during 1960. He
    pointed out that NASA’s activities involved test flying of experi-
    mental aircraft, untried higlilv explosive fuels, high-volt age elec-
    tricity, arid highly pressurizcd air and supcrhcated ternpcraturcs,
    in addition to rocket arid spacecraft tests and launching arid thc
    operation of two nuclear reactors and a cyclotron.
___- Hypersonic wind t unnrl at Douglas Aircraft became opera-
    tiorial at El Segundo, reportedly the largest industry-owned
    tunnel in tho United States (36 inches long, 6-inch diameter,
    capable of macli 10).
       USAF JIace I3 inade 1,100-mile guided flight, ending its R. & D .
    phase.
June 22: Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden sent an explmatory
    letter to Chairman Robert S. Kerr, of the Senate Committee on
    Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on the broad scientific and
    technological gains to be achieved in landing n man on the Moon
    arid returning him to Earth. Dr. Dryden pointed out that this
    difficult goal “has the highly important role of accelerating the
    development of space science and technology, motivating the
    scientists and engineers who are engaged in this effort to move
    forward with urgency, and integrating their efforts in a way that
    cannot be accomplished by a disconnected series of research inves-
    tigations in several fields. It is important to realize, however,
    that the real values and purposes are not in the mere accomplish-
    ment of man setting foot on the Moon but rather in the great
    cooperative national effort in the development of science and
    technology which is stimulated by this goal.” Dr. Dryden
    pointed out that “the billions of dollars required in this effort are
    not spent on the Moon; they are spent in the factories, workshops,
    and laboratories of our people for salaries, for new materials, and
    supplies, which in turn represent income for others * * *. The
    national enterprise involved in the goal of manned lunar landing
    and return within this decade is an activity of critical impact on
    the future of this Nation as an industrial and military power, and
    as a leader of a free world.”
       Mercury-Redstone booster for M R 4 flight was erected on pad
    5 a t Atlantic Missile Range.
       K. Kordylewski, of the Cracow Observatory in Poland, was
    reported to have photographed two cloudlike objects, possibly
    natural satellites of the Earth.
June 23: NASA-DOD Executive Committee for Joint Lunar Study
    and a Joint Lunar Study Program Office established by letter
    directive to work out and define support requirements for the
    U S . manned lunar laridirig program.
                                                                     29
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

June 23 NASA-USAF-USN           X-15 flown to 3,603 miles per hour
    (mach 5.3), record for manned aircraft by Maj. Robert White,
    US. Air Force, which was faster than a mile per second. Losing
    cabin pressure a t 100,000 feet, White was able to pilot the X-15
    safely because of full-pressure suit. This was the fifth powered
    NASA flight with the XLR-99 engine.
       Joint study was undertaken by NASA and DOD to make
    recommendations on the launch site to be used for the manned
    lunar exploration missions. A report of this study w s completed
                                                           a
    in July.
       Nike-Cajun sounding rocket fired from Eglin Gulf Test Range
    by Cambridge Research Laboratory with micrometeorite counting
    payload.
       Director of Marshall Space Flight Center directed that further
    engineering work on Saturn C-2 configuration would be discon-
    tinued, and that efforts would be applied to clarification of the
    Saturn C-3 and Nova concepts.
       Tiros I1 completed 7 months in orbit, still providing useful data.
June 24: President Kennedy assigned Vice President Johnson the task
    of unifying the Nation’s communications satellite programs, in a
    letter which stressed urgency and “highest priority” for the public
    interest.
       Mercury capsule was modsed for M R 4 flight, with obser-
    vation window replacing two viewports and with improved
    manual control system.
June 26: In an interview in U.S. News & World Report, NASA
    Administrator Webb stated that “the kind of overall space effort
    that President Kennedy has recommended * * * will put us
    there [on the Moon] first.” This achievement, costing between
    $20 and $40 billion, ‘( robably toward the $20 billion level * * *
    will be most valuabi in other arts of our economy.” Mr.
                                       B
    Webb said that the U.S.S.R. di have an advantage in bein
                                                                       k
    able first to orbit a multimanned spacecraft around the Eart
    and also around the Moon.
       A Navy YFNB barge was obtained by NASA to serve as a
    replacement for the Pdaemon in transporting of the Saturn
    booster to Cape Canaveral.
June 27: Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee unani-
    mously approved the administration’s $l,782,300,0OO budget for
    NASA in fiscal year 1962.
       Eberhardt Rechtin, of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, questioned
    the Soviet calculations on the rotation speed of the planet Venus
    and the astronomical unit, and su gested that the Soviet scientists
    may have been influenced by earf; MIT studies (1958). Com-
                                       ’er
      letion of extensive radar studies of Venus by J e t Propulsion
    Laboratory Goldstone, he submitted, provided more accurate
    information. The differing figures as reported are-
            U.S.S.R (1961): 9 to 11 days’ rotation-A.U. 92,812,797
          miles.
            Jet Pro ulsion Laboratory (1961): About 225 days’
                    1 .U. 92,956,000 miles.
          rotation-
  - Eight-engine static test of Saturn SA-T2 of 29.9 seconds’
    duration successful a t Marshall Space Flight Center.
30     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 1

June 28: First showing of new Soviet aircraft in flight rehearsal for
    an air show on July 9 in Moscow (first major air show since 1956),
    one a large delta-wing jet bomber perhaps comparable to the
    B-58, as well as a turboprop Bear Tu-114 carrying missiles.
June 28-July 21 : A Planning Task Force of the National Academy
    of Sciences Committee on the Atmospheric Sciences met in a
    series of six separate conferences in Boston to lay out a 10-year
    plan to guide long-range use of Government research funds.
June 29: First launching of three active satellites in one shot, and
    the first launching of a satellite with nuclear power, when a
    Thor-Able-Star launched Transit IV-A (equipped with an atomic
    radioisotope-powered battery of the Snap series), and two ac-
    companying satellites, Injun and Greb 1 1 from Atlantic Missile
                                               1,
    Range. Transit IV is forerunner of a navigation satellite sys-
    tem, while Injun gathers data on the radiation belts, and Greb I11
    gathers data on X-ray radiation from the Sun.
       NASA awarded contract to Pratt & Whitney for development
    of space radiators and condensors for the Lewis Research Center.
June SO: I n Scout launching of micrometeorite counter satellite
    (S-55) from Wallops Station, third stage did not ignite, and the
    vehicle was destroyed.
       Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, senior staff associate and former Director
    of the Langley Research Center, retired after over four decades
    of Government service. He began as a junior engineer a t Langley
    in April 1921, became Director in 1926, in which capacity he
    served for 34 years.
       Navy announced that Injun and Greb satellites placed in orbit
    with Transit IV-A had not separated and were thus not func-
    tioning a t full efficiency.
During June: National Academy of Sciences established the Geo-
    physics Research Board (GRB) in 1960 in response to a request
    from the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).
    By June 1961, it had four active panels to consider s ecific inter-
                                                         E
    national programs: World Magnetic Survey (WM ); Interna-
    tional Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY); International Exchange of
    Scientific Data; and Solid Earth Problems.
       Dr. von K&rm$n and some of his associates organized the
    Astronautics Foundation, Inc., in Washington, D.C., to enable
    U.S. individuals and corporations to support through this non-
    profit foundation various cooperative international activities.
       Boeing began modification of B-52 to carry aloft and release
    the Dyna-Soar manned space glider.
       Army Redstone missile completed its %year military test pro-
    gram (41 successes in 45 launchings).
       NASA entered letter cont,ract with RCA for four additional
    Tiros weather satellites to extend the program.
                            JULY 1961
July 1: Weather Bureau announced that cloud cover pictures taken
     by Tiros I went on public sale a t the National Weather Records
     Center, Asheville, N.C.
       The space detection and tracking systems (Spadats) began
     NORAD operations as scheduled, a system which “detects, tracks,
     and identifies manmade objects in space and consolidates and
     displays information regarding such objects.”
       First anniversary of Marshall Space Flight Center as a NASA
     center, and NASA Administrator Webb visited the Huntsville
     facility.
       U.S. Air Force reorganized its headquarters staff to reflect
     creation of Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), which made
     the Deputy Chief of Staff for Development, Lt. Gen. Roscoe C.
     Wilson, Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Technology.
July 6: NASA announced awarding of study contract of Douglas
    Aircraft Co. for the development of orbital placement t,echniques
     and engineering design for Project Rebound inflatable spheres.
       NASA awarded contract with Boeing to investigate the devel-
    opment of large Saturn-Nova class rockets employing different
    combinations of liquid or solid types of fuel.
       Israel fired a multistage solid-propellent Shavit (Meteor) I1
    rocket to an altitude of 80 kilometers, releasing a sodium-cloud
    meteorological payload.
       Major Gagarin, speaking in Helsinki, Finland, stated that the
     U.S.S.R. would launch another manned space vehicle sometime
    before the end of the year.
       French Foreign Ministry announced that West German Gov-
    ernment had agreed in principle to participate in 12-nation
    program to construct launch satellites.
Jdy 7 : USAF Discoverer XXVI orbited from Vandenberg Air Force
    Base, carrying instrument capsule to be recovered after 32 polar
    orbits and 4 days. Of the 25 previous Discoverers, 17 had one
                                                                 E
    into orbit and 15 carried recovery capsules, of which 5 had een
    recovered.
       The second static firing of the Saturn SA-T2 test booster was
    successfully completed a t Marshall Space Flight Center in an
    eight engine test of 119 seconds’ duration.
       Atlas E, launched from Cape Canaveral, established distance
    flight record of 9,050 miles, its nose cone landing 1,000 miles
    southeast of Cape Town, South Africa.
July 9: Massive Soviet air show over Tushino Airport in Moscow, on
    Soviet Air Force Day, which demonstrated that U.S.S.R. had
    continued development of all classes of military aircraft.
       Capsule of Discoverer X X V I snatched a t 15,000 feet during
    final descent after 32 polar orbits. Midair recovery by C-119,
    Capt. Jack Wilson, U.S. Air Force, as pilot, was fourth so per-
    formed. Capsule carried undisclosed payload.
                                                            31
32     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

July 9 : National Science Foundation rcleased forecast of the Nation’s
    science needs for the next decade, which predicted that United
    States would need nearly twice as many scientists in 1970
     (168,000) as today (87,000).
        Reported that Navy had been launching telephone poles with
    rocket boost in test of floating launching requirements.
July 10: National Science Foundation policy document entit,led
     “Investing in Scientific Progress” was released, which showed
    dollar and manpower investments needed by United States in
    decade 1960-70 to ensure fulfillment of the Nation’s research
    capabilities.
July 11: NASA announced that a complete F-1 engine had begun a
    series of static test firings a t Edwards Rocket Test Center, Calif.
July 11-12: Cosmonaut Gagarin visited England.
July 12: NASA Tiros I11 weather satellite successfully launched
    into near-circular orbit by Thor-Delta from Cape Canaveral.
__- Midas 111 (missile defense alarm system) launched into polar
    orbit from Pacific Missile Range, with record 1,850-mile-high
    orbit and was heaviest U.S. satellite launched to date. Second-
    stage Agena B was restarted a t apogee of first orbit.
        Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that construction was
     underway on the first large space simulator in the United States
     capable of testing full-scale spacecraft of the Ranger and Mariner
     classes with the three primary space eff ects-solar radiation, cold
     space heat sink, and a high vacuum equivalent to about one part
     in a billion ( 1 : 1,000,000,000) of the atmospheric pressure on the
     Earth.
July 13: Mercury-Redstone 6 was static tested for 30 seconds at
     Marshall Space Flight Center t o ensure satisfactory operation of
     the turbopump assembly.
July 13-14: Two Nike-Cajun rockets launched University of New
     Hampshire-Goddard Space Flight Center payloads from NASA
     Wallops Station.
July 14: Advanced Polaris fired 1,600 miles down Atlantic Missile
     Range with all-inertial guidance system.
        Simulated Mercury-Redstone 4 flight test held a t Atlantic
     Missile Range.
July 16: Vice President Johnson announced that the National Aero-
     nautics and Space Council had reached unanimous agreement on
     the national communications satellite policy, and unspecified
    recommendation transmitted to President Kennedy.
July 17: NASA announced selection of RCA Astro-Electronics Di-
     vision to build seven capsules for experimental ion propulsion
     engines.
        A joint tenancy agreement for NASA and DOD use of the
    Atlantic Missile Range was signed by Commander, Atlantic
    Missile Range, and the Director of Launch Operations, NASA.
July 18: FA1 (FBdBration Aeronautique Internationale) officially
    recognized the first space flight records claimed by U.S.S.R. and
     the United States:
        Yuri Gagarin (April 12, 1961): Duration in orbital flight, 108
     minutes; greatest altitude in Earth orbital flight, 203 miles;
     greatest mass lifted in Earth orbital flight, 10,395 pounds.
                                                                      33
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1901

          Alan Shepard (May 5, 1961: Altitude without orbit, 115.696
       miles; greatest mass lifted without Earth orbit, 4,031.7 pounds.
          United States-U.S.S.R. talks began on bilateral agreement on
       commercial air flights between New York and Moscow.
          Saturn SA-T2 booster successfully static tested for 111 seconds
       a t Marshall Space Flight Center.
July 18-20: NASA-Industry Apollo Technical Conference held in
       Washington, D.C., which assembled Apollo requirements with
       participation of Space Task Group, representatives of other
       NASA Centers, and the three Apollo study contractors-General
       Dynamics/Astronautics, General Electric, and Martin.
Jdy 19: Mercury-Redstone (MR-4) with manned Liberty Bell 7
       capsule canceled within minutes of launch because of adverse
       weather.
          NASA and Weather Bureau invited over 100 of the world’s
       weather services to participate in the Tiros I11 satellite experi-
       ment by conducting special ground-based observations synchro-
       nized with passes of the satellite.
          Tiros I11 photographed tropical storm Liza in the Pacific
       Ocean, pinpointing its location for meteorologists.
J u l y 20: NASA and DOD, following an exchange of letters between
       the Administrator of NASA and the Secretary of Defense, estab-
       lished a joint study to determine the national large launch vehicle
       needs for the next decade, considering the requirements of both
       NASA and DOD.
July 21: MR-4 Liberty Bell 7, manned by Mercury Astronaut
       Virgil I. Grissom, made successful 15-minute, 118-mile-high and
       303-mile-long flight down Atlantic Missile Range, premature
       blowout of escape hatch flooding capsule and making helicopter
       pickup of Grissom diflicult. Capsule sank in 18,000 feet of water
       after warning light indicated helicopter engine was overheating
       and the capsule was cast loose. This was the second successful
       manned suborbital space flight.
          President Kennedy signed NASA’s fiscal year 1962 authoriza-
       tion bill providing for a total of $1,784,300,000.
          USAF Discoverer XXVII destroyed by range safety officer
       60 seconds after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
          At the request of Senator Paul H. Douglas, the membership
       of the American Astronautical Society was polled by the Uni-
       versity of Illinois Observatory as to their opinion regarding the
       “scientific value” of the U S . space program to land on and
       return one or more men from the Moon.
          USAF processed 44 test pilots through the DynaSoar selection
       program, and reportedly both USAF and NASA test pilots would
       participate in the step I suborbital flight program.
July%?: Astronaut V i i l Grissom was awarded the NASA Distin-
           ished Service Medal by Administrator Webb a t conclusion of
    ER-~        press conference a t Cape Canaveral
July 2 . Red Star (Krasnaya Zvezda) of the U.S.S.R. stated Tiros I11
         3-
       and Midas I11 launched on July 12 were comparable to the U-2:
       “A spy is a spy, no matter what height it flies.”
34     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 1

July 23: NASA Administrator Webb, in congressional testimony,
    pointed out that the Tiros cloud-cover program was known to the
    entire world, involved no surveillance, and promised great bene-
    fit to all nations. He pointed out that data from Tiros satellites
    had been made available to all, including the Soviet Union.
       Central Aero Club of the U.S.S.R., in serking to place Gagarin’s
    flight in the record books, revealcd to FA1 Astronautics Docu-
    mentation Subcommittee, meeting in Paris, that Gagarin rode
    his spacecraft to Earth rather than parachuting.
July 24: White House issued statement by President Kennedy on
    “Communication Satellite Policy,” which outlined governmental
    responsibilities for research and development “to give maximum
    assurance of rapid and continuous scientific and technological
    progress,” and which affirmed that “private ownership and opera-
    tion of the U.S. portion of the system is favored” within eight
    policy requirements. Thc President’s statement said that
    through this country’s leadership, communications through the
    use of space satellites should be developed “for global benefit
    a t the earliest practicable date.” He invited “all nations to
    participate in a communication satellite system in the interest of
    world peace and closer brotherhood among peoples throughout
    the world.” And, during present phase of research and develop-
    ment, “no arrangemrnts between the Government and private
    industry [should] contain any commitments as to an operational
    system.” In conclusion, the Presidcnt said that “I am anxious
    that development of this new technology to bring the farthest
    corner of the globe within reach by voice and visual communica-
    tion, fairly and equitably available for use, proceed with all pos-
    sible promptness.”
       Dr. Edward R. Sharp, Director Emeritus of the XASA Lewis
    Research Center since his retirement in January, died. Joining
    NACA in 1922, Dr. Sharp was the first Manager of the Lewis
    Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1941, and became its Director in
    1947. He had received the US. Medal for Merit from President
    Truman in 1947.
       Joint PAA-DOD-NASA “Coinmercial Supcrsonic Transport
    Aircraft Report,” prepared by n joint task force, said that the
    development of a commercial transport airplane to fly t h e times
    the spced of sound (mach 3) was feasible and could be developed
    by 1970-71.
July 25: NASA reported that one of the Tiros 1 1 cameras was
                                                       1
    inoperative, but that duplicate camera was producing high-
    quality pictures. Over 3,500 cloud cover pictures had been
    transmitted since the launching of Tiros I11 on July 12.
       Titan ICBM with self-contained inertial guidance fired 5,000
    miles down Atlantic Missile Range.
July 26: Cosmonaut Gagarin participated in anniversary celebration
    in Havana of July 26 revolutionary movement of Fidel Castro.
July 27: Third USAF Minuteman missile successfully flown on 4,000-
    mile flight down Atlantic Missile Range.
       France announced plans to launch its first satellite by the end
    of 1964.
                                                                      35
        AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENT6 OF 1961

July 28: NASA and the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. signed
     a cooperative agreement for the development and testing of two,
    possibly four, active communication satellites during 1962. A.T.
     & T. would design and build the TSX satellites a t its own expense.
    and would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launchings by
    Thor-Delta vehicles a t Cape Canaveral. Relationship between
     this contract and the overall NASA communications satellite
    program aimed a t early development of an operational system
    was explained a t a NASA press conference.
        NASA invited 12 companies to submit prime contractor pro-
    posals for the manned lunar Apollo spacecraft by October 9.
        NASA representatives meeting with Arnold Engineering De-
    velopment Center (AEDC) fixed the guidelines for the Centaur
    propulsion system testing program.
        Interviewed in the Netherlands West Indies, en route to Brazil,
    Maj. Yuri Gagarin said that his next assignment would be a
    flight to the Moon. Asked about U S . efl’orts, he reportedly
    stated that “there is a place on the Moon for everybody.”
July29: Chief of Japanese Weather Bureau, Kiyoo Wadachi, re-
       orted that 30 observations from Tiros I11 had been received
    B rom the United States.
        World press reported opposition of astronomers to proposed
    USAF placement of 350 million needles into a 2,000-mile-high
    Earth orbit to test their feasibility as reflectors for global com-
    munications.
July SO: Draft text of program of the Soviet Communist Party to be
    presented to its 22d Congress in October was released in English
    by Tass, official Soviet press agency. This new program, the
    first proposed since the one submitted by Lenin and adopted in
     1919, made no direct or indirect reference to space exploration.
    On the role of science, it stated: “The party will do everything
    to enhance the role of science in the building of Communjst
    society, it will encourage research to discover new possibilities
    for the development of the productive forces, and the rapid and
    extensive application of the latest scientific and technical achiepe-
    ments, a decisive advancement in experimental work, includmg
    research directly a t enterprises, and the efficient organization of
    scientific and technical information and of the whole system of
    studying and disseminating progressive Soviet and foreign
    methods. Science will itself in full measure become a productive
    force * * *.”
July $1: NASA’s Tiros I1 transmitted photograph of a major storm
    off the south tip of Africa. Launched on November 23, 1960,
    Tiros I1 was expected to only have a useful lifetime of about
    3 months.
        NASA awarded contract to University of Michigan to continue
    to provide research instrumentation for measurement of tempera-
    tures and winds a t altitudes up to 150 kilometers with Nike-Cajun
    and other sounding rockets.
        NASA provided for transfer of funds to ONR for balloons,
    launching services, and related expenses in connection with
    high-altitude measurements of electron, low-energy proton, and
    alpha-particle spectrum of primary cosmic radiation to be
    conducted by the University of Chicago from Uranium City,
    Saskatchewan, Canada.
36     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

July 31: At Cape Canaveral with the President’s Missile Sites Labor
    Commission, Secretary of Labor Goldberg made public President
    Kennedy’s message praising the voluntary, no-strike, no-lockout
    pledges covering labor-management relations a t missile and space
    sites. The President’s m e s a e stated that “the Nation cannot
                                   H
    afford the luxury of avoidabe delay in our missile and space
    program. Neither can we tolerate wasteful and expensive
    practices which add to the great financial burden our defense
    effort already places on us.”
        Atlas E fired from Atlantic Missile Range with simulated
    atomic fuel cores to demonstrate dispersal on reentry into the
     atmosphere of the radioactive material in an atomic space
    generator.
        Vice Adm. T. G. W. Settle (Ret.) stated in Washington that
    Navy blimps should have been used in recovery of Mercury
    capsule, a proposal submitted to Navy 2 years ago, and which
    would have avoided recovery difficulties of Liberty Bell 7 and
    Astronaut Grissom. Settle pointed out that Navy had an-
    nounced the end of its lighter-than-air program in June 1961.
During July: Langley Research Center simulated spacecraft flights
    a t speeds of 8,200 to 8,700 feet per second in approaching the
    Moon’s surface. With instruments preset to miss the Moon’s
    surface by 40 to 80 miles, pilots with control of thrust and
     torques about all three axes of the craft were able to learn to
     establish orbits 10 to 90 miles above the surface, using a graph of
     vehicle rate of descent and circumferential velocity, an altimeter,
     and vehicle attitude and rate meters, as reported by M. J.
    Queijo and Donald R. Riley of Langley Research Center.
        “Celestial simulator” a t Jet Propulsion Laboratory in final
     checkout, an “instant universe” chamber which can duplicate
     white light and infrared point sources of solar system bodies
    likely to be used for navigation and attitude control of spacecraft.
        U.S.S.R. has scheduled “at least two more manned space
     flights this year, one t o circle the Earth, the other perhaps the
     Moon,” according to Dr. Grigori A. Tokaty, head of Northhamp-
     ton College of Advanced Technology, London, England. Former
     director of Russia’s long-range rocket group, Tokaty also stated
     that the U.S.S.R. was planning to establish “one or two” un-
     manned lunar stations in 1962.
        U.S.S.R. claimed three new world aircraft weight-lifting rec-
     ords for the Tu-114, in a flight from Vnukovo M e l d in which
     a 30,035-kilogram load was carried to an altitude of 41,125 feet,
     I. Sukhomlin as pilot.
                            AUGUST 1961
August 1: NASA directed Marshall Space Flight Center to enter
    contract negotiations with contractors for procurement of five
    operational Atlas-Centaur vehicles. These launchings were
    planned to begin in second quarter of 1964.
       NASA Ranger I launch from Atlantic Missile Range post-
    poned at T minus 15 minutrs because of failure of ground-sup-
    port equipment.
        NASA Apollo briefing held a t Space Task Group for all prime
    contractors interested in submitting bids.
August 2: NASA headquarters announced that it was making a world-
    wide study of possible launching sites for Moon vehicles; the
    size, power, noise, and possible hazards of Saturn-Nova type
    rockets requiring greater isolation for public safety than presently
    available.
       Dr. Sydney Chapman of the British Royal Observatory re-
    ported a t Langley Research Center-National Research Founda-
    tion-Virginia Polytechnic Instilute conference that evidence
    suggested existence of a third radiation belt surrounding the
    Earth-except for areas above the poles-at altitudes between
    20,000 and 28,000 miles.
       USAF announced that two Lockheed U-2 aircraft would
--
    begin series of air-sampling fligli ts from Okinawa.
August 3: USAF Discoverer XXVJII (total payload weight of 2,100
    pounds) launched but did not attain orbit.
       Tiros I1 transmitted photograph of a major storm in the
    Northwest Pacific Ocean.
August 5: Segmented solid-propellent rocket engine fired by United
    Technology Corp. a t Sunnyvale, generating over 200,000 pounds
    of thrust in 80-second k i n g . Developed under NASA contract,
    center section of engine contained over 55,000 pounds of propel-
    lant, the largest single piece yet manufactured in the United States.
       First Saturn (SA-1) booster began water trip to Cape Canaveral
    on Navy barge Compromise after overland detour around Wheeler
    Dam.
August 6: U.S.S.R. launched Vostok I1 into orbit carrying Maj.
    Gherman S. Titov. Spacecraft weighed 13 pounds more than
    Vostok I (April 12) and progress of Cosmonaut Titov’s flight was
    reported continuously on Radio Moscow.
--     I n press conference a t Hyannis Port, Mass., U S . Ambassador
    to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson, said : “Russia’s scientific contribu-
    tion to the conquest of outer space commands our admiration.
    Orbiting a new astronaut for a longer period of time is another
    step forward * * * this event [Vostok 11 sharpens the need for
                                                1
    some international action to regulate the use of outer space for
    peaceful purposes, and to keep the arms race from spreading to
    that field. The President has recently announced his proposal
    for cooperative sharing of communications and weather satel-
    lites. We hope the Russians won’t delay longer in joining us in
    cooperation .’?
                                                                87




                                                                        -
                  I
38     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 1

August 6: February report ol‘ the Spacc Science Board of the National
    Academy of Sciences was released recommending exploration of
    the Moon and planets ((as thc official goal of the U.S. space
    program and clearly announced, discussed, and supported.”
August 7 : Reported from Moscow that Major Titov lias successfully
    landed in Vostok I1 after 17 orbits and 25 hours, 18 minutes, the
    first test of man’s reaction to prolonged weightlessness. This was
    the second manned orbital flight, the first manned flight of more
    than one orbit.
        A joint message issued by Tass for the Soviet Party’s Central
    Committee, the Cabinet, and the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
    said : (‘Our achievements in the exploration of outer space are
    placed a t the service of peace and scientific progress, for the benefit
    of all people on our planet.”
        TWO   U.S. Air Force officers were sealed in space simulator for
    17-day test of man’s reaction to almost pure oxygen a t 35,000 feet
    altitude, at School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base,
    Tex. Emerging on August 25, Lts. B. Appel and J. Slider had
    eaten dehydrated food, drunk water processed from the atmo-
    sphere and their own body wastes, and were pronounced in good
    physical condition.
August 8: Over 100 foreign weathcr scrvices were invited jointly by
    NASA and the U.S. Weather Bureau to participate in the Tiros
    1 1 experiment lor a 9-week period beginning today. The pro-
      1
    gram provides cooperating services with an opportunity to con-
    duct special meteorological observations syncslironized with passes
    of the satellite.
        Atlas E’ successfully fired 5,000 miles from Atlantic Missile Range.
August 9: NASA selected MIT’s Instrumentation Laboratory to de-
    velop the guidance-navigation system for Project Apollo space-
    craft. This first major Apollo contract was required. since
    guidance-navigation system is basic to overall Apollo mission.
    The Instrumentation Laboratory of MIT, a nonprofit organiza-
    tion headed by C. Stark Draper, has been involved in variety of
    guidance and navigation systems developments for 20 years.
        Enormous reception for. Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov in Red
    Square, h!foscow. That evening a t a Kremlin reception, Premier
    Nikita Khrushchev made an impromptu speech in which he as-
    serted that the Soviet Union could construct a roclict with an
    explosive warhead equivalent to 100 million tons of TNT.
        Dr. Clifford C. Furnas, chancellor of the University of Buffalo,
    was appointed Chairman of the Defensr Science Board by Secrc-
    tary McNamara.
August IO: X-1.5 (No. 1) on its first flight with new XLR-99 engine
    was flown to 2,735 rnilcs per hour by Corndr. Foircst S. Petersen,
    U.S. Navy, a t Edwards Air Force Base.
        In regular press conference, President Kennedy stated that
    l (we are spending as much money and devoting as large a percent-

    age of scientific personnel, engineering, and all thc rest, as we
    possibly can to the space program. We are constantly concerned
    with speeding it up. We are making what I consider to be a
    maximum effort.”
-       I n passing NASA fiscal year 1962 appropriations, Congress cut
    $226,686,000 requested for salaries and expenses to $206,750,000.
                                                                   39
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

August 11: Thomas F. Dixon of North American Aviation was ap-
    pointed Director of NASA’s Office of Launch Vehicle Programs
    (OLVP), effective September 18, 1961. He replaced Maj. Gen.
    Don R. Ostrander, U S . Air Force, who returned to military duty
    as Vice Commander of AFBSD (AFSC), having served as first
    Director of OLVP since December 16, 1959.
       Project West Ford received approval in National Aeronautics
    and Space Council policy statement released a t the National
    Academy of Sciences by Presidential Scientific Adviser Jerome B.
    Wiesner. Conceived a t MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory, project pro-
    posed placement of 350-million copper threads (0.7-inch long and
    0.001-mch diameter) into a 5-mile wide and 24-mile lon belt
                                                               B
    around the Earth from a satellite, which would serve as re ector
    antennas for extremely short wave lengths (8,000 megacycles),
    perhaps expanding usable frequency channels.
       Vostok I1 press conference held in Moscow, featuring President
    of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, Xlatislav Keldysh, and
    Cosmonaut Maj. Gherman S. Titov.
       NASA announced negotiation of a contract with Hughes
    Aircraft for construction of three experimental synchronous
    communications satellites.
       Aerojet-General Corp. announced first successful underwater
    launching of a liquid-fueled rocket, an Aerobee fired from a water
    test basin a t Azuza, Calif.
       NASA Langley Research Center awarded contract to Mar-
    quardt Corp. t o increase structural wind tunnel testing tempera-
    ture from 600” to 2,000” F.
August 12; Echo I completed first year in orbit, still clearly visible
    to the naked eye, after 4,480 orbits and traveling 138 million
    miles. Echo I provided basis for over 150 communications
    experiments, recent ones indicating only a 40-percent reduction in
    transmission reflection caused by the changed shape. Echo I
    provided significant data on atmospheric drag and solar pressure.
       Aerobee 150-A fired with liquid hydrogen experiment from
    Wallops Island.
       Record six Polaris missiles fired underwater in 1 day by U.S.S.
    Abraham Lincoln.
August 14: Navy barge Compromise, carrying first Saturn booster,
    stuck in the mud in the Indian River just south of Cape Canav-
    eral. Released several hours later, the Saturn was delayed only
    24 hours in its 2,200-mile journey from Huntsville.
      Swedish scientists fired a U.S. Arcas rocket to 55.8-mile
   altitude from Arctic Circle test range a t Vidsel.
August 16: Explorer XI1 (S-3) placed into highly eccentric orbit by
    Thor-Delta from Atlantic Missile Range, which would provide
   detailed evaluation of behavior of energetic particles between
    170- and 50-000-mile altitude. Under Goddard Space Flight
   Center, this “windmill” satellite carried six experiments de-
   veloped by Ames Research Center, State University of Iowa,
   University of New Hampshire, and Goddard Space Flight Cen-
   ter. Several days were required to confirm orbit.
40     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

August 15: Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the radiotelescope a t Jodrell
    Bank, England, expressed concern in an interview about the
    USAF Project West Ford, to place 350 million small pieces of
    wire into an orbital band encircling the Earth a t a height of 500
    to 1,000 miles. Sir Bernard stated that “the published intention
    of the plan is to provide a reflector for radio communications
    from one side of the Earth to the other. Those of us who have
    studied this notice it is being carried out under the auspices of thc
    USAF and not the NASA. * * * 1 1
       Dr. Frank B. Voris, captain, Medical Corps, U.S. Navy,
    Navy liaison officer to Project Mercury since 1958, reported
    aboard as Assistant Director for Aerospace Medicine in NASA’s
    Office of Life Science Programs.
August 16: F-1 rocket engine tested in first of firing series of the com-
    plete flight system.
       The International Academy of Astronautics, meeting in
    Paris, named Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank radio-
    telescope, as the first winner of the Daniel and Florence Guggen-
   heim In t ernationa1 Astronautics Award.
       Centaur vehicle C-1 was tested and accepted by Marshall
    Space Flight Center.
August 16-18: General meeting of the International Astronomical
   Union a t the University of California, Berkeley.
       International Hypersonics Conference held a t MIT.
August 17: NASA announced that Explorer XI1 had successfully
    completed first orbit, radioing data on magnetic fields and solar
   radiation from an apogee of near 54,000 miles and perigee within
    170 d e s of the Earth.
___ Tiros I11 spotted two storm cells about 500 miles south and
   southwest of Hawaii, reports which alerted Honolulu and Guam
   of these previously unknown potential typhoons.
       President Kennedy signed into law the bill providing NASA
   appropriations for fiscal year 1962 of $1,671,750,000.
       USAF Blue Scout launched from Atlantic Missile Range, radio
    contact lost during the fourth stage with payload intended to
    reach 140,000 miles into space.
August 18: NASA announced that analysis of Project Mercury sub-
    orbital data indicated that all objectives of that phase of the
    program had been achieved, and that no further Mercury-Red-
    stone flights were planned.
       Announced that NASA had decided to add 15 Agena B vehicles
~-
    to the original Agena B program.
August 19: Controversy over Project West Ford aired at Xnternationd
    Astrmomical Union meeting at Berkeley, Calif.
August 21 : NASA held a news conference on Explorer XII, at which
    the great amount o i continuous coverage on interrelated data in
    its eccentric orbit was pointed out.
       DC-8 jet airliner flown beyond mach 1 in experimental flight
    by Douglas Aircraft.
August 22: University of Michigan astronomers rcported reception of
    natural radio signals from the planet Mercury.
       Republic of Chins announced plans to initiate a rocket research
    program.
                                                                   41
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

August 2 : Ranger I test satellite of unmanned lunar spacecraft,
        3
   launched from Atlantic Missile Range by Atlas D-Agena B into
    low parking orbit, but did not attain its programed eccentric
    orbit.
       Maj, Gherman S. Titov, in his serialized account of his orbital
    flight in Pravda, described the state of weightlessness.
       Saturn H-1 engine drop-tested into salt water a t Cape Can-
    averal, then returned to Marshall Space Flight Center for in-
    specting, cleaning, and static firing.
August 24: NASA announced decision to launch manned lunar flights
    and other missions requiring Saturn and Nova class vehicles froni
    expanded Cape Canaveral facilities. Based upon national space
    goals announced by the President in May, NASA plans call for
    acquisition of 80,000 acres north and west of AFMTC, to be
    administered by the USAF as agent for NASA and as a part of
    the Atlantic Missile Range. Decision followed intensive NASA-
    DOD survey for launching facilities, including trajectory advan -
    tages, overflight or booster impact hazards, air and water trans-
    portation, instrumentation support, and cost, time, and land
    availability advantages. Expansion of Cape Canaveral was noted
    as first of three major steps in accelerating the U S . space pro-
    gram, the remaining two steps being a manned space flight
    research center, and a booster fabrication and test facility.
       Mercury-Atlas 4 launch postponed.
       NORAD charts showed that flight of Vostok I1 was tracked
    continuously.
August 25: Explorer XI11 (S-55A) placed into orbit by NASA Scout
    from Wallops, a micrometeorite counting satellite developed by
    Langley Research Center and Goddard Space Flight Center.
       NASA announced selection of Blaw Knox Co. to conduct
    second-phase feasibility study for a 240-foot diameter deep space
    tracking antenna for Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s deep space
    instrumentation facility a t Goldstone, Calif.
August 26: Explorer XIII, popularly referred to as the “beer can
    satellite” because of its micrometeorite counting structure, com-
    pleted its 15th orbit.
       Aerojet-General fired largest solid-fuel-rocket motor to date,
    over one-half million pounds of thrust, a t Sacramento, Calif.
    This motor weighed over 70 tons and was made in several seg-
   ments which were joined together a t the static test site.
       Northrop T-38 (Talon) jet flown 842.6 miles per hour to
    claimed world speed record for women, by Jacqueline Cochran
    a t Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
August 27: I n a letter to the President, 35 Members of Congress urged
    that a decision on the Nation’s satellite communication system
    be delayed to determine (‘whether such a system should be
   publicly or privately owned and under what circumstances.”
       The Soviet Communist Party organ, Pravda, explained why
    Russian space techniques and the names of spaceship designers
    were kept secret as follows: “A corrupt capitalist society, by its
    very nature, is extremely capable of turning the greatest peace-
    ful achievements of mankind into the total means of destruction
    of mankind. This is why it is risky to open even the smallest
     82534424
42     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 1

   loopholes in the world of Soviet rocket technique for the gentle-
   men who are lagging considerably behind as far as thcir tech-
   nique is concerned, but who become militarily agitated and dis-
   tracted from an honest prograrii of general and complete dis-
   armament and who mumble soiiiething about the right of inspec-
    tion of neighbors’ orchtuds and storerooms. That is why the
   wonderful group of heroes who insured the mastering of the
   cosmos remain nameless until now.”
August 28: S A S A selected Vitro Engineering Co. for negotiation of a
    design contract for an engine maintenancc and disassembly
    building, one of the facilities to be a part of the National Nuclear
    Rocket Development Center.
       Lt. Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force
    Systems Command, said that plans to orbit a monkey in Dis-
    coverer X X I I (March 30) were canceled a t the last minute, and
    that such plans had not been rescheduled.
       Reported that Martin Co. originally required 75,000 man-hours
    to produce the first Titan I’s, which had now been reduced to
    19,000 man-hours per Titan. Man-hour rate for the first five
    Titan 11’s averaged 35,000 man-hours on each one.
       Lt. Hunt Hardisty, US. Navy, pilot, and Lt. Earl H. DeEsch
    flew an F4H Phantom I1 over the 3-kilometer course of Holloman
    Air Force Base, N. Mex., and averaged 902.769 miles per hour for
    a new world’s record for speed at low altitude.
August 29: NASA announced that Explorer XI11 launched on August
    25 had reentered the atmosphere. Transmitting considerable
    data on micrometeoroids, spacecraft was last heard on August 27
    by the Minitrack facility a t Antofagasta, Chile.
       NASA Associate Administrator Seamans announced the addi-
    tion of four additional Ranger spacecraft, bringing the total to
    nine, the number of Rangers to be launched in this phase of the
    lunar exploration program. “This new third phase of the Ranger
    program is a part of the general acceleration of the program to
    land an American on the Moon by 1970,” said Dr. Seamans.
       Ranger I completed 100 orbits, transmitting data on all engi-
    neering devices and eight scientific experiments. It was expected
    to come down soon.
August SO: USAF Discoverer X X I X launched into polar orbit with
    300-pound data capsule, from Pacific Missile Range.
       NASA announced that Ranger I spacecraft had reentered the
    Earth’s atmosphere. Launched on August 23, Ranger I made
    111 orbits, traveled almost 3 million miles, and its orientation,
    communications, and electronic systems performed satisfactorily.
       USAF Minuteman ICBM exploded seconds after firing in silo
    a t Cape Canaveral due to guidance malfunction.
August 31: U.S.S.R. announced policy of resumption of nuclear
    weapon testing which had been suspended March 31, 1958, and
    that bombs can be delivered
    rockets like those Majs.
    to begin their unrivaled
                                                                43
      AERONAUTICAL A N D ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

During August: NASA site selection team headed by John F. Parsons,
    Associate Director of Ames Research Center, toured possible
    sites for a manned spacecraft center.
       New wind tunnel became operational a t Ames Research
    Center, capable of research on reentry problems at speeds of
    mach 7.5, 10, and 15.
       With successful launch of Explorer XI1 on Au ust 15, NASA
                                                   t
    Delta launch vehicles had successfully launche five satellites
    out of six attempts, the only failure being the first attempt.
    Delta’s high reliability record began with Echo 1 on August 12,
    1960, and includes Tiros I1 and 111, and Explorers X and XII.
    Built by prime contractor Douglas Aircraft, the NASA Delta
    launch vehicle consists of a Thor first stage (Rocketdyne MB-3
    liquid engine), Aerojet-General second stage (AJ-10-118, an
    improved Vanguard second stage), and an ABL third stage
    (X-248 spin-stabilized version of Vanguard third stage).
       New 210-foot diameter radiotelescope began operations at
    Parkes, New South Wales, operated by a group of scientists
    headed by Dr. E. G. Bowen, radar pioneer.
       NASA-DOD Large Launch Vehicle Planning Group in session
    since August 1 to study the policy, mana ement structures, and
                                            %
    requirements of launch vehicles beyon the size of Saturn.
    Meeting in NASA headquarters, the group was headed by Dr.
    Nicholas E. Golovin, technical assistant to the Associate
    Administrator of NASA.
       Announced that RCA scientists determined the distance
    between Earth and Venus to an accuracy of 200 miles using
    84-foot tracking antenna.
                          SEPTEMBER 1961
September 1: White House announced that the U.S.S.R. had resumed
     testing of nuclear weapons early this morning, the first known
     nuclear test by U.S.S.R., United States, or Britain since the
     fall of 1958.
        Per NASA management instructions, all space vehicles and
     spacecraft under cognizance of NASA were to be equipped with
     fail-safe devices for terminating electromagnetic transmissions at
     the completion of their planned useful life.
        Three parachuting skindivers recovered capsule of Discoverer
     XXIX, the seventh recovery of an object from orbit in the
     USAF Discoverer program. Capsule had made 33 orbits and con-
     tained human, animal, and soil life samples.
        NASA Administrator Webb, appearing before the Senate
     Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, requested $60
     million additional for fiscal year 1962 for the acquisition of 80,000
     acres adjoining Cape Canaveral for launching facilities for the
     expanded space program.
        NASA issued its “Program Evaluation and Review Technique
     Handbook,” its adaptation of the Navy P E R T program manage-
     ment system.
September 2: Scientists at Nagoya University. Japan, were reported
     to be training monkey for space flight next year, hopefully in
     conjunction with Japanese Government-financed rocket program
     carried out by Tokyo University’s Institute of Industrial Science.
September 5 Thirty days’ exposure to simulated vacuum of space
              :
     killed bacteria by causing them to disintegrate molecule by mole-
     cule, was finding of studies reported by the Materials Testing
     Laboratory of Hughes Aircraft Co. Dr. Charles G. Walence
     reported thlit sterilization of space vehicles probably could be
     eliminated from current planning.
September 5 : Authorization for NASA to acquire necessary land for
     additional launch facilities at Cape Canaveral was approved by
     the Senate.
        In an interview with C. L. Sulzberger, Premier Iihrushchev
     reviewed the world crisis in detail. ‘(In a strange Darwinian
     interpretation of the advance of nations,” Sulzberger reported,
     “Mr. Khrushchev jokingly considers that the United States is
     still in the stage of ‘jumping’ while the Soviet Union has learned
     bow to ‘fly.’ This refers to the Earth-orbiting successes of the
     Soviet spacemen, Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin and Maj. Gherman S.
     Titov.”
September 5-7’: International Conference on Science and World Affairs
     held rtt Stowe, Vt., a t which nonofficial proposals for a joint
     United States-U.S.S.R. space program were considered by dele-
     gates of 12 nations including the United States and the Soviet
     Union.
      44
                                                                       45
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

September 6: USAF Titan successfully launched from Atlantic Missile
     Ran e, making 6 , I m i l e flight.
       &C announced that U.S.S.R. had detonated a fourth nuclear
     device in the atmosphere, a t a site east of Stalingrad.
       After a series of six static firings, the Saturn SA-T2 booster
     was removed from the static test tower a t Marshall Space Flight
     Center.
S e e d e r 7: NASA announced that Government-owned Michoud
    Ordnance Plant near New Orleans would be the site for fabrica-
     tion and assembly of the first stage of Saturn as well as for making,’
     sta es for larger booster.
_-      lfalloon flifhts to measure loss of radiation from the Van Allen
     radiation be ts-the     “dumping profile” ex eriment-was          an-
                                                     $
     nounced by National Science Foundation.            lights are part of
     joint project by University of Minnesota and University of
     California, taking place along line from Flin Flon, Manitoba, to
     Waterloo, Iowa.
        USAF Titan with inertial guidance system successfullylaunched
     from Atlantic Missile Range, the second in as many days, impact-
     ing into target area over 5,000 miles down range.
        The Agena B vehicle 6002 was delivered to Atlantic Missile
     Range, in preparation for the Ranger 2 launch.
September 8: Deep space tracking antenna dedicated b United States
                                                         9
     and South African officials. Located 40 miles rom Johannes-
     burg, the antenna has operated since July in collaboration with
     Goldstone and Woomera, and tracked Ranger I.
        Reported from Stowe, Vt., that unofficial American-Soviet
     discussions on cooperative space exploration were near agreement,
     and that internationalized status for space similar to that achieved
     by treaty for the continent of Antarctica was under consideration.
     Delegations included seven members of President Kennedy’s
     Science Advisory Committee and six members of the ruling body
     of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The Stowe Conference was
     sponsored by the National Academy of Arts and Sciences of Bos-
     ton, with costs defrayed by the Ford Foundation.
September 10: Tiros I11 photographed Hurricane Esther in rocess of
                                                               P
     formation, 2 days before hurricane-hunter aircraft veri ed winds
     of hurricane force. Quality of Tiros I11 pictures processed in 8
     hours through the National Meteorological Center, Suitland, Md.,
     was not alone sufficient for identification of a hurricane.
        On the same day, Tiros I11 also observed one-eighth of the
     Earth, providing data on two other hurricanes (Carla and Deb-
     bie), one dissipating hurricane (Betsy), two typhoons (Nancy
     and Pamela), and at least one other vortex storm.
        White House released “Project Horizon” re 01% of task force
     created in March to establish goals to maintain lmerica’s primacy
     in aeronautics. The report made a strong recommendation for
     the development of a supersonic transport, among other recom-
     mendations.
        U.S.S.R. announced that it would launch B series of “more
     powerful and improved rockets” into the Central Pacific in tests
     between September 13 and October 15.
46     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 0 1

September 11 : NASA selected North American Aviation to develop an
     upper stage (S-11) for an Advanced Saturn launch vehicle to be
     used on both manned and unmanned missions.
September 12: In a speech before the National Press Club, NASA
     Administrator Webb reviewed NASA’s program and outlined
     the interest in the rendezvous-in-space technique for staging
     flights to the Moon and nearby planets.
        X-15 flown to record 3,614 miles per hour by NASA’s Joseph
     A. Walker a t Edwards Air Force Base.
        USAF Discoverer XXX launched into polar orbit from Pa-
     cific Missile Range.
September I S : Unmanned Mercury spacecraft orbited by Mercury-
     Atlas launch vehicle from Atlantic Missile Range and recovered
     1 hour and 22 minutes after landing by destroyer U.S.S. Decatur.
     This MA-4 (capsule 8) flight demonstrated, said NASA Space
     Task Group Director Robert Gilruth, that “Atlas has the capa-
     bility to fly a man in orbit; it brought in for the first time the
     Mercury worldwide tracking network; and demonstrated the
     ability of the capsule and its systems to operate completely un-
     at tended.”
        Two experiments to measure atmospheric winds, tempera-
     ture, and density in relatively high altitudes conducted from
     Wallops Island in two four-stage Argo D-4 rocket launches.
     Sodium clouds were released a t near 120 statute miles and again
     at 228 miles in first launch, and a t 118 and 230 miles in the second
     launch. French scientists participated by using special optical
     instruments to observe the brilliant orange and yellow clouds
     which stirred a rash of public inquiries to newspapers from hun-
     dreds of miles around.
        U.S.S.R. announced that it had fired new, powerful carrier
     rocket more than 7,400 miles to within less than five-eighths of a
     mile from its Central Pacific target.
        Soviet Marshal Kiril S. Moskalenko, chief of rocket forces,
     declared that 95 percent of all Soviet rockets fired reached their
     targets. (Article in Red Star timed to coincide with first firing
     of new rocket series in the Pacific.)
September 1.4: USAF C-130B cargo plane snagged the parachuting
     capsule of Discoverer X X S north of Hawaii, Capt. W. C.
     Schmensted as pilot.
-_      White House released its reply to letter of August 27 signed by
     35 Members of Congress which expressed concern over the pri-
     vate ownership of an operational communications satellite sys-
     tem. The White House memorandum stated that “any decisions
     RS to control should preserve as much flexibility as possible,” and
     reemphasized the administration policies including “maximum
     competition” in any system of private ownership.
        Resolutions calling for the creation of an international space
     year program and an international space agency, both under the
     auspices of the United Nations, introduced in the Senate by
     Senator Hubert Humphrey.
                                                                      47
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF I961

September 14: AEC announced that the Soviet Union had fired its 10th
     nuclear blast in the current test series begun 2 weeks ago.
September 16: White House announced that AEC-DOD had con-
     ducted first U.S. nuclear weapons test since October 1958, an
     underground weapons development test at the Nevada testing
     site, one of low yield and which produced no fallout.
        Army Kike-Zeus fired from White Sands Proving Ground met
     all test objectives, including controlled high-velocity in the atmos-
     phere and evaluation of solid-fuel rocket motors and guidance
     system.
        Marshall Space Flight Center's Procurement and Contracts
     Office reported that a contract was let to the Noble Co. for dis-
     assembling the Redstone gantry a t Atlantic Missile Range and
     reassembling and erecting it a t Pacific Missile Range. This
     gantry would be erected on pad 75-1-1 at Vandenberg Air Force
     Base for use with Thor-Agena B launches after January 1962.
September 16: Congressman Overton Brooks, of Louisiana, chairman
     of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics since its
     creation in January 1959, died a t Bethesda Naval Hospital.
September 17: USAF Discoverer X X X I placed into polar orbit from
     Pacific Missile Range by Thor-Agena.
        Soviet Union announced that 12 altitude and speed records
     had been broken by its twin-jet M-10 antisubmarine seaplane.
September 18: First of four scheduled Skylark rocket firings was
     launched from Woomera in the joint United States-Australian
     ultraviolet survey of the southern skies.
September 19: NASA Administrator Webb announced that location
     of the new Manned Spacecraft Center would be in Houston, Tex.,
     the conclusion of an intensive nationwide study by a site selection
     team. The Manned Spacecraft Center would be t,he comniand
     center for the manned lunar landing mission and all follow-on
     manned space flight missions. This announcement was the third
     basic decision on ma'or facilities required for the expanded U.S.
                          1
     Range and the estab ishment of the spacecraft fabrication center
     a t the Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans, La.
     Center at the Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans, La.
        Recovery of capsule of Discoverer X X X I was called off as
     capsule and satellite (launched Sept. 17, 1961) failed to separate
     and both remained in orbit.
        USAF Bomarc B launched from Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., on
     command from SAGE Center a t Montgomery, Ala., destroyed
     supersonic Regulus launched from Venice, Fla.
        Air Force Systems Command formed a Bioastronautics Divi-
     sion, effective October 1, to consolidate all USAF applied research
     in this area into a single organization. School of Aerospace
     Medicine, now under Air Training Command, becomes a part of
     Air Force Sysfems Command.
48     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 196 1

September 19: In a speech to the USAF Worldwide Information Con-
     ference a t Philadelphia, Maj. Gen. Daniel E. Hooks, Commander
     of the Office of Aerospace Research, reported that predictions of
     OAR’S Solar Laboratory a t Sacramento Peak, N. Mex., were
     borne out by the flights of the U.S.S.R.’s Vostok I and 11. High
     proton shower activity associated with solar flares had been pre-
     dicted for April 1961, except from April 11 through 14 (Major
     Gagarin’s flight in Vostok I was on April 12). August 6, the day
     of the launching of Major Titov’s l7-orbit flight, was the “safest
     day” for low solar activity on record since 1955.
September 20: Robert Gilruth and other officials of the Space Task
     Group made survey of the new site of the Manned Spacecraft
     Center near Houston, Tex., to seek temporary operational quar-
     ters as soon as possible. Permanent quarters will be constructed
     under the supervision of the Army Corps of Engineers.
September 21 :D. Brainerd Holmes was appointed NASA’s Director of
     Manned Space Flight Programs. As general manager of RCA’s
     Major Defense Systems Division, Holmes was project manager
     for the ballistic missile early warning system (BMEWS).
        Representative George P. Miller, Democrat, of California, was
     named chairman of the House Science and Astronautics Com-
     mittee.
        Soviet Union protested to the U.S. National Academy of
     Sciences that Project West Ford might endanger Soviet cosmo-
     nauts, protest contained in a letter to Detlev W. Bronk, president
     of the NAS, signed by Matislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet
     Academy of Sciences.
September 22: Announced a t Space Task Group that a 30-cubic-foot
     balloon would be installed in Mercury spacecraft to allow for
     ship recovery should helicopter be forced to drop it as happened
     during the M R 4 recovery.
Septem.ber 23: U.S.S.R. announced that third flight of current series
     of Pacific tests of new multistage carrier rocket was successful.
        NASA planned to spend $6 million on expansion of its Langley
     facilities in this fiscal year, according to Representative Thomas
     N. Downing after a conversation with NASA Administrator
     James E. Webb. Representative Downing said he was satisfied
     that the lower peninsula area of Virginia would not suffer finan-
     cially when the Space Task Group moved to Houston, Tex.
September 24: Administrator Webb announced major organizational
     changes and top-level appointments in NASA. Keyed to the
     Nation’s accelerated civilian space program, changes provided
     clearer focus on major programs, and provided center directors
     with a louder voice in policymaking and program decisions.
     Effective November 1, major headquarters program offices would
     be headed as follows: Ira H. Abbott, Director of the Office
                                                                    49
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

    of Advanced Research and Technology; Homer E. Newell,
     Director of the Office of Space Sciences; D. Brainerd Holmes,
     Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight; and an Office of
     Applications Programs with no director yet named. Thomas
     F. Dixon was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. Abe
     Silverstein was named Director of the Lewis Research Center and
     Robert R. Gilruth, Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center.
September 24: Speaking a t the Air Force Association convention in
     Philadelphia, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air
     Force Systems Command, said that “the United States has been
     notably slow to recognize the military application of new inven-
     tions. Two of the most significant inventions of this century-
     the airplane and the liquid-fuel rocket-are American inventions.
     Yet in each case their first application was made by other na-
     tions.” Gen. Schriever also stated: ‘‘We should recognize that
     there is no inherent difference between basic military and non-
     military space technology. What really matters is not the tech-
     nology but the intent * * * space power must become a vital
     part of our national strength and security.”
        NASA made a grant to Stanford University’s School of
     Medicine for development of design of payload instrumentation
     to determine existence of life forms on nearby planets, a project
     under the direction of Dr. Joshua Lederberg and Dr. Elliott C.
     Leventhal.
September 25: I n a stirring address to the Assembly of the United
     Nations meeting in New York, President John F. Kennedy
     called for “world law in the age of self determination” rather than
     a “world war in the age of mass extermination.” Among basic
     proposals for waging effective peace, he urged “keeping nuclear
     weapons from seeding new battlegrounds in outer space.” I n
     projecting the theme that “the events and decisions of the next
     10 months may well decide the fat’e of man of the next 10,000
     years,” President Kennedy spoke of the impact of space explora-
     tion as follows:
        “As we extend the rule of law on Earth, so must we also extend
     it to man’s new domain-outer space.
        “All of us salute the brave cosmonauts of the Soviet Union.
     The new horizons of outer space must not be riven by the old
     bitter concepts of imperialism and sovereign claims. The cold
     reaches of the universe must not become the new arena of an
     even colder war.
        “TOthis end, we shall urge proposals extending the United
     Nations Charter to the limits of man’s exploration in the uni-
     verse, reserving outer space for peaceful use, prohibiting weapons
     of mass destruction in space or on celestial bodies, and opening
     the mysteries and benefits of space to every nation * * *.”
50     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 1

September 25: Dr. George N. Constan of Marshall Space Flight Center
     named as acting manager of the new NASA Saturn fabrication
     plant near New Orleans by Director von Braun of Marshall
     Space Flight Center .
September 26: NASA bidders conference on a contract to produce tlie
     booster (S-I) stage of the Saturn vehicle was held a t the Munici-
     pal Auditoriurn, S e w Orleans.
        Meeting to examine the iriodific.atiori of ('-133 aircraft for
     carrying Saturn S-IV stages was held at NASA 1,anglcy Re-
     search Center.
Sfptembcr $7: Ion engine dcvclopcd on NASA contract denionstrated
     at Huglies Aircraft Laboratories.
September 28: XASA announced that iristrunicntd Venus probe to
     be launclied next year would he launched by an Atlas-Agena B
     rather than a Centaur rocket as originally planned.
--      Solar flare studied by Explorer XI1 and Injun I, rcadings
     within a few hom~sindicated energetic protoris with rrlocities
     of near 10,000 liilornetcm per secoiid, while 2 days after the
     solar flaw both satellites saw a sudden increase in tlie intensity
     of' low-cncrgy protons (c. 10 mev) concurrently with a inagnetic
     storm on Earth and briglit aurora a t low altitude. I t was
     coricludecl that low-energy protons traveled slowly from tlie Sun
     with tlie iriagrietic stornic-loud.
        X-15 (No. 2) flown to 100,SOO feet and 3,600 miles per hour
     by Comdr. Forrest S. Petersen, U S . Navy, a t Edwards, Calif.
September 98-2.9: Pair of spiriup rockets on Tiros I1 successfully
     fired after more than 10 months in orbit.
September 2.9: USAF awarded three contracts for speediiig develop-
     ment of the Dyna-Soar, a manned orbital space glider. Re-
     ceiviii: coiltracts were Boeiiig Co. for developiiient of the glider
     and rclated systems, Radio Corp. of America for communications
     and ti-aching devices, and Rlinneapolis-Hone_v~~,ell      Regulator
     Co. for tlie guidance system.
-_       Dr. Chnrlcs hf. Herzfeld, of the National Bureau of Standards,
     joined DOD's Advanced Rescarch Projects Agency to coordi-
     nate the Project Del'cnrlcr program.
        Navy Polaris (A-3) with modified second stage testing treon
     gas i*egulator launched from pad at Atlantic Missile Range.
September 50: NASA Office for the United Nations Conference headed
     by Dr. John P. Hagen was closed, effective this date. Continued
     uncertainly of arrangements for a conference on the peaceful
     uses of outer space witliiii the United Kations rnadc such a
     move necessary. Sustained N ASA respocsihility in this regard
     was assigned to the Office of International Programs.
        Air Force Systems Command announced consolidation of all
     USAF research and development in bioastronautics under single
     management. The new Bioastronautics Division, Air Force
     Systems Command, would have its headquarters a t Brooks Air
     Force Base, San Antonio, Tex.
         Two 5-15 test pilots, USAF's h h j . Robert M. White and
     NASA's Joseph A. Walker, were jointly awarded the 1960 Iven C.
     IZincheloe Memorial Award as the Nation's outstanding test
     pilots; award of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots
                                                                  51
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

September SO: NASA received an additional $10 million for salaries
     in a supplemental appropriation bill approved by Congress,
     enough to hire an additional 1,250 persons.
During September: National Bureau of Standards and the Institut6
     Geofisico de Huancago of Peru initiated construction of the
     Jucamarca Observatory, a 6-million-watt pulse transmitter and a
     22-acre antenna with 9,216 crossed dipoles mounted above a re-
     flecting screen. Located 17 miles east of Lima, Peru, the Ob-
     servatory wl be used for ground-based exploration of the upper
                 il
     atmosphere and space.
        USAF established a Council of Scientists to be comprised of
     senior civilian scientists of major Air Force organizations, Dr.
     Leonard S. Sheingold as Chairman.
        Congress appropriated funds to the U.S. Weather Bureau for
     implementation of the National 0 erational Meteorological
                                          Y
     Satellite System. To phase in as ear y as technology warrants
     and to continue expanding the operational capability through the
     early Nimbus launchings by NASA, the system planned to be
     fully operational by 1966 as Nimbus system became operational.
     The s stem would include data acquisition stations in northern
          B
     latitu es, communications for transmitting the data, and a
     National Meteorological Center to receive, process, analyze, and
     disseminate the derived information over domestic and inter-
     national weather circuits.
                          OCTOBER 1961
October 2-7: Twelfth Congress of the International Astronautical
    Federation held in Washington, D.C.
October 2: NASA Deputy Administrator Dryden and Soviet Academy
    of Sciences official Dr. Leonid I. Sedov both appealed for greater
    international cooperation and exchange of information in the
    peaceful exploration of space in their speeches a t the opening of
     the 12th World Congress of the International Astronautical
    Federation.
        NASA conducted a press conference for foreign correspondents
     attending the IAF Congress, pointing out that some 40 nations
     are now participating in NASA programs or are obtaining NASA
    help for their respective space programs. Director of the Office
     of International Programs, Arnold Frutkin, pointed out that
     growing space research cooperation would soon include a uni-
     versity training program in which 100 foreign students would
     work a t American universities on peaceful space experiments.
        USAF Atlas E missile made successful 5,000-mile flight a t
    Atlantic Missile Range. The payload included the guidance
     equipment for the Centaur rocket, radiation sensors, and a nose
     cone intended for the Minuteman. Data capsule was recovered.
October 3: House Science and Astronautics Committee released in-
     terim report on “Research and Development in Aeronautics,”
     which concluded that “the welfare of the Nation, in both its
     economic and security aspects, is dependent in no small degree
     on continuing aeronautical research of high caliber.”
        Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson began tour of west coast
    missile and space installations.
        Inhouse procurement policies and practices of NASA reviewed
    by headquarters and field personnel in conference a t Lewis Re-
    search Center.
        First regular meeting of the International Academy of Astro-
    nautics held in conjunction with the 12th Annual Congress of
     the International Astronautical Federation in Washington.
        Dr. Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, of the U.S.S.R. Academy of
    Sciences, told the IAF that Russian radar returns from Venus
     indicated a value of 149,599,500 kilometers for the astronomical
     unit. This was a major revision of the value of 149,469,500
     kilometers first released by the Russians in March. The Russian
     value compared with 149,598,820 kilometers obtained by Jet
     Propulsion Laboratory and the figure of 149,597,850 kilometers
     obtained by Lincoln Laboratory. Disagreement remains on
     whether Venus day is a 9-to-1 1-earth-day period or 225-earth-day
     period.
October 3 5 P E R T (program evaluation and review technique) sym-
          -:
    posium held a t Huntsville, Ala. , sponsored by the American
     Institute of Industrial Engineering and the University of Alabama.
      G2
                                                                     53
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 8 1

October 4: Beginning of the fifth year of the “space age,” being the
                                 a
     anniversary of the launchin of Sputnik I (1957).
        Project West Ford given nal approval by the White House.
        Maj. Robert Rushworth, U.S. Air Force, flew x 1 to 2,820
                                                           -5
     miles per hour, with bottom tailfin missing in programed mal-
     functions for test of stability and control.
        State Department ruled that Soviet space scientists would not
     be allowed to visit the American Rocket Society’s Space Flight
     Report to the Nation in New York on October 9-14, a reciprocal
     action prompted by Soviet restrictions on American scientists in
     the U.S.S.R.
        Soviet scientists in Washington for 12th IAF Congress revealed
     that Maj. Gherman Titov was ill during his 17 orbits in Vostok I1
     on Au ust 6. Disorientation, nausea, and irre ular heartbeat
    resultei from prolonged weightlessness, accorfing to 0. G.
     Gazenko and V. J. Yazdovsky of the Soviet Academy of Sciences.
October 5: USAF Atlas fired 9,000 miles from Atlantic Missile Range
    into Indian Ocean, carrying dummy nuclear warhead and a data
     capsule which was recovered.
October 5-6: Atomic Energy Commission announced that the Tory
     II-A-1 nuclear test reactor underwent tests on September 28 and
     October 5-6. Power levels of the test were not disclosed but
     advanced plans called for tests a t full power. The test was for
    “about 1 minute” a t temperatures “in excess of 2,000° E”.” and
     emission of radiation was “negligible. l 1
October 6: USAF Titan I launched from Cape Canaveral carrying
    Titan I1 guidance system.
October 7: Soviet E-166 jet fighter flown to 1,482.039 miles per hour
    in closed 100-kilometer course, according to Moscow claim.
        Second stage of Nike-Zeus exploded a t 2-mile altitude in test
    launch.
        U.S.S.R. launched fourth multistage rocket 7,500 miles into
     the Pacific.
October 8: Plans for a worldwide scientific study of the Sun, to begin in
     1964 and continue for 18 months, were approved by scientists
     from 51 nations gathered in London for the triennial meeting
    of the International Council of Scientific Unions. Final plans to
     be drawn in Paris in April 1962 a t a meeting of the International
     Committee on Geophysics, successor to the IGY.
        In article in New York Times, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Execu-
     tive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council, said:
     “In my view, we [the United States] do not have a division be-
     tween peaceful and nonpeaceful objectives for space. Rather,
     we have space missions to help keep the peace and space missions
     to enable us to live better in peace.”
--      In article in New York Times, Mr. George J. Feldman, con-
     sultant to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics,
    outlined several areas of international space law that urgently
    require solution, including sovereignty in space, liability for
     damage from spacecraft, conflicts of interest arising from space
     experiments, sovereignty claims on celestial bodies, and the inter-
    national allocation of satellite radio frequencies. Communica-
     tions satellites make latter point particularly critical, as well as
     posin an unprecedented problem in American contract and anti-
          P
     trust aw.
54     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

October 9-15: American Rocket Society’s 16th annual meeting and
     Space Flight Report to the Nation held in New York City.
October 10: NASA Argo D-4 rocket was launched from Wallops,
     reaching an altitude of 585 i d e s and landing 817 miles out in the
     Atlantic, to gather data on the density of electrically charged
     helium atoms in the upper atmosphere.
October 11: x-15 flown more than 40 miles iiito space-217,000 feet-
     and reached a speed of 3,647 miles per hour, Maj. Robert White,
     U S . Air Force, as pilot. This was above 99.9 percent of Earth’s
     atmosphere; pilot’s heartbeat and respiration rose to twice above
     normal; and outside skin temperature of the X-15 rose to 900’ F.
     on reentry.
        NASA Administrator Webb, speaking to the American Rocket
     Society, said NASA scientists “are going to consider the rendez-
     vous technique with great care before going ahead with Nova.”
     Decision on whether to give priority to the rendezvous technique
     would probably be made by the end of 1961, he said.
        Final report of House Committee on Science and Astronautics
     relating to their hearings on “Commercial Applications of Space
     Communications Systems” released, having among its conclusions:
        (1) Because of worldwide interest and potential usefulness of
     a space communications system, the US. Government must
     “retain maximum flexibility regarding the central question of
     ownership and operation of the system.”
        (2) NASA will not only evaluate the various commercial pro-
     posals but will “conduct all space launches and retain direct
     control over all launching equipment, facilities, and personnel.”
        (3) Research and development of military space communica-
     tions systems should continue to be conducted by DOD but all
    research and development in space communications “should be
     conducted under the general supervision of NASA in accordance
    with its statutory mandate to ‘plan, direct, and conduct aero-
    nautical and space activities’ ” as well as evaluate the technical
     merits of proposed systems.
        I n a luncheon address to the American Rocket Society, Gen.
    Bernard A. Schriever said: ‘(1     have been, am being, and, if the
    situation is not changed, will continue to be inhibited if our space
     efforts continue to be carried out under an unnecessary, self-
    imposed national restriction ; namely, the artificial division be-
    tween space for peaceful purposes and space for military pur-
    poses.” Asserting USAF management experience in space sys-
    tems, General Schriever added: “There is no short cut to the
    creation of a team of dedicated and experienced men with a
    tradition of accomplishment .”
        Jacqueline Cochran set woman’s altitude record of 56,071.3
    feet, in Northrop T-38 jet trainer a t Edwards Air Force Base.
October IS: In speech a t the American Rocket Society, Vice President
    Lyndon B. Johnson stated: “If I could get one message to you it
    would be this: The future of this country and the welfare of the
    free world depend upon our success in space. There is no room
    in this country for any but a fully cooperative, urgently motivated
     all-out effort toward space leadership. No one person, no one
     company, no one Government agency, has a monopoly on the
    competence, the missions, or the requirements for the space
    program. It is and it must continue to be a national job.”
                                                                    55
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1061

October 13: Discoverer XXXII was placed into polar orbit; its capsule
     contained components of USAF satellite systems. This marked
     the 100th successful firing of the Thor booster rocket.
        The Ad Hoc Carrier Committee established by the FCC to
     make an industry proposal on the development and operation of
     commercial communications satellites recommended a nonprofit
     corporation be formed, to be owned by companies engaged in
     international communications, with the U.S. Government having
     one more representative on the board of directors than any one
     company. Western Union fled a minority statement proposing
     a public stock company arrangement to prevent dominance of
     the corporation by any one company.
        The American Rocket Society presented its ma’or annual
                                                           1
     awards as follows: Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memoria Medal to
     Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space
     Flight Center; Astronautics Medal to Comdr. Alan B. Shepard,
     Mercury astronaut, for his MR-3 flight of May 5; James H. Wyld
     Memorial Medal to Harrison A. Storms, Jr., of North American
     Aviation; Propulsion Medal to Robert B. Young of Aerojet-
     General Corp. for his role in development of Titan I1 engine;
     G. Edward Pendray Award to Kraft Ehricke for his contribution
     to astronautical literature; and Research Medal to Dr. James Van
     Allen of State University of Iowa for basic research.
        On its second birthday in space, Explorer VI1 was still trans-
     mitting, although it had been scheduled to stop a year ago.
        The Soviet Union announced it had f i e d B t h multistage
     rocket 7,500 miles into the Central Pacific, with all stages func-
     tioning perfectly and with the nose cone landing in the target
     area with a high degree of accuracy.
October 14: Capsule of Discoverer XXXII recovered by C-130 piloted
     by Capt. Warren Schensted, U.S. Air Force, the sixth aerial
    recovery of an ejected satellite capsule and Schensted’s second
     catch. Capsule contained test objects including seed corn.
        NASA Argo D 4 launched from Wall0 s Station carried
                                                  I;.
                 -
    United States-Canadian topside sounding sate ite payload to 560-
       .-  -.

     mile altitude.
        U.S.S.R.’s Tass announced that the “Air Force Herald” would
    be retitled “Aviation and Cosmonautics” (Aviatsiga I Kosmo-
     navtika), be inning in January 1962.
                 f
        U.S.S.R. c aimed a new world speed record for vertiplanes on
     a closed 62-mae circuit at 209 miles per hour. Tass said this
     exceeded the previous record of 191 miles per hour held by a
     New Zealander, G. Ellith, flying a British Rotordyne. The
     following day, Tass claimed a horizontal speed of 228 milea per
     hour for the Kamov vertiplane.
October 14-16: Sky Shield I1 provided aerospace control exercise for
     NORAD and SAC, including grounding of all commercial aircraft
    for 12 hours.
October 17: USAF-USN-NASA X-15 flown to 108,600 feet and a
    record speed of 3,900 miles per hour, piloted b y Joseph Walker
    a t Edwards, Calif.
October 18: NASA Scout fired payload to 4,261-mile altitude, obtaining
    data on the ionosphere.
56    AERONAUTICAL A N D ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

October 18: First U S . showing of films of Vostok I1 space flight by
     Gherman Titov, before the Maryland Academy of Sciences in
    Baltimore, was canceled a t the last minute by a Soviet Embassy
    official. Film had been shown to press correspondents in Moscow
    on October 9.
        James A. Van Allen was awarded the Elliott Cresson Medal
    of the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, for “his many contri-
    butions and pioneering achievements in the field of space
    science. * * *”
October 18-22: The 20th American Assembly sponsored by Columbia
    University met to study the problems of space exploration and,
     in its report, recommended a proper balance with it and other
    programs in the national interest.
October 19: In :t speech at Naval Research Laboratory, Harold Brown,
     Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said Government
    labs would hereafter be the “primary means” for carrying out
     military weapon programs ; that DOD would seek tin increase
     in the number of supergrade scientific positions and would ask
     for the wine top pay for scientists as NASA has; that labs would
    be given increased status in the chain of command; and that
    lab directors will be given funds they can spend for research
     without prior approval.
        NASA Administrator Webb, speaking a t the 20th American
     Assembly, said the accelerated space program was necessary or
     else “we would see the Russians, with the advantage of their
     advance position in booster thrust, stay continuously ahead.
     * * * The cost over the 10 years of the accelerated program will
     very probably be less than if it were stretched out over 15 years.”
        NASA Scout launched from Wallops Island, Va., and placed
     94-pound P-21 payload to 4,261-mile altitude in a study of the
     ionosphere.
October 20: Ranger test postponed a t Atlantic Missile Range.
October 21: USAF Midas IV launched into polar orbit from Pacific
     Missile Range, and also carried Project West Ford payload.
October 22: NASA announced that Dr. Hiden T. Cox, executive
     director of the American Institute of Biological Sciences, would
     become Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, and “charged
     with developing NASA policies to insure that the character, the
     intent, and the results of America’s space effort are correctly and
     adequately interpreted to the people of this country and the
     world. ”
        Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
--
     Affairs, Harlan Cleveland, outlined in a speech a t St. Louis
     University the seven-point program that the United States will
     propose to the United Nations General Assembly for guaranteeing
     peace and world cooperation in space: (1) Explicit confirmation
     that the U.N. Charter applies to the limits of space exploration;
      (2) it declaration that space and heavenly bodies are not subject
     to claim of national sovereignty; (3) an international system for
     registering of all objects launched into space; (4) a specialized
     space unit in the United Nations Secretariat; ( 5 ) a world weather
     watch using satellites; (6) a cooperative search for ways toward
     weather modification; and (7) a global system of communications
      to link the world by telegraph, telephone, radio, and television.
                                                                   57
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

October 22: National Science Foundation announced the establishment
     of a science resources planning office to study U.S. long-range
     scientific needs, to be headed by NSF Associate Director for
     Planning, Richard H. Bolt.
October 23: The Freedom 7 Mercury capsule in which Alan B. Shepard,
     Jr., made the first suborbital space flight, was presented to the
     National Air Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. In his
     presentation, NASA Administrator Webb said: “To Americans
     seeking answers, proof that man can survive in the hostile realm
     of space is not enough. A solid and meaningful foundation for
     public support and the basis for our Apollo man-in-space effort
     is that U.S. astronauts are going into space to do useful work in
     the cause of all their fellow men.”
        “Such fights as those of Freedom 7 are not stunts. They are
     not antithetical to sober scientific and technological research.
     Interpreted properly, these dramatic events can add much to
     public understanding and excite creative interest in extending the
    base on which public support must rest.”
        NASA announced that it had ordered 14 additional Delta
     launch vehicles (Douglas Thor first stage, Aerojet-General
     AJlO-118 second stage, and Allegheny Ballistics Laborator third
     stage) for Relay, Syncom, Telstar, and Tiros satellites. Jive of
     the first six of the twelve Deltas successfully launched Echo I,
     Tiros I1 and 1 1 and Explorers X and XI.
                     1,
        Ranger launching again postponed a t Atlantic Missile Range
     because of technical difEculties.
        Cleveland extension (SNPO-C) of the joint AEC-NASA Space
     Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO) activated, located on Lewis
     Research Center and headed by John L. Wilson.
        USAF Discoverer XXXIII failed to achieve polar orbit.
        First underwater launching of Navy Polaris A-2, and first fir-
    ing from submarine, U.S.S. Ethan Allen.
        AEC announced that the Soviet Union had detonated a ther-
    monuclear bomb with a 30-megaton yield as well as a small
    underwater nuclear device. These were the 22d and 23d Soviet
    nuclear tests reported by AEC.
        Marshal R. Y. Malinovsky, Soviet Defense Minister, an-
    nounced that the U.S.S.R. had solved the problem of antimissile
    defense (a statement later qualified i retranslation).
                                          n
October 24: Studies of “unconventional” rockets using liquid fuels in
    the thrust range from 2 to 24 million pounds announced by
    NASA; 2 contracts being carried out by Aerojet-General and
    Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation.
        USAF Titan $?red from Cape Canaveral to coincide with over-
    head passage of Midas IV.
        The first Centaur liquid-oxygenfiquid-nitrogen tanking tests
    were successfully completed at Sycamore Canyon.
        Long duration static test of the S-I stage (SA-2 vehicle)
    occurred a t Marshall Space Flight Center, for a period of 120
    seconds.
        Small liquid-fuel rocket was fueled and fired while floating in
    ocean off Point Mugu in Aerojet-General demonstration of this
    launching technique.
     82534-62-5
58     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

October 65: NASA selected Pearl River site in southwestern Missis-
     sippi, 35 miles from the Michoud plant in New Orleans, for static
     test facility for Saturn and Nova-class vehicles, completed facility
     to operate under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center.
         Ranger 2 shot postponed indefinitely as the %day “window”
      (i.e., when the Moon, Sun, and Earth were in favorable positions)
     had ended before technical difficulties could be corrected.
         Reported from Cape Canaveral that launch of Titan the
     previous evening had been detected by Midas IV.
         USAF announced that Project West Ford’s 350 million dipoles
     launched with Midas I V had not yet been found by radar contact.
         Full Tass text of Marshal R. V. Malinovsky’s speech on October
     23 as it appeared in Soviet dailies, showed no statement to the
     effect that the Soviets had perfected an antimissile missile, as
     had been reported by Moscow correspondents of the American
     press.
 October 26: National Aeronautic Association appointed committee
     headed by Maj. Gen. Albert Boyd, U S . Air Force (retired), to
     program U S . efforts to break world aircraft records now held
     by other nations.
         Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory successfully flight-
     tested largest plastic balloon (31s feet in diameter and 434 feet
     long).
-_       U.S.S. Blandy demonstrated capability of a destroyer to
     recover MR-2 Mercury capsule, with Virgil Grissom aboard,
     from water in series of pickups in lower Chesapeake Bay.
 October 27: Largest known rocket launch to date, the Saturn 1st stage
     booster, successful on first test flight from Atlantic Missile Range.
     With its eight clustered engines developing almost 1.3 million
     pounds of thrust a t launch, the Saturn (SA-1) hurled water-
     filled dummy upper stages to an altitude of 84.8 miles and 214.7
     miles down range. In a postlaunch statement, Administrator
     Webb said: “The flight today was a splendid demonstration of
     the strength of our national space program and an important
     milestone in the buildup of our national capacity to launch
     heavy payloads necessary to carry out the program projected by
     President Kennedy on May 25. We in NASA deeply appreciate
     the contribution by the military services and American industry
     in achieving this important milestone. * * *” Development of
     Saturn had begun under Advanced Research Projects Agency
      auspices in 1958.
         Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corp. launched
      Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station with 60-pound payload
      that reached 90-mile altitude in a study of electron density and
      temperature in the upper level of the atmosphere.
         Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory scientists reported that
      Discoverer XVII nose cone (launched November 12, 1960, from
      Pacific Missile Range) had picked up tritium-product of a solar
     flare in which hydrogen and helium combine a t high energies.
      While recovered satellite capsules often pick up some tritium,
      capsule of Discoverer XVII had 100 times the normal amount.
                                                                    59
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

October 2 : Secretary of Defense McNamara announced that progress
         7
    of the Administration’s accelerated defense buildup made unneces-
    sary the use of additional defense funds appropriated by the
    Congress above the amount requested by the administration.
     The Congress had voted $514.5 million for additional long-range
    bombers; $180 million additional for the B-70; and $85.8 million
     additional for Dyna-Soar.
       Second NASA honor awards ceremony in Washington : Dr. Abe
     Silverstein, new Director of the Lewis Research Center, received
     NASA’s Outstanding Leademhi Medal; William O’Sullivan of
                                     1
     Project Echo received the NAS Exceptional Scientific Achieve-
     ment Award; and George D. McCauley received the Sustained
     Superior Performance Award. Other NASA personnel who had
     received NASA or non-Federal awards during NASA’s third year
     were also recognized.
        Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., awarded the Theodore Roosevelt
     Distinguished Service Award in New York City.
        All-out speed trial of X-15 postponed because of heavy cloud
     cover, a flight aimed a t 4,100 miles per hour.
October 29: NASA announced that first Mercury-Scout launch to
     verify the readiness of the worldwide Mercury tracking network
     would take place at Atlantic Missile Range.
        U.S.S.R. announced completion of its series of Pacific rocket
     tests with a successful shot of 7,500 miles. Since series began on
     September 13, Tass had announced a total of eight shots, em-
     phasizing the accuracy of what was described as a “fundamentally
     new type of guidance system.”
October SO: U.S.S.R. exploded 55- to 60-megaton nuclear device as per
     Khrushchev’s promise to the 22d Communist Party Congress.
     White House release later in the day pointed out that this Soviet
     explosion would ((produce more radioactive fallout than any
     previous explosion. The Soviet explosion was a political rather
     than a military act.”
October SI: NASA has assembled an outstanding management team
     for its stepped-up assault on space, NASA Administrator Webb
     told the Aero Club of Washington. Citing Associate Adminis-
     trator Seamans, Deputy Associate Administrator Dixon, and
     Director of Manned Space Flight Holmes as examples, Mr. Webb
     added: ‘(Thesemen, and many others associated with them, know
     the technical side of aeronautics and space and are all experienced
     in the management of large activities. Each has demonstrated
     a personal earning capacity far beyond what the Government is
     able to pay for their services. Each is thoroughly familiar with
     the opportunities and problems associated with our most impor-
     tant technical military weapon system development efforts. It is
     fortunate for this Nation that men with these high qualifications
     and such experience are willing to fore o large earnin in industry
                                                         K”
     and a more normal personal and fam5y life to supp y the leader-
     ship needed in our national space effort.”
       Launch of Mercury-Scout canceled a t T minus 10 seconds a t
     Atlantic Missile Range because of mechanical difficulties, while
     record speed flight of X-15 was again prevented by cloud cover
     restricting instrumentation.
60     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

October 31 : At autumn meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in
    Los Angeles, Dr. Hilde Kallmann-Biji reported on Committee on
    Space Research report by an international studies roup on data
                                                         7
    discovered by Soviet and American satellites as we 1 as sounding
    rocket observations including those of Britain and West Germany.
    Findings indicated that 500 miles in space, temperatures may
    fluctuate l,OOOo F., and that the Earth's upper atmosphere has
    distinct day and night variations in density and pressure.
During October: A series of some 50 supersonic flights to analyze the
    characteristics, intensity, and air and ground effects of supersonic
    booms began a t Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., under joint
    sponsorship of the USAF, FAA, and NASA.
                         NOVEMBER 1961
November 1 : New organization of NASA headquarters became
     effective, which established four iiiajor program offices (Manned
     Space Flight, Space Sciences, Advanced Research and Tech-
     nology, and Applications), and provided center directors with
     direct line to the Office of the Associate Administrator.
        Reported that the DOD-NASA Golovin Committee was near
     agreement on hybrid solid-and-liquid fuel rockets for Dyna-Soar.
     Golovin Committee had been meeting for 3 months to work out
     families of large rockets for overall national space program.
        Mercury-Scout, testin global tracking network, wae destroyed
                            B
     by range safety officer a ter lift-off.
        Radiocarbon from nuclear tests had been useful in tracing
     movements of the atmosphere, reported Prof. Gordon S. Fer-
     gusson to the National Academy of Sciences. Studies since 1955
     showed that it took 1 year for carbon 14 to move from one
     hemisphere to the other, once it gets into the lower atmosphere.
        Scientists and engineers of Langley Research Center and
     the Space Task Group were guests of the Peninsula Chamber of
     Commerce honoring the 46 years of NACA and NASA on the
    Virginia Peninsula.
       Ballute (balloon braking system) reentry test of 500-pound
    Cree vehicle, launched by three-stage Nike rocket, reaching an
    altitude of 28 miles and a speed of near 1,900 miles per hour,
    a t E lin Air Force Base, Fla.
-U8AF Hound Dog missile launched successfully from B-52
    over Atlantic Missile Range and hit target area.
November 2: Lewis Research Center scientists, G. B. Brown and
    E. E. Callighan, reported a t 1961 International Conference on
    High Magnetic Fields a t MIT, that NASA was constructing a
    magnetic shield of superconducting alloys for future manned
    spacecraft .
  - British Skylark reached an altitude of more than 100 miles in
-
    third of four NASA firings to study ultraviolet radiation in the
    Southern Hemisphere.
       Navy Aerobee 100, which had been launched from water on
    October 24, recovered and overhauled, made its second successful
    launch at Point Mugu, Calif. This was the second successful
    launch of liquid-fuel rocket from the open sea, having been towed
     to sea, fueled horizontally, ballasted to float vertically, and
    ignited by remote control.
       Reported unnamed NASA spokesman stated that two inspec-
    tions of Gurtler-Hebert & CO.% renovation of the Michoud
    Ordnance Plant for NASA revealed no racial discrimination.
AYol;ember NASA announced start of a nationwide recruiting drive
           3:
    for 2.000 talented scientists and engineers.
                                                             61
 62     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

 November 3: Nine-nation Western European Conference in London an-
     nounced decision to launch a satellite in mid-1965, using a British
     Blue Streak first stage, a French Veronique second stage, and a
     West German third stage, from the Woomera range in A4ustralia.
 ___Lincoln Tlaboratory of MIT reported that examination of
     telemetry from Midas IV indicated that Project West Ford
     package of dipoles liad been ejected a t the expected time and the
     proper speed. No evidence was available as to whether the
     dipoles liad been released, and no radar reading had been obtained.
        Three Polaris A-2 missiles successfully fired within %hour
     period from submarine Ethan Allen.
 November 4: USAF Office of Aerospace Research symposium at LlTT,
     at which Dr. Otto Schmitt, of Northwestern University, reported
     that snails, worms, and one-celled paramecia had the ability to
     detect magnetic fields encountered on the surface of the Earth.
 November 5: USAF Discoverer XXXTV launched into polar orbit with
     recoverable capsule. Launch represented 22d successful in the
     Discoverer series.
 November 6: NASA informed Marshall Space Flight Center that
     management of the Agena B vehicle system would be retained
     at Marshall Space Flight Center.
        Department of Commerce issued a proposal by M I T researchers
 -_.



     on a science information network, entitled “An Experimental
     Communications Center for Scientific and Technical Informa-
     tion” (OTS, AD-255626). Proposed network included news-
     papers as well as radio and TV and recommended further research
     on a specific network to process, identify and retrieve scientific
     documents and information for dissemination.
        N. Varvarov, in Soviet newspaper, Ekonomicheskaya Gazeta,
     denounced the U.S. space program as using outer space for military
     purposes and cluttering the cosmos with an unnecessarily large
     number of satellites. Especially critical of the Discoverer series,
     the article said: “* * * the United States, pursuing an intensive
     arms race, is setting up an elaborate system of cosmic military
     intelligence communications and navigation. * * * Actually,
     this is banditry on an international scale. * * *”
 November 7: Explosion in hydrogen system canceled full-power run



c-   of AEC Kiwi B-1A reactor a t Jackass Flats, Nev. Five men
     were injured, and the reactor was not damaged.
        NASA announced award of a contract to North American
     Aviation Co. to study the feasibility of a large erectable manned
     space station based on Langley Research Center concept.
 November 8: Industry proposal to FCC for organizing a commercial
     communications satellite system critically reviewed in hearings
     of the Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business
     Committee.
 November 9: X-15 flown to announced record 4,070 miles per hour
     (later revised to 4,093) by Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force,
     in top-speed test flight, making safe landing with outer right
     windshield cracked.
                                                                       63
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

November 9: Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower in speech a t
    Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland, said:
       “I for one do not fully understand why, in the midst of a
    plethora of necessary and costly activities, our Nation should
    be required, urgently, to develop a capacity to put men on the
    Moon and challenge our principal opponent in doing so. * * *”
       Senate Small Business Committee concluded critical hearings
    on the FCC’s handling of the communications satellite project.
November 10: USAF Atlas with capsule containing squirrel monkey
    destroyed by range safety officer a t Atlantic Missile Range
    when main sustainer engine failed 15 seconds after launch.
       Reported that ONR-supported radio observatory a t Cal Tech’s
    Owens Valley, Calif., had expanded the radius of the observable
    universe 27 times (36 sextillion miles, the distance traveled by
    light a t a speed of about 186,000 miles a second in 6 billion years).
       I n reviewing NASA’s communications satellite programs, Ad-
    ministrator Webb pointed out that it had been speculated that
    the satellite system “may have progressed enough by 1964 that
    we shall be able to watch the Tokyo Olympic Games on television
    a t home.”
November 1 1 : NASA announced that top speed of X-15 on Major
    White’s record flight was revised to 4,093 miles per hour (mach
    6.04), reached a t 95,800 feet. (White also held altitude record of
    217,000 feet (41 miles), flown on October 11).
November 12: Mercury-Atlas 5, scheduled for launch no earlier than
    November 14, ran into technical difficulties, postponing launch for
    several days.
       Bell Aerosystems Co. announced design of a “practical zero
    gravity belt” to propel a man a short distance in space.
November 13: USAF announced that amateur radio communications
    satellite, assembled by Project Oscar Association, would be flown
    piggyback in future Discoverer vehicle.
November 13-22: International Meteorological Satellite Workshop
    held in Washington, D.C., attended by weathermen from 28
    nations, sponsored by NASA and the U.S. Weather Bureau to
    apply Tiros-acquired data to practical day-to-day weather
    prognosis.
November 14: United Arab Republic neither confirmed nor denied
    reports of November 8 that it had successfully launched its first
    rocket. Dr. Eugen Saenger of the Stuttgart Jet Propulsion Insti-
    tute in Germany denied any connection with the United Arab
    Republic program as charged by Israel.
       Soviet and bloc delegates from Czechoslovakia and Poland,
    who had previously accepted invitations, did not attend the
    NASA-Weather Bureau International Meteorological Satellite
    Workshop held in Washington ; telegram from Andre Zolotukhin
    received by Dr. Reichelderfer stated that “our representatives
    unable to participate,” but requested “dispatch of relevant papers
    if possible.”
November 15: Navy Transit IV-B and Traac (Transit Research
    Attitude Control) satellites launched into orbit by Thor-Able-
    Star a t Atlantic Missile Range.
- - USAF Discoverer XXXV launched into polar orbit with 300-
    pound recoverable capsule.
64     A E R O N A U T I C A L A N D A S T R O N A U T I C A L E V E N T S O F 19 6 1


 November 15: NASA Bios (biological investigation of space) payload
     launched by Argo D-8 booster rocket from Pacific Missile
     Range, but veered sharply off course 57 seconds after launch.
         Anniversary of the first flight of the USAF-USN-NASA X-15
     powered with the XLR-99 engine (15 flights total to date). A
     $225 million research program under NASA management, test
     data indicated that X-15 would exceed its design limits by 100
     percent in altitude and 17 percent in speed. The X-15 had
     already pushed near its design altitude limit of 250,000 feet
     (reached 217,000 feet October 11, 1961) and passed its maximum
     design speed of mach 6 (reached mach 6.04 November 9, 1961).
         NASA Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, D.
     Brainerd Holmes, said, in an interview, that at least 10 Apollo
     spacecraft wrould be ordered in the manned lunar vehicle prime
     systems contract to be awarded in December 1961.
        Army launched Speedball rocket successfully from the island
     of Roi-Namur on Kwajalein atoll in the Southwest Pacific, the
     first target rocket to be used in Nike-Zeus development.
November 16: Gold-plated capsule of Discoverer XXXV recovered
     after 18 orbits in midair over Fern Island by c-130 aircr:rft,
     Capt. James F. McCullough, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. It was
     the 10th recovery from orbit in the Discoverer series and the
     I st recovery observed from the ground.
-_      I n speech on “Scientists and Engineers in the Space Program,”
     Albert F. Siepert, NASA Director of Administration, outlined
     NASA’s basic policies on personnel. He pointed out that of
     NASA’s some 20,000 employees, only 4,000 had come to NASA
     through individual appointments, the remainder on transfer of
     organizations intact to NASA. NASA’s personnel utilization
     practices, Siepert said, were as follows: (1) Don’t use a scientist
     or engineer when another skill will do as well; (2) classify a man’s
     skills by what he actually does, rather than how he was formallv
     trained; (3) provide professional entrance into the Federal civil
     service through an examination which is work centered rat,her
     than academically oriented ; (4) take on-the-job training tirid edu-
     cation seriously; (5) encourage professional recognition outside
     the agency; and (6) recognize that job satisfaction depends upon
     the man’s continued interest in his work as well as his take-home
     pay.”
        William J . O’Sullivan, Jr., of Langley Research Center awarded
c__



     the Second NASA Invention and Contribution Award for con-
     ception and development of the inflatable space vehicle. Pro-
     posed in January 1956 to the U S . IGY Committee, O’Sullivan’s
     invention led to two successful NASA experiments, Echo I and
     Explorer TX, and US. Patent No. 2,996,212, entitled “Self-
     Supporting Space Vehicle ” issued to the NASA Administrator
     in behalf of the United States on August 15, 1961.
        Army Nike-Zeus antimissile rocket with active second stage
     successfully fired a t Point Mugu, Calif.
November 17: NASA announced selection of the Chrysler Corp. lor
     construction, test, and launch of 20 first-stage Saturn boosters
     a t its Michoud, La., fabrication plant.
        First USAF Minuteman successfully fired from silo a t Atlantic
- -
     Missile Range, making 3,000-mile flight.
                                                                    65
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

November 18: Ranger I1 placed into low orbit from Atlantic Missile
    Range by Atlas, but Agena second stage did not restart, leaving
    deep-space probe Ranger in parking orbit. Results reported to
    delay lunar-landing Ranger shot in early 1962.
       NASA announced that record Argo D-8 vehicle was launched
    with Bios payload from Point Arguello, but reentry capsule
    beacon signal had not been acquired by down-range recovery
    forces.
       Evidence of traces of living things in meteorites from space
    reaching Earth, reported in Nature magazine by George Claus
    of NYU and Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham, based upon dis-
    covery of five types of “organized structure” in the Orgueil mete-
    orite found in southern France in 1864, and the Ivuna meteorite
    that fell in central Africa in 1938.
       Reported from Moscow that U.S.S.R. was planning to orbit
    a man around the Moon in 1962, and that the U.S.S.R. had
    ICBM’s in being with 100-megaton warheads.
November 10: NASA announced the completion of the preliminary
    flight rating test of the Nation’s first liquid-hydrogen rocket
    engine. The engine, the RL-10, was designed and developed
    by Pratt and Whitney, of United Aircraft, for the Marshall
    Space Flight Center, and 20 captive firings were completed
    within 5 days under simulated space conditions, consistently
    producing 15,000 pounds of thrust. RL-10, previously known
    as XLR-115, was initiated in October 1958 and over 700 firings
    were conducted in its development.
       Navy Skylark balloon began coast-to-coast fli h t carr ing
    University of Chicago cosmic ray ex eriment, faunche1 a t
                                              f
    Brawley, Calif., and landing near Ashevi le, N.C., on November
    21.
November 20: NASA announced consolidation of nuclear-electric pro-
    pulsion program a t Lewis Research Center by transfer of the
    Marshall Space Flight Center Research Projects Division under
    Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger to Lewis within 3 months.
       Executive order of the President suspended the %hour limita-
    tion on construction workers in NASA. It stated that “a clearly
    leading role in aeronautical and space achievement has become a
    vital national objective,” and that it was essential to conduct the
    space program “with a major national commitment of manpower,
    material, and facilities,” and “with all possible speed and effi-
    ciency.”
       In news conference, Dr. Albert R. Hibbs, Jet Propulsion Lab-
    oratory’s Chief of Space Sciences, stated that it would be a “major
    accomplishment” if the United States were to overtake the Rus-
    sians in the race to the Moon, a ‘(less than 50-50 chance.” He
    pointed to the rumors that, the Soviet Union had already at-
    tempted to launch a probe to Mars.
       NASA Launch Operations Directorate announced establish-
    ment of Offices of Financial Management and of Procurement and
    Contracts to support NASA activities a t Cape Canaveral, pre-
    viously done by Marshall Space Flight Center.
November 20-91: Technical conference on the progress of X-15 re-
    search held a t Edwards Air Force Base, sponsored jointly by
    NASA, USAF, and USN; the third in H series, previously held in
    1956 and 1958.
66     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1 9 6 1

November $1: I n a speech on “Our National Program in Space,”
    NASA Administrator Webb said:
       “In carrying out its responsibilities, NASA cooperates with
    and depends upon private industry, universities, and many other
    Government agencies-not only the Department of Defense, the
    Atomic Energy Commission, and the Bureau of Standards, but
    the Weather Bureau, the Federal Communications Commission,
    the Federal Aviation Agency, the National Science Foundation,
    and others.
       “It has been only 4 years since the first manmade satellite
    orbited the Earth. Since then, progress in this new field of
    space has been tremendous. 1 believe that in the years ahead
    the rate of progress will trace H steeply ascending curve. 1
    believe also that the many problems we will solve to achieve
    manned exploration of space will create a wealth of new materials,
    consumer goods, processes, and techniques, thus opening a host
    of new jobs, careers, opportunities for investment, and a general
    national growth.
       “We can be first in space if we advance our scientific and
    technical knowledge a t the most rapid rate possible, and if we
    go forward with the sustained effort that it requires. That is
    the basis of our national space effort.”
       Titan ICBM launched from Cape Canaveral carrying target
    nose cone to be used in Nike-Zeus antimissile-missile tests. This
    was first Titan ICBM to be fired from Cape Canaveral by a
    military crew, AFBSD’s 6555th Aerospace Test Wing.
November $2: USAF launched an unnamed satellite with an Atlas-
    Agena booster from Point Arguello, Calif., in first unannounced
    U.S. satellite launching.
       An F4H Phantom I1 piloted by Lt. Col. Robert B. Robinson
    (USMC), claimed a new world speed record at Edwards Air
    Force Base, averaging 1,606.324 miles per hour.
November $3: Tiros I1 completed first year in orbit, still transmitting
    cloud-cover photographs of usable quality, although it has been
    expected to have a useful lifetime of only 3 months. Tiros 1      1
    had completed 5,354 orbits, and had transmitted over 36,000
    photographs.
       National Aeronautic Association notified Mrs. Constance Wolf,
    of Blue Bell, Pa., that her Texas-to-Oklahoma balloon flight of
    40 hours 13 minutes, 363.99 miles and 13,000-foot altitude estab-
    lished 15 women’s world records.
November 24: First four U.S. Nike-Cajun rockets arrived in Norway
    for use in research program off Andoeya Island early nest year.
       DOD announced that the Sdvanced Research Projects Agency
~-
    (ARPA) had selected Space Technology Laboratory (STL) to
    develop satellite system under Project Vela for detection of
    clandestine nuclear weapons in outer space.
___ Official Soviet films on the flight of Vostok I1 shown on nation-
    wide TV in NBC program, “Crossing the Threshold-Part I.”
November 25: Announced that the largest quartz lens ever ground
    had been completed by Bauscli CP- Lomb for use in NASA’s
    optical solar simulation system a t the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
    The lens is 36 inches in diameter, 6 inches thick at the center,
    and weighs 350 pounds.
                                                                        67
           AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

    November 26: Russian scientist, K. Florensky, reported in Komsomol
        Pravda that a comet’s head, not a meteorite or an interplanetary
        atomic weapon, caused the big explosion that jarred Siberia on
        June 30, 1908. The blast near the Hunguska River killed 1,500
        reindeer, felled trees over an area of 700 square miles, and was
        recorded on seismographs around the world.
    November 27: The United States presented an outline for a program
        for cooperation and control in outer space to the U.N. Committee
        on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in New York. This
        was the first committee meeting held since its membership was ex-
        panded from 18 to 24 nations by the General Assembly 2 years
        ago, the 7 Communist members refusing to attend until today.
        U.N. Delegate Charles W. Yost urged consideration of the US.
        proposals before the life of this Committee expired a t the end of
        the year. The US. proposals were: acknowledge that inter-
        national law and U.N. Charter extend to outer space; establish
        central registry for all space launchings and satellites; and share
        all information from weather satellites.
           USAF reported that Lincoln Laboratory’s Millstone Hill radar
        at West Ford, Mass., had made three sightings on November 3,
        13, and 15, which might be the missing package of 350 million
        copper needles launched into orbit on October 21.
           Senator Robert Kerr announced that he would introduce legis-
        lation to authorize private ownership of the U.S. portion of the
        proposed worldwide communications satellite system. His bill
        would create the “Satellite Communications Corp.” which the
        participating firms would buy.
           The Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation announced
        openings for 18 young scientists and engineers for graduate
        study in rockets, jet propulsion, space flight and space structures
        a t Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Aerospace Laboratory
        a t Princeton, and the Institute of Flight Structures a t Columbia.
        Established in 1949, Guggenheim fellowship program in the
        aerospace sciences has provided financial aid to 142 students to
        date.
            General Curtis E. LeMay, Chief of Staff, U S . Air Force, said
        in interview with U.S. News & World Report:
            “I think we’re a t the period of space technology that we were
        in aeronautical technology along about 1914. At that time no one
        could predict the type of weapon systems that the airplane was
        going to produce, or the transportation system that it would
        eventually produce. As a matter of fact, it was pretty much a
        laughing stock-a very expensive toy.
            “We, of course, initially did a very poor job in our development
        program to advance the science of aeronautics in this country.
        I hope we do a better job in space. At the present time we can’t
        predict what will eventually come out of research in space in the
        way of weapon systems or commercial vehicles or any other
        use that we might put space to. I am sure that men are going
        out into space. I’m sure that they’ll find useful things to do out
        there, and I’m sure that, unless something is done to preclude it,
        they’ll find things to fight over out there, too.”




?
68     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

 November 68: President Kennedy awarded the Harmon International
     Aviator’s Trophy jointly to the three X-15 test pilots. Tlic
     first joint award in the history of the trophy went to A. Scott
     Crossfield of North American, Joseph A. Walker of NASA, and
     Maj. Robert M. White, U.S. Air Force.
-        NASA selected North American Aviation to design and build
     a three-man Apollo spacecraf t leading toward eventual lunar
     landings and exploration of the Moon. Each proposal was evr~l-
     uated by a team of nearly 200 NASA and DOD specialists.
 November 69: Mercury-Atlas 5 launcli from Cape Canaverul placed
     Mercury spacecraft carrying chimpanzee “Enos” into orbit ; retro-
     rockets were fired on second rather than planned third orbit
     because of developing malfunction of attitude control system.
     Mercury capsule was recovered 1 hour and 25 minutes aiter water
     landing by the destroyer Stormes, and well-performing “Eiios”
     recovered in excellent condition. Project hlercury officials rirtmrd
     John H. Glenn :IS     prime astronaut for the first manned orbital
     mission with M. Scott Carpcntcr :is backup, and Donald S1:tyton
     as prime astronaut for second manned orbital mission with
     Walter Schirra as backup.
         President Kennedy, tiftrr giving lengthy answer to w question
     a tiis regular press conlerence, was handed t i note hg his press
      L
     secretary, which he read and then said:
         “Tliis chimpnnzee who is flying in space took off a t 10:08.
     He reports that everything is perfect and working well.”
         Thomas E”. Dixon, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, in
            11 before the Greater 110s Angeles Press Club, reviewed west
     coast space projects i ~ n dsiiitl:
         “All of these projects tire part of >L unified national program,
     which was accelerated earlier this year. I want to ernpliasize
     that this is a national program. I t is not just a NASA progrmi.
     I t is not just a governinent program. I t is a program to mobilize
     America’s manpower and resources to meet the gods wc have set
     for ourselves in space.”
         Soviet Cosmonaut Gagwin in New Delhi said tliat “we will
     riot have to wait long” for the first manned flight to the Moon.
     Gagyin was insking R 9 d a y visit to India.
-_       Air Force Officeof Aerospace Research (OAR) announced that
     its Office of Scientific Research had awarded 139 basic research
     grants and contracts worth almost $8 million so far this fiscal year.
November SO: Army fired its Pershing solid-fuel tactical missile from
     Cape Canaveral on a 200-mile flight, testing accuracy, warhead
     components, and blast and heat factors at launch in relation to
     operational crew protection. This was the seventh straight
     successful firing of the Pershing.
         Army successfully fired a Nike-Zeus antimissile missile from
     White Sands Missile Range in the first flight test of all three
     rocket motors.
 During November: Studies by General Electric’s S ace Sciences
                                                         R
     Laboratory, under NASA contract, disclosed that t e heat barrier
      encountered by vehicles returning from deep space will be a t
     least 2jk times more severe than previously estimated.
                                                                  69
      AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

During November: Textron’s Bell Aerospace Corp. completed 81 flight
    tests with cold gas one-man propulsion system in USAP (2-131
   aircraft flyin “Keplerian trajectories.”
               %
       National ureau of Standards established the Radio Refrac-
   tive Index Data Center a t its Boulder, Colo., laboratories, to
   correlate data from 300 reporting points on the variable refraction
   of radio waves a t specific times, heights, and locations.
       DOD revised its patent policy on space research and develop-
   ment contracts in accordance with present NASA patent pro-
   visions, such provisions already having been written into space
   communications contracts (i.e., Government retains royalty-free
   exclusive title to patents developed under contract).
       USAF announced expansion of gaseous physics research
   activities with the construction of a $636,000 laboratory a t
   L. G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, Mass., as a part of the Cambridge
   Research Laboratory.
       Project Rover, Project Pluto, and the U.S. under round nuclear
   test program were halted in Nevada by a jurisgctional strike
   between the Operating Engineers and the Plumbers and Pipe-
   fitters Unions.
      Representatives of 30 American aerospace firms in Europe
   formed an informal organization known as U.S. Aerospace
   Industries in Europe.
       Douglas Aircraft reported successful dro and recovery of a
   data capsule and camera that will be usec f to film inflation of
   Echo-ty e spheres as a part of Project Big Shot (the first phase in
   the NA8A program leadin to a global communication system
                              R
   usin rigidized inflatable sp eres equidistant and in orbit around
   the barth).
      Two-hundred-foot radiotelesco e of the Commonwealth
                                     B
   Scientific and Industrial Research rganization was commissioned
   a t Parkes, 200 miles west of Sydney, Australia. Slightly smaller
   than the British radiotelescope a t Jodrell Bank, the Parkes tele-
   scope is considered superior in surface accuracy and tracking
   control. It cost $1.8 million of which the Rockefeller Foundation
   and the Carnegie Cor . donated $500,000.
                         B
      USAF aircraft pro uced sonic booms on routine trainin
                                                                   1
   missions over major airlane intersections, in support of FA
   studies of supersonic air transportation problems.
                          DECEMBER 1961
December 1 : Three new world helicopter speed records were claimed
    by Capt. Bruce K. Lloyd, U S . Navy, and Comdr. E. J. Roul-
    stone, U.S. Navy, who flew an HSS-2 helicopter a t 182.8,179.5,
    and 175.3 miles per hour for 100, 500, and 1,000 kilometers, re-
    spectively, over a course along Long Island Sound between
    Milford and Westbrook, Conn.
       Nike-Zeus guidance system successfully passed initial flight
    test a t White Sands Missile Range.
       Navy-sponsored Hypersonic Propulsion Research Laboratory,
    for simulating flights a t speeds up to mach 10, was opened a t
    Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins University.
December 1-2: Two Roksonde meteorological sounding rockets were
    successfully fired from Cape Canaveral, telemetered measure-
    ments of winds and temperatures a t altitudes above 180,000 feet.
    Produced by Marquardt for the Army, Roksondes had already
    completed a series of tests at White Sands Missile Range and
    Pacific Missile Range.
December 2.- Twelve Canadian Black Brant rockets for upper-atmos-
    phere research were to be launched from NASA’s Wallops Sta-
    tion, Virginia, as the Canadian Defence Research Board shifted
    the firing site from Fort Churchill because a fire largely destroyed
    the Canadian facilities. Capable of carrying a 150-pound pay-
    load to an altitude of 150 miles, Black Brants were to be fired
    from Wallops a t the rate of two in December 1961, two in Febru-
    ary 1962, six in April 1962, and two in May 1962.
December 4: Ambassador Adlai Stevenson introduced a resolution
    before the U.N.’s Political Committee for a U.N. space program
    guided by four considerations: (1) Application of the principles
    of international law to outer space and celestial bodies to ensure
    against sovereignty claims in space; (2) making the U.N. a clear-
    inghouse for use of outer space, including information on satellite
    launchings and cooperation for peaceful use of outer space; (3)
    international cooperation on weather satellite information; (4)
    international cooperation on communications satellites.
       Ambassador Stevenson said: “There is a right way and a wrong
    way to get on with the business of space exploration. I n our
    judgment, the wrong way is to allow the march of science to be-
    come a runaway race into the unknown.
       “The right way is to make it an ordered, peaceful and coopera-
    tive and constructive forward march under the aegis of the United
    Nations.’’
       Reported from Cape Canaveral that Astronaut John H. Glenn,
    Jr., had moved into “ready room” quarters. NASA had made
    no announcement whether a man would ride in the next Mercury
    capsule.
       USAF fired a Blue Scout rocket from Point Arguello, Calif.,
    aimed at a point some 27,600 miles out in space and over the South
    Pole, to measure low-energy protons originating from the Sun.
      70
                                                                  71
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

December 6: A new world aircraft altitude record for sustained hori-
    zontal flight was claimed by Comdr. George W. Ellis, U.S. Navy,
    who flew an F4H Phantom I1 a t 66,443.8 feet over Edwards Air
    Force Base, Calif.
       AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO) selected
    the proposal of the Aetron Division of Aerojet-General Cop. as
    the basis for negotiating an architect and engineering contract
    for an $8 million downward-firing test stand for the Nerva engine.
    The Nerva would be used in nuclear rockets with a reactor derived
    from the Kiwi B test series.
       Reported by Drew Pearson that CIA had warned that Russia
    “is preparing to launch a man around the moon in 60 days.”
December 6: The first Project Mercury manned orbital flight, MA-6,
    was scheduled by NASA for early in 1962 after analysis of the data
    from the MA-5 chimpanzee orbital flight indicated that the Mer-
    cury-Atlas system and the tracking network were ready for
    manned orbital flight.
       Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., commander, U.S. Navy, and
    Virgil I. Grissom, captain, US. Air Force, were awarded the
    first astronaut wings (almost identical design of a shooting star
    imposed on the traditional pilot’s badge) in a joint ceremony by
    their respective services.
       U.S.S.R. raised its expenditure on science by 12 percent in its
    1962 budget. The Minister of Finance, Vasily Garbuzov, an-
    nounced that the 1962 expenditure on science would be 4,300
    million rubles ($4,773 million). Also announced was a 44-percent
    increase in the defense budget to 13,400 million rubles ($14,874
    million).
       Italian Air Force crew fired Jupiter IRBM from Atlantic
    Missile Range, the third such launching.
December 7: NASA postponed its projected manned orbital flight from
    December 1961 until early in 1962 because of minor problems
    with the cooling system and positioning devices in the Mercury
    capsule, Dr. Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, said
    in a Baltimore interview. (‘You like to have a man go with every-
    thing just as near perfect as possible. This business is risky.
    You can’t avoid this, but you can take all the precautions you
    know about.”
       Plans for the development of a two-man Mercury capsule were
    announced by Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA’s Manned
    Spacecraft Center. The two-man capsule, to be built by McDon-
    ne1 Aircraft Corp., would be similar in shape to the Mercury
    capsule but slightly larger and two to three times heavier. Its
    booster rocket was announced to be the USAF Titan 1 ,scheduled
                                                          1
    for flight test early in 1962. One of the major objectives in the
    two-man capsule program would be a test of orbital rendezvous,
    in which the two-man capsule would be put into orbit by the
    Titan I1 and would attempt to rendezvous with an A ena stage
                                                          8
    put into orbit by an Atlas rocket. Total cost for a ozen two-
    man capsules plus boosters and other equipment was estimated
    a t $500,000,000. Program name later announced as Gemini.
72     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1961

December 7: Power run completed the test series on the Kiwi B-1A
    reactor system being conducted a t the Nevada Test Site by
    AEC's Los Alnmos Scientific Laboratory. Fourth in a series of
    test reactors in the joint AEC-NASA nuclear rocket propulsion
    program, Kiwi B-1A was disassembled for examination a t the
    conclusion of the test runs.
       Second Atlas ICBM launched by SAC crew, from Vandenberg
--
    Air Force Base.
       Preproposal conference on the contract for design, research,
    development, fabrication, and testing of the reactor-in-flight-test
    (Rift) vehicle was held a t Marshall Space Flight Center. This
    vehicle would test-fly the Nerva nuclear engine now under de-
    velopment. Twenty-nine firms were invited to attend this pre-
    liminary conference at which they were furnished general infor-
    mation on the project. Interested firms would then have 30 days
    to file information on their capabilities and experience. Then a
    smaller number of firms would be invited to submit detailed bids.
    Purpose of the two-step evaluation was to enable firms not in a
    competitive position to avoid the expense of entering detailed
    proposals.
       United States and Soviet delegates to the United Nations
    informally discussed the question of the political makeup of the
    U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Cses of Outer Spacc and 011 a
    possible joint resolution in that Committee.
December 8: NASA selected Mason-Rust as the contractor to provide
    support services a t NASA's hlichoud plant near New Orleans,
    providing housekeeping services through June 30, 1962, for the
    three contractors who would produce the Saturn S-I and S-IB
    boosters and the Rift nuclear upper-stage vehicle.
       USAF fired an Aerobee sounding rocket from Point Arguello,
    Calif.,.out over the Pacific 1,300 miles high arid 900 miles toward
    Hawaii, at which point the rocket released three sets of flares to
    be photographed froni California, Hawaii, and Alaska. Purpose
    was to provide a more precise linowledge of the location of Hawaii
    with respect to the North American mainland by means of
    photogrammetric triangulation of the flare photos.
December 9: Solid-propellent rocket motor generating nearly 500,000
    pounds of thrust was fired in a static test of 80-second duration by
    United Technology Corp. a t Sunnyvale, Calif., under USAF
    contract.
       Nike-Zeus antimissile missile was fired from Point Mugu in
--
    its first low-altitude flight, going up to 40,000 feet and then out
    over the Pacific Missile Range at that altitude.
December 10: The Carnegie Institution issued annual report contain-
    ing several findings from its space scientists: Philip Abelson con-
    tended that it was a waste of time and money to sterilize vehicles
    going to the Moon or planets because any life there would be so
    unlike terrestrial life that it could not be contaminated by Earth
    organisms; Horace Babcock offered a theory on alternating spiral
    magnetic fields of the Sun that might explain sunspots, flares,
    and the 22-year magnetic cycle; other scientists noted growing
    evidence of major differences in chemical composition of distant
    stars, indicating a need to revise methods of computing distances
    to those stars.
                                                                   73
       AERONAUTICAL A N D ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

December 11 : The U.N.’s Political Committee unanimously approved
    a resolution calling on the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer
    Space to meet on March 31, 1962, to begin discussions of world
    cooperation in space. The resolution essentially incorporated
    the four-point U.S. program on the peaceful uses of outer space.
    The U.S.S.R. supported the resolution although it had previously
    rendered the Committee inoperative by boycotting its meetings.
        The national space program portends a major technological
    advance for mankind, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert
     C. Seamans, Jr., told the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce.
     Comparing its potential to that of the invention of the steam
    engine, Dr. Seamans noted:
        “Two aspects of such major advances are characteristic. First,
    the practical results are largely unforeseeable, primarily because
    they develop on broad fronts and, frequently, in unsuspected
    directions. Second, the concentration of effort required does not
    diminish effort expended on other frontiers of knowledge, but
    rather spurs such activities. For example, despite fears that
    space technology would monopolize the scientific effort of this
    country, such fields of activity as oceanography, geophysics, and
    the physics of high-energy particles have greatly increased since
    the national space effort has become a serious one.”
       Contract awarded by Army Engineers to Brown & Root, Inc.,
    for design of major portion of NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center
    a t Houston, Tex.
       Survey of leading space experts on US. space goals from 1970-
    75 by the North American Newspaper Alliance produced a con-
    sensus that the United States would establish a Moon base from
    which to thoroughly explore the Moon and to launch interplane-
    tary manned probes. Those interviewed included important
    figures in space industry, USAF, NASA, and space research.
December 1.2: Discoverer XXXVI was launched by the USAF into
    orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., with a piggyback
    10-pound Oscar (orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio) satel-
    lite aboard in addition to the Discoverer payload. Oscar was
    the first satellite built by private citizens to be put in orbit,
    transmitted Morse signal to world amateur radio operators.
       The National Center for Atmospheric Research was inaugu-
    rated a t Boulder, Colo. To include the facilities of the High
    Altitude Observatory of the University of Colorado, to be gov-
    erned by the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research,
    a corporation of 14 universities from coast to coast, and to be
    h a n c e d by the National Science Foundation, the center would
    provide a national attack on weather research, including the use
    of tools such as rockets, balloons, and computers too expensive
    for any one university to finance.
       USAF Atlas launched from Atlantic Missile Range carried
    piggyback package of 28 dummy fuel cells in a study of how
    metals evaporate on reentry.
       Army announced that track radar for Nike-Zeus antimissile
    missile had successfully tracked an Atlas ICBM on November 22
    from Ascension Island as well as Echo I 1,500 miles from Earth.

     82534--62-6
74     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 1

December 13: NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a speech
    in Cleveland that the United States would follow its first manned
    orbital flight in January 1962 with similar manned orbital flights
    every 60 days. These would gather data on effects of weight-
    lessness, needed to determine the pacing of the two-man flight
    program later on. Mr. Webb also forecast the launching of 200
    sounding rockets, 20 scientific satellites, and 2 deep-space probes
    in 1962.
       USAF completed Titan I research and development test flight
    program of 40 launches a t the Atlantic Missile Range; of the 40
    launches 4 had been failures.
December i4: NASA fired a four-stage solid-fuel Trailblazer rocket
    from Wallops Station, Virginia, in the first of a series of reentry
    tests. Two stages boosted the rocket to 167 miles; then the other
    two drove the nose cone down through the atmosphere at 14,000
    miles per hour.
       Nike-Zeus firing in extended range from Point Mugu attained
    all test objectives.
December 15: NASA’s Explorer XI1 satellite returned voluminous
    data revising previous information on the Van Allen radiation
    belts and showing them to be no substantial problem to manned
    space flight. Launched on August 15, 1961, and transrnitting
    until December 6, 1961, Explorer XI1 returned information
    amounting to 5,636 telemetry tapes (2,400 feet each). Of prin-
    cipal interest was its finding that the Van Allen belts consist of
    a preponderance of protons over electrons in a ratio of 1,000 to 1.
    Since the protons are of less than 1 million electron volts energy,
    they do not themselves offer a serious radiation problem and
    serve to slow the velocity of other radiation.
--     S-IB stage of the Advanced Saturn launch vehicle would be
    built by the Boeing Co., NASA announced. The $300 million
    contract, to run through 1966, called for development, construc-
    tion, and test of 24 flight stages, plus several for ground tests.
    Assembly would take place at the NASA Michoud Operations
    Plant, New Orleans, La. The S-IB would be the first stage of
     the vehicle that would launch the three-man Apollo spacecraft
     for direct circumlunar flight or, with rendezvous, for lunar landing.
       I n a ceremony at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., the USAF
    graduated its first class o five pilot-engineers from its school for
                                E
    space pilots. Graduates were awarded advanced technical degrees.
December 18: Dr. Robert Jastrow, Chief of Theoretical Division and
     Director of the Institute for Space Studies, Goddard Space Flight
    Center, making the 25th annual Wright Rrothers’ Lecture before
     the Institute of Aerospace Sciences, reviewed progress in the space
    sciences, said the most exciting and fruitful area thus far had
    been investigation of “solar control over the atmosphere of the
    Earth, causes of weather activity in the lower atmosphere, and
     the structure of the upper atmosphere.”
        NASA announced that the first station in a network of data-
     gathering stations for use with second-generation satellites had
     been completed near Fairbanks, Alaska. Site for the second of
     the $5 million installations, each with a high-gain antenna 85 feet
     in diameter, was announced to be Rosman, N.C., 40 miles south-
     west of Asheville.
                                                                    75
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

December 18: USAF awarded an additional $52 million contract to
    North American Aviation for development of a prototype B-70
    bomber, bringing to $267 million the amount allocated for the
    B-70.
       Capsule from Discoverer XXXVI was ejected from orbit after
    6 da s and a record of 64 orbits, landed in the Pacific near Hawaii,
        %
    was ept afloat by 3 USAF pararescue men until arrival of Navy
    destroyer.
       USAF Minuteman ICBM successfully fired from a silo and
    traveled 3,600 miles down the Atlantic Missile Range, the second
    consecutive successful silo launching.
       Successful test of a new way to steer large-size rockets was
    announced by United Technology Corp., an experimental method
    called liquid thrust vector control (TVC), in which a gas or liquid
    is spra ed into the exhaust path of a rocket engine, deflecting
    the e d a u s t and thereby turning the vehicle. The test was
    made with a 450,000-pound-thrust solid-fuel engine.
       DOD summary statement on the x-15 program stated that
    to that date there had been 45 flights of the x-15, with planned
    performance achieved on 42 and the prime research objectives
    achieved on 40. The 98-percent launch success record of the
    X-15 was attributed to ( I ) use of alternate modes for subsystems
    and (2) the presence of a pilot to detect malfunctions in sub-
    systems. This compared to a 43-percent launch record for an
    unmanned missile with no alternate modes in subsystems.
December 19: NASA announced that Ira H. Abbott, Director of
    Advanced Research and Technology, would retire in January
    after 32 years service with NACA and NASA. Beginning with
    the Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929, Abbott became
    internationally known for his aerodynamic research, in more
    recent years as supervisor of x-15, supersonic transport, nuclear
    rocket, and advanced reentry development programs.
December 19-20: A technical conference on problems of runway
    slush in winter jet operations was held in Washington under
    joint sponsorship of the Federal Aviation Agency and NASA.
    The conference, open to aviation representatives, reviewed the
    extensive research flight tests conducted a t FAA’s National
    Aviation Facilities Experimental Center and other experimental
    and theoretical work done a t NASA’s Langley Research Center.
    Interest in all experiments centered on the adverse effects of run-
    way slush on takeoff and landing characteristics of jet aircraft.
    Research findings were that on both takeoff and landing in heavy
    slush jetliners tend to act like “a sailboat without a keel,” that
    a t takeoff speeds heavy slush causes jetliners to lose the effect
    of nose wheel steering and most of their braking power. Recom-
    mendations included the devising of a quick and accurate means
    of measuring runway slush and suspension of jet operations when
    slush reached a depth of 1 inch.
December 2 : X-15 No. 3 made first flight, a successful test of new
           0
    automated control system, NASA’s Neil A. Armstrong as pdot
    in his first flight of XLR-99-engined X-15. At half throttle,
    X-15 reached speed of 2,502 miles per hour and an altitude
    of 81,000 feet.
76     AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

December 20: KASA announced that Douglas Aircraft had bcen
    selected for negotiation of a contract to modify the Saturn S-IV
    stage by installing a single 200,000-pound-thrust, Rocketdyne J-2
    liquid-hydrogenfliquid-oxygen engine instead of six 15,000-pound-
    thrust P. & W. hydrogenloxygen engines. Known as S-IVB,
    this modified stage will be used in advanced Saturn configura t‘ions
    for manned circumlunar Apollo missions.
__- Two new radiotelescopes, one at Cambridge University and
    the other at Jodrell Bank, would be constructed with grants from
    Britain’s Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
    totaling $3,360,000. The Cambridge telescope would consist,
    of three 52-foot paraboloidal aerials, two fixed and one rail-
    mounted, designed to examine A limited area of the sky with
    greater precision than present equipment. The Jodrell addition
    would be a 125-foot telescope to be used in conjunction with the
    present 250-foot telescope.
___ USAF launched Atlas ICBM from Cape Canaveral with it
    rhesus monkey in a side-mounted pod on a flight 5,000 miles long
    and 600 miles in altitude. The flight was intended to produce
    information on reactions to launch and reentry conditions much
    more severe than in human flights. The monkey survived the
    flight but recovery attempts failed.
___ In San Bernardino news conferericc, Gen. Bernard Schriever,
    U.S. Air Force, said: “I have never fclt we were behind Russia
    in missile development .”
December $1: Army Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully inter-
    cepted a Nike-Hercules missile flying a t over 3,000 miles per hour
    over White Sands Missile Range, while another Nike-Zeus
    made highest flight to date from Point Mugu and another Nike-
    Zeus was launched from Kwajalein Island in the South Pacific.
December $2: Unnamed USAF satellite launched from Point Arguello,
    Calif. The announcement said it was powered by an Atlas-
    Agena B combination and that the satellite was “carrying a num-
    ber of classified test components.”
       NASA selected Air Products & Chemicals to supply additional
    liquid hydrogen for west coast development projects, a $35 million
    contract to be negotiated for a &year period.
December 26: Development time schedule for Dyna-Soar was reduced
    when DOD authorized the USAF to move directly from €3-52
    drop tests to unmanned and then manned orbital flights. This
    eliminated the previous interim stage of suborbital flights to be
    powered by the Titan I1 booster. USAF announced it \vas
    canceling the Titan I1 development contract held by the Martin
    Co. and negotiating a new contract for a larger booster.
       Ten scientific organizations recommended that the American
    Association for the Advancement of Science create a new section
    to deal with scientific information and communication. The
    problem was seen to be one of an overabundance of informiition
    not accessible for the scientist, particularly in interdisciplinary
    science. Only three other new sections have been created in the
     American Association for the Advancement of Science in this
    century.
                                                                    77
       AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 19 6 1

December $7: The “race in space” between the United States and
    U.S.S.R. was the top news story of 1961, with the Berlin crisis
    running second, according to a poll of Associated Press member
    newspapers and radio stations.
       Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman of the Atomic Energy Com-
    mission, speaking before the American Association for the Ad-
    vancement of Science, said that although science had become a
    determining factor in national and international events, its
    effectiveness was hampered because educated men did not under-
    stand science. Yet, he said, science was truly a part of the
    humanities; “Who in our times can make an adequate criticism
    of life without knowledge of the ideals, the methods, the dynamics
    of science?”
       DOD and USAF revealed that the B-70 bomber may be re-
    designated RSB-70 (reconnaissance-strike-bomber) and its mis-
    sion changed from tracking known, fixed targets to seeking out
    and destroying unknown, hidden, or uncertain tar ets.
                                                        !f
       Dr. Carl Sagen, of University of California (Berke ey), disputed
    the “space seed” life theory in American Association for the
    Advancement of Science paper. “Panspermic” theory did not
    seem plausible in the light of the fierce environment of space and
    the vastness of the universe, he said.
December 28: Titan 1 ,an advanced ICBM and the booster designated
                      1
    for NASA’s two-man orbital flights, was successfully captive-fired
    for the first time a t the Martin Co.’s Denver facilities. The test
    not only tested the flight vehicle but the checkout and launch
    equipment intended for operational use.
December 29: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA,
    speaking in Denver before the American Association for the
    Advancement of Science, said: “The sheer magnitude of the
    manned lunar exploration program, amounting as it will to $3
    billion or more [in fiscal year 19631, represents a significant
    application of the Nation’s resources. These billions of dollars
    will be spent in the laboratories, workshops, and factories of the
    Nation and thus constitute a significant factor in the Nation’s
    employment and economy generally. The personnel in the
    space program are not all scientists and engineers but come from
    every walk of life.
       “The ultimate and practical purpose of these large expendi-
    tures is twofold: (1) Insurance of the Nation against scientific
    and technological obsolescence in a time of explosive advances in
    science and technology; and ( 2 ) insurance against the hazard of
    military surprise in space.”
       Dr. Joseph F. Shea was appointed Deputy Director for Systems
    Engineering, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA headquarters,
                to D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA’s Director of Manned
    reportinf
    Space F ight. Dr. Shea came to NASA from Space Technology
    Laboratories.
       Dr. Arthur Rudolph was appointed Assistant Director of
    Systems Engineering in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight.
    Operating out of the Marshall Space Fli h t Center, Dr. Rudolph
                                             f
    would serve as liaison between vehicle evelopment a t Marshal!
    and the manned space flight program a t the Manned Spacecraft
    Center in Houston.
78    AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS OF 1 9 6 1

December SO: Navy HSS-2 Sea King helicopter flown a t 199 miles per
    hour for 3-kilometer distance claimed world record a t Windsor
    Locks, Conn., by Commander P. L. Sullivan, U.S. Navy, and
    Capt. D. A. Spurlock, U.S. Marine Corps.
December SI: NASA established a Management Council to ensure the
    orderly and timely progress in the manned space flight programs.
    The Council, composed of senior officials from NASA head-
    quarters, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Manned Space-
    craft Center, and chaired by D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of
    the Office of Manned Space Flight, would meet a t least once a
    month to identify and resolve problems as early as possible and
    to coordinate the interface problems.
       Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator)
    said in a radio interview that a second Venus probe had been
    added to NASA’s 1962 program as insurance for the first probe
    scheduled in August. Both probes would be the Mariner R,
    the reduced-weight version resorted to because of time slippage
    in the Centaur booster program. Dr. Seamans also said the
    United States plans three attempts to land instrumented packages
    on the Moon in 1962.
During December: General Electric announced operation of the largest
    solar therinionic power system a t GE’s solar test facility near
    Phoenix, Ariz. Early tests generated an output of 12.18 watts
    and unit has potential efficiency of 15 to 20 percent of the total
    solar energy input.
       West German Post Office indicated that it would construct
    near Munich a round station capable of handling up to 600
                     B
    phone calls simu taneously for operations in late 1963 or early
    1964 with Telstar and Relay type satellites.
       Japan’s launch facilities for its rocket research program would
    be moved from Akita on the northwest coast of Honshu to Kago-
    shima on the southern tip of Kiushu, according to an announce-
    ment by Hideo Itokawa at the Thul International Symposium
    on Rockets and Astronautics in Tokyo.
       USIA reported that U S . space achievements were a leading
    item in their overseas information program and covered all media.
    USTA concluded : “The policy of ‘openness’ observed in both
    U.S. manned space flights during the year dramatized the basic
    difference between the American open society and the Soviet
    closed society, and drew widespread approval from commentators
    throughout the free world. The availability of full information
    about the events through all news media, together with the pres-
    ence of foreign correspondents- who gave firsthand, on-the-spot
    coverage- enabled oversea audiences to achieve a high degree of
    self-identification with one of the greatest adventures of our
    times. )’
                         APPENDIX A
SATELLITES,     SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED                     SPACE
              FLIGHTS-A CHRONICLE FOR 1961
   The following chart was prepared from open public sources by
Dr. Frank W. Anderson, Jr., Deputy NASA Historian. Sources
included “Satellite Situation Reports” prepared by the Space Opera-
tions Control Center a t Goddard Space Flight Center and the “Space
Activity Summaries” prepared by NASA’s Office of Public Informa-
tion. Russian data are unofficial.
   It is a characteristic of documenting space flights that the data
processing of telemetry requires time, sonietimes in the order of
months, until scientific results are available. The documentation of
such results thus remains a problem resolutely attacked but not fully
solved. Comments are invited.
                                                             79
___
                                                                                                                                          Period                   Inclina-
                                                                                                                            Perigee
                                                                                                        Apogee
Launcl                    hternationa
                                                                                                                                                                                                Remarks
                                                                                                                                         (minutes)                   tion
                                                                                                                           (SVdtUtc
                                           Vehicle                    Payload data                      (statute
              Name         designation
 date
                                                                                                                            miles)
                                                                                                         miles)
                                                                                                                                         ______
  1961
                                                                                                                                                                             __ -
                                                                                                                  __                             - - - - --       97.40- -          Ne a r c i r c u 1a r p o 1a r orbit
                                                                                                                                         94.9.
                                                                                                       340 .-.-. 295
                                          Atlas-           Total weight: 4,100 pounds, includ-
          3amos I1
Jan. 31                   1961 Alpha                                                                                                                                                      ~




                                                                                                                                                                                     achieved.
                                                        ing 2d-stage casing.
            (United                        Agena.
                            1.
                                                           Objective: Determine capabilities
            States).
                                                        for making observations of space, the
                                                        atmosphere, and the nature of the
                                                        globe from satellites.



                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                           Payload: Photographic and related
                                                        test equipment.
                                                                                                                                         89.8- - -. - 64’ to
                                                                                                                                                  --                                Decayed on Feb. 26, 1961.
                                                           Total weight: 14,292 pounds.                          138.75---.
                                          Not dis-                                                     203.56- __.
          3putnik IV      1961 Beta 1.
                                     .
Feb. 4
                                                                                                                                                        Equn-
                                                           Objective: Develop and place heavy
                                           closed.
           (U.S.S.R.).
                                                                                                                                                                    tor.
                                                        space vehicle in precise orbit.
                                                           Payload: Not disclosed.
                                                                                                                                                _______
                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                            - - L23.-.-.                                                            Decayed on Feb. 25, 1961.
                                                                                                                                                                  Not dis-
                                                                                                                                         89.7
                                           . do..          Total weight: Not disclosed.                198._._.
                                          -. .
          3putnik V       1961 Gam-
     12                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                   closed.
                                                           Objective: Test injection of probe
           (U.S.S.R.).      ma 3.
                                                        into interplanetary orbit.
                                                           Payload: Venus probe.
                                                                                                                                         300 days . . 0.581- - _ _ .
                                                                                                       i.nioo as-                                  .
                                                                                                                           .7183 as-
                                                           Total weight: 1,419 pounds.
                                          Sputnik
                          1061 Gam-
          Venus probe
                                                                                                                            tronom
                                                           Objective: Probe in vicinity of Ve-           tronom-
                            ma 1.          V.
           (1J.S.S.R.).
                                                                                                                            ical
                                                        nus; test long-range communications;             ical
                                                                                                                            unit.
                                                        provide measurements and observa-                units.
                                                                                                                                                                                     15, 1961. Was predicted by
                                                        tions of solar S V S ~ ~ N .
                                                        ..
                                                                                                                                                                                     U.S.S.R. to pass within 62,500
                                                           pLlyloUi: ~~,iiL~ment rnwsiiie
                                                                                       to
                                                                                                                                                                                     miles of Venus on May 19-20,
                                                        cosmic rays, miignetic fields, chargv 1
                                                                                                                                                                                     1961.
                                                        pxticles of interplanetwy g.15 :ind
                                                        corpuscular sunbeams, and to rword
                                                        micrometeor impacts.
                                                                                                                                                                                    1st satellite orbited by all-
                                                           Total weight: 80 pounds, including                     305 .
          Explorer IX     1961 Delta I.   Scout---.                                                    1,605- _ _ _.-...-
     16
                                                                                                                                                                                      solid-fuel rocket; first satellite
                                                        lbpound sphere and 65 pounds of
           (United
                                                                                                                                                                                      orbited from Wallops Station.
                                                        ejection, inflation, telemetry, and
           States).
                                                                                                                                                                                      Radio beacon on bdloon satel-
                                                        ot,hernnninment.
                                                               -l--r------
                                                                                                                                                                                      lite never operated, requiring
                                                           Objective: Study performance of
                                                                                                                                                                                      optical tracking. Early results:
                                                        Scout research rocket; orbit inflatable
                                                                                                                                                                                      at 700 kilometers, atmospheric
                                                        sphere to measure atmospheric den-
                                                                                                                                                                                      density was measured as
                                                        sity.
                                                                                                                                                                                      3x10-17 gram per cubic centi-
                                                           Payload:        3.65-meter     inflatable
                                                                                                                                                                                      meter.
                                                        sphere of milar and aluminum foil;
                                                        radio beacon, 280 solar cells. and min-
                                                        iature batteries..
                                                        .~ . . . ~.
                                                           .-       .
                                                                                                                                                                                    Near-polar orbit achieved; cap-
                                                           Total w~ight:1.45ilpounds      includirig
          Discoverer XX                                                                                486. _ -. L i i . - - - - -
                                          Thor-
                          1961 Epsilon
     17                                                                                                      ..
                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                     sule could not be recovered
                                                        Ztl-stdge c s i n g :bnd 3OU-pound reentry
                                           Agenn
           (United          1
                                                                                                                                                                                     because of equipment mal-
                                                        capsule, retrnrockrt, :ind rt’wvory aids.
                                           B.
           States).
                                                                                                                                                                                     function in satellite. Still in
                                                           Objective: ISvnluition of h g t m i 1%
                                                                                                                                                                                     orbit, Jan. 2, 1962.
                                                        satellite and of modified satellite
                                                        stabilization system.
                                                           Payload: As above, plus 4 silicon
                                                        samples to test effects o highenergy
                                                                                     f
                                                        protons on silicon used on transistors
                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                        and solar cells.
                                            ____ -.                                                                                       Near-polar orbit achieved; 1st
                          1961 Zeta 1-   .-do
         Discoverer XXI                                  Total weight: 2,200 pounds (approx-             140_ _ _ _97.8 . _   30.740 to
                                                                                                                  D3.8; _
    I8
                                                      imately).
          (United                                                                                                   nfter       Equa-      successful restart of Agena
                                                                                                                                           engine in space was made
                                                         Objective: Collect data on atmos-                                      tor.
          States).                                                                                                  restart.
                                                                                                                                           while satellite was in orbit.
                                                      pheric phenomena and infrared radia-
                                                      tion in s u w o r t of USAF early                                                    Satellite still in orbit.
                                                      warning sateiljtes.
                                                         Payload: Not disclosed.
                                                                                                         _______       - - _-
                                                                                                                            - B.360 to
    21   Transit 111-I3   1961 Eta 1.    Thor-           Total weight: 250 pounds.                       117      64.5.                   Orbit achieved was elliptical
                                    .
          and h f t i                       Ablc-        Objective: Test of all-weather global                                  Equa-      instead of near circular as
                                            Star.     navigational satellite system for ships                                              intended and hampered qual-
           (United                                                                                                              tor.
                                                      and aircraft.
          States).                                                                                                                         ity of Transit data; the 2 satel-
                                                         Payload: 38inch sphere rjnged with                                                lites failed to separate as
                                                                                                                                           planned but both transmitters
                                                      6,600 solar cells and containing 2 trans-
                                                                                                                                           functioned. Decayed on Mar.
                                                      mitters, command system, memory
                                                      system, telemetry system, despin                                                     30, 1961.
                                                      system, SECOR experiment.
                          . - - -. -     .- - - -. -.    Total weight: 67 pounds.
                                 ..              .
                                                         Objective: Measure intensity of
                                                      very low frequency signals coming
                                                      through the ionosphere.
                                                         Payload: %inch sphere containing
                                                      telemetry and transmitting equip-
                                                      ment and 2 very low freouencv
                                                                                  ~~



                                                      receivers.
                                                                                             _______
Mar. 9                                                   Total weieht: 10.340 nonnds.
         Spacecraft I V   1961 Theta     Not dis-                                                                 Not dis-
                                                                                                         115_ _ _ . _ _ _ dis-Vot         Orbit achieved, cwsule said
                                                                                                 156
                                                         Objective- Testing of structure and
                                           closed.
           (U.S.S.R.).                                                                                                                     recovered in predetermined
                           1.                                                                                       closed.     closed
                                                      systems for manned spaceship, in-                                                    area in U.S.S.R. on Mar.
                                                      cluding exposure of animals to cos-                                                  9, 1961; animal passengers rc-
                                                      mic radiation.                                                                       ported alive and well
                                                         Payload: Telemetry and television
                                                      equipment; reportedly carried 1 dog,
                                                      guinea pigs, black mice, insects, and
                                                      plant seeds.
                                                                                                 ___
                                         Thor-
         E lorer X        1961 Kamm                      Total weight: 79 pounds.               145,ooU                                   Orbit achieved, transmitters
          x                                                                                              100. _ ._I12 hours. 120 to
    25                                                                                                          __.
                                            Delta.       Objective: Gather definitive data                                                 functioned continuously for 60
                           1.
           (#kited                                                                                                              Equa-
                                                      on interplanetary and Earth's mag-                                                   hours; data supported theory
           States).                                                                                                             tor.
                                                      netic flelds and their interplay with                                                that interplanetary magnetic
                                                                                                                                           field near Earth is mainly ex-
                                                      solar plasma.
                                                         Payload: 13-inch sphere connected                                                 tension of Sun's magnetic
                                                      by tube to 19-inch cylinder; magne-                                                  flcld.
                                                      tometer, 2 fluxgate magnetometers,
                                                      plasma probe optical aspect sensor,
                                                      transmitter, ahd chemical batteries.
                                                                                                         _______
         SlwXcraft v                                                                             150__.___.
                          1961Iota 1..   Not dis-        Total welght: 10,330pounds.                                          M"64' to    Orbit achieved. cabin reported
                                                                                                                  Calcu-
    25                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                          1
           (U.S.S. R.).                    closed.       Objective: Further test of structure                                   Equa-
                                                                                                                    lated at               recovered in predetermined
                                                      and systems for future manned space-                                      tor.       area in U.S.S.R., with animal
                                                                                                                    88.4.
                                                      ship including capsule recovery with                                                 passengers alive a n d well.
                                                      ani&& aboard.
                                                         Payload: Radio tracking and com-
                                                      munications equipment; T V to report
                                                      on condition of animals; animal pas-
                                                      sengers, including at least 1 dog.
                                                                                                                                      Inclina-
                                                                                                                         Period
                              iternatioi
Launch
                                                                                                                                        tion                   Reniarks
                                              Vehicle                                                                  (innlute!
                              designatio                              Payload data
 date            Name


  1961
                                                                                                                                __
                                                                                                   382_ _ _ _ . _ _ _-                      to      Orbit achieved, capsule sepa-
                                             Thor-           Total weight: 2,100 pounds, includ-                    101.2-           31'94'
             Discoverer       961                                                                          126__..._.
Apr.     8
                                                                                                                                                     rated from Agena in orbit;
                                                                                                                                       Equa-
              XXIII            Lambda         Agena       ing Zd-stage casing and 300-pound re-
                                                                                                                                       tor.          capsnle failed to return to
                                                          entry capsule, retrorocket, and recov-
              (United                          B.
                               1.
                                                          e-m aidp                                                                                   Earth because of stabilization
              States).                                    --
                                                                                                                                                     problems.
                                                             Objective: Test of Agena B satel-
                                                          lite, especially changes in guidance
                                                          stabilization, and propulsion for iml
                                                          proved control of orbital period.
                                                             Payload: Reentry capsule with
                                                          retrorockets and recovery aids; exter-
                                                          nal liehts for trackine exoeriment.
                                                                                                                                     $5.07' to
                                                                                                                      89.1 . .                      Orbit achieved; spacecraft and
                                             Not dis-        Tofalw&ghc: 10,418 pdunds.
             Vostok I         961 MU 1                                                             187.66_ _ _ . _ _ _ . -..
                                                                                                             108.76 _
       12
                                                                                                                                       Equa-         pilot Maj. Yuri Qagdriu re-
                                              closed.        Objective: Placingof manned space-
              (U.S.S.R.).
                                                                                                                                                     coveied safely after 1 orbit of
                                                                                                                                       tor.
                                                          craft in orbit and recover man and
                                                                                                                                                     the Earth.
                                                          spacecraft.
                                                             Payload: In addition to man, life-
                                                          support equipment, radio and televi-
                                                          sion to relay information on condition
                                                          of man.
                                                             Total weight,: A2 noiinds                                                              Orbit achieved, with all equip-
                                             Juno I1 (4
             Explorer X I                                                                                                            28.80..
                              961 Nu I.                                                                               108.1..
                                                                                                   1,113.2.
       27                                                                                                                                      ..
                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                ..
                                                             O b ~ e & i drbi&g- 8-gamma-ray                                                         ment functioning normally.
                                                                         ~e~
              (United                         stages).
                                                                                                                                                     Preliminary analysis of data
              States).                                    telescope to detect high-energy gamma
                                                                                                                                                     from gamma-ray telescope
                                                          rays from cosmic sources and map
                                                                                                                                                     measuring intensity of gamma
                                                          their distribution
                                                                                                                                                     radiation rules out 1 version
                                                             Payload: 1% by 23).$-inch octagonal
                                                                                                                                                     of steady-state cosmology in
                                                          satellite mounted on 8 bv 20%-inch
                                                                                                                                                     which matter and antimatter
                                                          instrument column; gamma-ray tel-
                                                                                                                                                     were held to be created simul-
                                                          escope, Sun and Earth sensors, micro-
                                                          meteorite shield temperature sensor                                                        taneously. If this were correct
                                                                                                                                                     the intensity of gamma radia-
                                                          damping mechanism. 2 radio trans:
                                                                                                                                                     tion would have been 1000
                                                          mitters, solar cells, a i d batteries.
                                                                                                                                                     times greater than it meas4ed.
                              ---- -- - --                                                          . --
                                                                                                   . -. .
             Freedom 7                                                                                                                              Suborbital flight achieved. As-
                                             Mercury-       Total weight: 2,100 pounds (ap-
May 5
                                                                                                                                                     tronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr.
                                              Red-        proximate) including man.
               (M R-3)
                                                                                                                                                     went to 115, miles altitude:
                                                            Objectiv;: Putting a man into sub-
               (United                        stone.
                                                                                                                                                     landed 297 miles down ranee.
               States).                                   orbital flight and recovering man and
                                                          Spacecraft.
                                                            Payload: In addition to man, life-
                                                          support systems radio and telemetry
                                                          equipment to rlport dn condition of
                                                          man.
                                                                                                                                                     Champlain.
                                                                                                   161.6. -
June 16      Discoverer                      Thor-                                                                                   32.110 to
                              961 Xi I.                     Total weight: 2,100 pounds (approxi-                                                    Orbit achieved, capsule ejected
                                                                                                                      90.87.. ..
              X X V (United                                                                                                            Equa-         from orbit and recovered from
                                              Agena       mately) including Zd-stage casing and
                                               n.
              States).                                                                                                                 tor.
                                                          300-podd reentry capsule with retro-                                                       sea that same day north of
                                                          rockets and recovery aids.                                                                 Hawaii.
                                                            Objective: Testing of recently
                                                          changed components in Agena €3 im-
                                                          proving control of orbital period.
                                                     Payload: Rare and common metals
                                                   for study of effects of spaw environ-
                                                   ment. radiation and micrometeorite
                                                   meashring instruments.
            'ran& IV-A
       29                1961 Omi-      Thor-         Totalweight: No 1 175 pounds;No. No. 1,623                               6' to
                                                                                                            No. 1.              7           Orbit achieved hut satellites 2
              (United                              2,M pounds; No. 3 4b pounds.
                           cron 1.       Able-                                               Nos. 2                               EqW-       and 3 a paredtlyfailed to sepa-
                                                                                                              103.7;
              States).                   star.                               of 3 satellites
                                                      Objective: Orbi                        and 3            Nos. 2
                                                                                                  ,                                          rate; t& aomewhat damaged
                                                                                                                                 tor.
                                                   NO 1 to develop%weather            global 634.             and 3,                         the uality of transmissi5n.
                                                                                    'IV-A).
                                                   nakgation system (-sit                                                                    f i a n s l t IV-A was 1st satellid
                                                                                                              138
                                                                                                               0..
                                                   NO. 2 to measure solar X-ray radiatio;                                                    to use nuclear generator.
                                                   'Greb III). No 3 to measure cosmic                                                        " r d t IV-A data established
                                                   h i a t i o n &d id intensity (Injun).                                                    that the Earth's equator is
                                                      Payload: No 1 memory system and                                                        elliptical rather than round
                                                   electronic clock itransmitters NO 2                                                       there being 8 1000-foot differ:
                                                   2 X-ray detectoh, 1 transmittei; Nd. $                                                    e n w between the lo est and
                                                   12 particle and proton detectors, 1                                                       shortest equatorial 3ameter.
                                                   transmitter.                                                                              This difference if not allowed
                                                                                                                                             for, would hect satellite
                                                                                                                                             orbits.
                                                                                                                   ___ - - -
                                                                                                 __
July        Uscoverer
        7                1961 Pi 1.-.                  Total weight: 2,100 pounds (approxi- 503-- - -.
                                        Thor-                                                               D5--               8 . 3 to
                                                                                                                                29'         Orbit achieved, capsule ejected
            XXVI                         Agena      mately) including 2d-stage w l n g and                                        Equa-      some 3 hours later, recovered in
            (United                      B.         300-pound reentry capsule with retro-                                         tor.       midair northwest of Hawaii
            States).                                rockets and recovery aids.                                                               after 32 orbits.
                                                       Objective: Evaluating of Agena I3
                                                    and new changes in components; in,-
                                                    proving of control of orhitni period;
                                                    ejection and recovery of capsule. I
                                                       Payload: Chemical elenients in-
                                                   cluding silicon iron b i s d u t b
                                                    yttrium, to hetesthdforehcctsofs W !   I
                                                   environment; erosion gauge; mkro-
                                                    meteorite detector.
                                                                                                      __          _______
            lidas I11
       12                1%l Sigma 1    Atlas D-      Totnl wcieht: 3 600 pounds (approx- 1,850- - -                           Not avdil-
                                                                                                            IGO                             Orbit achieved almost perfectly
             (United                     Agena     imuteiy) includi& entire 2d stage.                                           able.        circolar~higdest orbit to date
             States).                    B.            Objective: Testing systerti for giohal                                                heaviest U.S. satellite to date:
                                                   detection of missile iaunchings.
                                                       Payload: Sensor telemetry and
                                                   communications ebuipment; hetails
                                                   not released.
                                                                                                       __            ____
            'iros I11
       12                1%1 Rho 1-, Thor-                                                    500.44. -
                                                      Total weight: 285 pounds.                                                47.89 to
                                                                                                            m.4-                            Orbit achieved, cameras and
                                         Delta.       Objective: Further development of                                          Equa-       infrared equipment trans-
                                                   satellite weather observation system;                                         tor.        mitted good data.
                                                   photographing Earth's cloud cover
                                                   and transmitting it to Earth foranaly-
                                                   sis measuring solar energy absorbed
                                                   reflected, and emitted by the'Earth:
                                                      Payload: 42- by Isinch cylinder
                                                   containing 2 wide-angle cameras 6
                                                           recorders and electronic clodks.
                                                   tn
                                                   i n E r e d mneras, 6 transmitters, at-
                                                   titude sensors.
__
                                                                                                                                                  Incliira-
                                                                                                                                   Period
                                                                                                                     l'erigee
                                                                                                    Apogee
Launcl                         nternation:
                                                                                                                                                                             Reniarks
                                                                                                                                  :minutes)         tion
                                                                                                                     (statute
                                                                     Payload data                   (statute
                                               Vehiclc
                               designation
 date              Name
                                                                                                     miles)           miles)
____
  1361
                                                                                                                                                       Flight successful, rc;ioliine alli-
                                                                                                                                                 .__.___.-.
                                                           Total weight: 2.100 ponnds.
                                              Mercury-
Jrily 21      Liberty Bcll 7
                                                                                                                                                         tude of 118 miles and ranSe of
                                                            Ohjective: Further testing of Mrr-
                                               Red-
                (MR-4)
                                                                                                                                                         303 miles. Pilot Virgil I.
                                                         cury eapsnlc and life-support system
                                               stone.
                (United
                                                                                                                                                         Orissoin recovered, capsrile
                                                         in inannetl Aiyht, prcliininxy to
               States)
                                                                                                                                                         partially flooded and lost.
                                                         orbiting man.
                                                                                                                                                         This was the 2d sricccssful
                                                            Payload: In addition to nmn, cap-
                                                                                                                                                         manned suhorbital flight.
                                                         sule, and life-sripport system, radio,
                                                         and telemetry to report on condition
                                                         of man.
                                                                                                                                  18.ti. - . .                  Orbit achieved; after 17% orbits.
                                                                                                                                                 64'5'36"L
                                                                                                            110.3.---.
                                                                                                   115.3...-~
                                                           Total weight: 10,430 pounds.
                                              Not dis-
                               lye1 Tau 1.
              Vostok I1                                                                                                                     ..
Aiig.    C
                                                                                                                                                                 spacecraft returned to Earth
                                                            Ohiective: Orbit manned snacccraft
                                               closed.
               (W.S.S. It.)
                                                                                                                                                                 and both cralt and pilot (Maj.
                                                         for some 17 orhits and recovir snacc-
                                                                                                                                                                 Gherman Titov) successfully
                                                                                                                                                                 recovered.
                                                         lessness.
                                                            Payload: In addition to man, in-
                                                         cluded life-support equipment, radio,
                                                         television. and telemctrv to renort on
                                                         condition of man, tape record&, auto-
                                                         matic and manual control equipment.
                                                                                                                                                                Ceased transmitling I k c . li, 1Y61,
                                                                                                                     180. . . . LO Iiorirs.      33.30..
                                                            Total weight: 83 pounds.               47,800..                                                ..
                                                                                                                                                            .
              E:\plorcr XI1    I961 Upsiloi                                                                              . ..
                                                                                                               -.
        li
                                                                                                                                                                 after 1,6M),000,000 bits of data.
                                                                                                                                  25 rnin-
                                                            Ohjective: Investigating solar wind,
                (United         1.
                                                                                                                                                                 Preliminary analysis of 10 per-
                                                                                                                                  utrs.
                                                         interplanetary magnetic fields, distant
                States)
                                                                                                                                                                 cent of data indicated Van
                                                         parts of the Earth's rnagnetic field.
                                                                                                                                                                 Allen belts really 1 magneto-
                                                         energetic particles in interplanetary
                                                                                                                                                                 sphere-charged particles
                                                         space and in the Van Bllen radiation
                                                                                                                                                                 trapped in Earth's magnetic
                                                         belts.
                                                                                                                                                                 field; extends from 400 to 30,000
                                                            Payload: 27- b y 19-inch cone with
                                                                                                                                                                 or 40,000 miles out, with abrupt
                                                         magnetometer boom and 4 solar-cell
                                                                                                                                                                 outer boundary, topped by
                                                         paddles; 10 particle detection systems
                                                                                                                                                                 20,000-kilometer electromag-
                                                         measuring proton and electron activ-
                                                                                                                                                                 netic turbulence. Magneto-
                                                         ity and its relationship to magnetic
                                                                                                                                                                 sphere's outer portion mostly
                                                         fields; optical attitude sensor; 1 trans-
                                                                                                                                                                 lowenergy protons, jts elec-
                                                         mittrr.
                                                                                                                                                                 trons having less intensity
                                                                                                                                                                 than previously indicated;
                                                                                                                                                                 lower portion still dominated
                                                                                                                                                                 by high-energy protons.
                                                                                                              - ..                31.1. . .                     Orbit achieved was low, oval
                                                                                                                     105.3...
        L':                                                                                                                                      32.9O..
                                              Atlas-                                               312.5..
                               1961 Phi 1.                                                                                             ..                  -.   ~
              Ranger I                                                                                                       ~~




                                                                                                                                                                 Earth orbit rather than deep
                                               Agena
               (I Jnited
                                                                                                                                                                 space probe as planned; test of
                                                B.
               States).
                                                                                                                                                                 spacecraft achieved, hut many
                                                         measuring cosniic rays, radiation,
                                                                                                                                                                 of the desired interplanetary
                                                         dust; checking on whether Earth is
                                                                                                                                                                measurements could not be
                                                    followed by cometlike trail of hydro-
                                                                                                                                                                made. Reentered Aug. 29,
                                                    gen gas.
                                                                                                                                                               1961.
                                                       Payload: 5- by 11-foot cone contain-
                                                    ing equipment for measuring solar
                                                    radiation energetic particles, cosmic
                                                    rays ma'gnetic fields, solar x-rays,
                                                    n e u h hydrogen geocorona, cosmic
                                                    dust. and friction: 2 transmitters. 8,680
                                                    solar'calls 1 silver zinc battery.'

                                          kout. - _. Total ;eight: 187 onnds, including                         Originallj       Originally   Originall!      Orbit achieven was lower than
                                                                                                Originallj
                           1961 Chi 1..
           Ex lorer XI11
     25
                                                                                                                                                               planned. reentered on AUK.27
                                                    spent &pound 4tf: stage and 12-              com-                             com-         com-
                                                                                                                 com-
            (bnited
                                                                                                                                                               1961; an kig~itdata recomputeti
                                                    pound transition section.                                    puted            puted        puted
                                                                                                 puted
            States).
                                                                                                                                               at              t o account for pmniatnre re-
                                                       Objective: Testing performance of                         at               at
                                                                                                 at
                                                                                                                                                               pected lifetime).
                                                                                                                                                               entry (dawn from 1 year ex-
                                                    Scout vehicle and guidance; investi-          6063.34'        174.60;         97.27;       3.2;
                                                                                                                                                64'
                                                                                                  later Lt         later a
                                                    gating the nature and effects of spsce                                         later a1     later a
                                                    flight on micrometeoroids.                                                                  37.50.
                                                                                                                  74.             97.5.
                                                                                                  722.
                                                       Payload: 76- by %-inch cylinder
                                                    almost covered by 5 types of micrd
                                                    meteoroid impact detectors; 2 trans-
                                                    mitters solar cells, and nickel cad-
                                                    mium batteries.
                                                                                                                                     - R2.14°-.-
                                                                                                                140              91__..___                    Orbit achieved, capsule ejected
                           1861Psi l--    Fhor-        Total weight: 2 100 pounds (approx-      345
           Discoverer
     31
      (                                                                                               ..____I


                                                                                                                                                               on 33d orbit and rccovered
                                                    imate) includinh 2d-stage casing and
            XXIX                            Agena
                                                                                                                                                               from sea north of Hawaii Srpt.
                                                    300-po;nd reentry capsule with rctro-
            (United                         B.
                                                                                                                                                               4, 1961.
                                                    rockets and recovery aids.
            States).
                                                       Objective: Testing reliability of
                                                    Agena B; improving control of orbital
                                                    perlod; ejecting and recoveringcapsule.
                                                       Payload: Test instruments to check
                                                    on adjnstments made as rrsult of pre-
                                                    vious flights.
                                                                                                                       92.4. ----_                       --   Orbit achievrtl, cnpsnlr rjrvted
                                                       Total weight: 2,100 pounds (approx-
                                          .-do
                           1961 Omega                                                                                                         8?..58O-
                                                                                                345
Sept. 11                                                                                                        154 ___..._
                                                                                                                                                               on 33d orbit and rrroverril in
                                                    imate), including 2d-stage casing 2nd
                             1.
                                                                                                                                                               midair near llnwnii Sept. 14,
                                                    300-pound reentry capsule with retro-
                                                    rockets and recovery aids.                                                                                 1961.
                                                       Objective: Testing reliability of
                                                    Agena B; improving control of orbit;
                                                    ejection and precision recovery of cap-
                                                    sule.
                                                       Payload : Biological samples, solar
                                                    cells, and radiation-sensitive materials
                                                    for testing ofeffrcts ofexposure to radi-
                                                    ation.
                                                                                                                        - - -.                                Orbit achieved, reentry made
                                                       Total weight: 2 700 paunds in arbit      168.6----.                       88.6___._.
                           1881Alpha-                                                                                                   32.57'---
                                          Mercury-
     13                                                                                                         100..   .
                                                                                                                                                               automatically on program.
                             Alpha 1.       Atlas C (3,900at liftoff 2500 at recovery).
                                                                                                                                                               capsule recovered within pro'
                                                       Objective: drbiting the unmanned
                                            WA-4)
                                                                                                                                                               gramed area 161 miles east of
                                                    Mercury capsule to test systems and
                                                    abilit to return capsule to predeter-                                                                      Bermuda; dll test objectives
                                                                                                                                                               met.
                                                    minegrecovery area after 1 orbit test-
                                                    ing of global Mercury tracking) net-
                                                    work.
                                                       Payload: Simulator of pilot, to test
                                                    environmental control; 2 voice tapes
                                                    to check tracking network. life-sup-
                                                    Port system; 3 cameras, tape' recorder,
                                                    telemetry.
                                                                                                                            Period
                                                                                                              Perigee
                                                                                              Apogee
                          iternationa
Launch                                                                                                                                             Remarks
                                                                                                                            minutes)
                                                                                                              (statute
                                                                                              (statute
                                                                Payload data
                                        Vehicle
                          lesignation
                Name
 date                                                                                                          miles)
                                                                                               miles)


  1961                                                                                                                                   hbit achieved, but 2d stage and
                                                                                                                            31_..._
                                                                                                              52. -..            .-.
                                                                                              !55--...             ..
                                                      Total weight: 2,100 pounds (aP-              ..
                                        'hor-
                          961 Alpha-
             Xscoverer
Sept. 17                                                                                                                                  capsule failed to separate; c a p
                                                    proximate), including ad-stage cas-
                                          Agena
                           Beta 1.
              XXXI                                                                                                                        sule did not reenter as pro-
                                                    ing and 300-pound reentry capsule
                                          B.
              (United                                                                                                                     gramed; decayed Oct. 26, 1961.
                                                    with retrorockets and recovery aids.
              States).
                                                      Objective: Testing reliability of
                                                    Agena B; improving control of orbital
                                                    period; ejecting capsule for precision
                                                    recovery.
                                                      Payload Test instruments to check
                                                    on adjustments made as a result of Dre-
                                                    vions-flights.
                                                                                                                       --                h b i t achieved capsule ejected
                                                                                                          -                 M 8 . ___.
                                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                                              47.07.
                                                                                              146.06.
                                                      Total weight. 2.100 Dounds (aD.                   .
                                        ..-do----
                          961 Alpha-
             Discoverer
Oct. 13                                                                                                                                   on 18th orbit 'and recovered in
                           Gamma 1.
              XXXII                                                                                                                       midair north of Hawaii Oct. 14,
              (United                                                                                                                     1961.
              States).

                                                    pe3od; ejection and recovery of c a p
                                                    sule; investigating radiation effects.
                                                      Payload: Test instruments to check
                                                    nn adinst.m~nts   made as a result 01

                                                    testing, in01
                                                    shielding materials,
                                                    transmitter to investigate effects o
                                                    ionosphere on radio propagation.                                                     Attained planned altitude and
                                                                                              4.2C1..--
                                        3cout. - -.   Total weight: 94,ponnds.
             P-21 Probe
         1
         :                                                                                                                                transmitted good data. Con-
                                                      Objective: Testing Scout vehick
               (United                                                                                                                    firmed Explorer VI11 data on
                                                    and guidance system measuring ion0
               States).                                                                                                                   helium layer rovided R stmc-
                                                    spheric electron deisity profile, anc                                                 ture of ionos$ere: At 120 kilo-
                                                    testing new Doppler velocity anc                                                      meters a mixture of mtrogen
                                                    position facility at Wallops Station.                                                 and oxygen molecules; from
                                                      Payload: 15-by 33-mch %sided frus                                                   120 to 1,OOO kilometers, pre-
                                                    trum containing electron sensor, :                                                    dominately atomic oxygen;
                                                    transmitters, nickel cadmium bat                                                      from 1 OOO to 2 500 kilometers,
                                                    teries.                                                                               helium); above i,500kilometers,
                                                                                                                                          hydrogen.
         Midas IV       1961 Alpha-    Atlas-
    21                                               Total weight: 3,500 ounds (approx- Not avai                       Not avail-
                                                                                                        Not avail                       Orbit achieved; Project West
          (United         Delta 1.      Agena.    imately), including %?stage.             able.         able.          able.            Ford piggyback capsule ejected
          States).                                                                                                                       in orbit but fate uncertsm; no
                                                     Objective: Place experimental sstel-
                                                  lite in orbit and eject the Piggyback                                                  deflnite radar sighting.
                                                  West Ford dipoles.            ---
                                                     Payload: In addition to Midas
                                                  equi ment 75-pound package of
                                                  350&(~m 'cop r dipoles to form
                                                  radio-A&ction E l t .
                                                                                                            _______
                        1981 Alpha-    Thor-
Nov. I   Discoverer                                  Total weight: 2 100 pounds (approx- 514.-.-. .     140                             Orbit achieved. capsule was
                                                                                                                       32.52O..---
          XXXIV           Epsilon 1.    Agena     imately), including 2d-stage casing                                                    ejected in orbit but failed to
           (United                      B.        and 3O&pound reentry capsule with                                                      resnter because of in-orhit mal-
          States).                                retrorockets and recovery aids.                                                        function.
                                                     Objective: Testing reliability of
                                                  Agena B; improving control of orbital
                                                  pecod; ejection and recovery of cap-


                                                                                                                                 ____
                                                                                                 _-_.
                                                                                                    -   582- -.- - -
                                                                                                              -
    1:                  1961 Alpha-    Thor-
         Transit IV-B                                                                                                                   Orbit achieved.
                                                                                                                       32.42O.
                                                                                          700.
                                        Able-
          and Traac       Eta 1.
                                                  global navigation sakllite for use by
           (United                      star
          States).                                ships aircraft
                                                    Psiload: 43: by 31-inch drum carry-
                                                  ing stable osdllators continuous trans-
                                                  mitten phase modulators memory
                                                  system: clock, Snap auxiliiry power
                                                  system for transmitters.
                                                                                                 ._. 562-.. . -
         Traac          1981 Alpha-                  Total weight: 200 pounds.                                         v2.430-
                                                                                           720- _.                                         Do.
                                                                                                             -.
                                                     Objective: Testin a gravity orienta-
                          Eta 2.
                                                  tion system for ssteylites; gaining data
                                                  on Van Allen belts.
                                                     Payload: 43- by 15inch doorknob
                                                  containing gravity gradient stabiliza-
                                                  tion equipment, particle detectors.
                                                                                                               ____
    It                  1961 Alpha-    Thor-        Total weight: 2 100 pounds (approxi- 173.4.... 147.2.
         Discoverer                                                                                                    11.63'.          Orbit achieved; capsule ejected
          xxxv                         Agena B.   mately) indudink Zd-stage casing and
                          Zeta 1.                                                                                                        and retrieved in midair by a
          (United                                 3O&po&d reentry capsule with retro-                                                    C-130 some SM) miles north-
                                                  rockets and recovery aids.                                                             west o Honolulu on Nov. 16,
          States).                                                                                                                             f
                                                                                                                                         1861.
                                                     Objective. Testing design changes.
                                                  obtain radiation data;obtain data 0;
                                                  f t r spacecraft design; orbit, eject,
                                                   uue
                                                  and recover capsule.
                                                     Payload: Instruments to measure
                                                  effects of design changes; experiments
                                                  on future design; radiation measuring
                                                  equipment.
                                                                                                                              Period       Inclina-
                                                                                              Apogee         Perigee
                          nternationr
Launch
                                                                                                                             (minutes)       tion
                                                                                              (statute       (statute                                            Remarks
                                        Vehicle                 Payload data
              Name        designation
 date
                                                                                               miles)         miles)

  1961
                                                                                                                     - - ._ 18.3-. - - -
                                                                                                                          -                           Orbit achieved was low Earth
                                        Atlas-       Total weight: 675 pounds.            145.7- .           14.9.
          Ranger I1       1961 Alpha-
xov. 18                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                       orbit rather than the deep
                                                     Objective: Test spacecraft systems
                                         Agena.
           (United          Theta 1.
                                                                                                                                                       elliptical one plumed, so datu
                                                   for future lunar and interplanetary
           States).
                                                                                                                                                       was not obtained on some of
                                                   missions; obtain data on cosmic
                                                                                                                                                       the test items. Primary oh-
                                                   rays radiation and dust particles and
                                                                                                                                                       jective of testing the system
                                                   on &hether t i e Earth is trailed by
                                                                                                                                                       was achieved. The satellite
                                                   cometlike tail of hydrogen gas.
                                                                                                                                                       reentered on Nov. 18 1961
                                                      Payload: 5- by 11-foot cone with
                                                                                                                                                       somewhere between d b and
                                                   hexagonal base containing experi-
                                                                                                                                                       13th orbit.
                                                   ments on solar iadiation, particle de-
                                                   tection, cosmic rays, magnetic Eelds
                                                   solar X-rays       neutral hydroged
                                                   geocorona, mimic dust, and space
                                                   friction; 2 transmitters, 8,680 solar
                                                   cells.
                                                                                                                                                      Orbit achieved. on 2d of 3
                                                                                                             19.6.
                                                      Total weight: 4 100 pounds liftoff; L47.5-                             88.5 _ _ . _ _ _
                          1961 Alpha-   Atlas D--.
          Mercury-Atlas
     29                                                                                                              . -.
                                                                                                                      ..
                                                                                                                                                       planned orbit; Mercury cap-
                                                   2,900 pounds, orbit; 2,400 pounds, re-
           V (MA-5)         Iota 1.
                                                                                                                                                       sule was progbmed into re-
                                                   covery.
           (United
                                                                                                                                                       entry because of minor difficul-
                                                      Objective: Orbit Mercury space-
           States).
                                                                                                                                                        ties with attitude jets and
                                                   craft with chimpanzee aboard in test
                                                                                                                                                       electrical systems; capsule
                                                   of all Mercury systems preparatory
                                                                                                                                                       landed in the recovery area
                                                   to manned orbital flight.
                                                                                                                                                       near Puerto Rim about 128
                                                      Payload: In addition to chimpanzee
                                                                                                                                                        p.m     Nov. 29 1961 was
                                                   4 cameras, 6 radiation measurement
                                                                                                                                                       pickzd up by U’.S.S. dttormes
                                                   packs, 78 temperature measurement
                                                                                                                                                       about 253 p m. the same day.
                                                   instruments, 2 playback tape re-
                                                                                                                                                        chimpanzee ‘ Enos performed
                                                   corders.
                                                                                                                                                        satisfactorily in flight and was
                                                                                                                                                        in good condition on recovery.
                                                                                                                                                        Flight was considered success-
                                                                                                                                                       ful; no additional primate
                                                                                                                                                        flights were felt necessary to
                                                                                                                                                        prepare for the manned orbital
                                                                                                                                                        flight.
                                                                                              t7.600- - -.                                            Flight successful. 1st flight of a
                                                     Total weight: 29 pounds.
                                        Blue
          USAF Probe
 Dec. 4
                                                                                                                                                        Blue Scout rocket conflgura-
                                                     Objective: T o measure low-energy
                                         scout
           (United
                                                                                                                                                        tion from the Pacific Missile
                                         Junior.   protons coming from the Sun.
           States).
                                                                                                                                                        Range.
                                                     Payload: G “open window” photo-
                                                   multiplier tube-type detectors; 2 solid-
                                                   state detectors; new 12-pound telem-
                                                   etry system including quarter-watt
                                                   transmitter, digilock encoder.
                                        T t l weight: 2,100 pounds (approx-
                                         oa
              1861 Alpha-   Thor-                                             81.210..
                                     imately) including 3WpOund reentry
                             Agena
               Kappa 1.
                             B.      capsule with retrorocket8 and recov-
                                     .Qvv nldr
                                     --"
                                        Objective: To conduct radiation                       coverer c ule was ejected
                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                       &.
                                     and radio experiments; to orbit Agena                    from orbit    18,1961 landed
                                     stage     Dtscoverer capsule -and                        in the Pacific near kawail
                                             satellite; to eject fro& orbit
                                      O
                                      &                                                       was kept afloat by 3 USA+
                                     and recover the Discoverer capsule.                      pararescuemenuntllplckedup
                                        Pavload: Caosule contained radia-                     by U.S.S. Rmshaw.
                                     tion -experheha includlng blbpack
                                     of human and anlmal t h u e a sporea,
                                     molds and algavnuclear traik plate.
                                     dosimktera and 'samples of sllicon:
        and                          bismuth, magnesium.gold. titanium.
                                     and nickel; radiation hst+ents     in:
                                     cluding ones measuring the time
                                     history of radiation and radiation
                                     shielding properties of materials.
                                     Agena stage (to remain in orbit) con-
                                     tained radiation-measuring instru-
                                     ments relating to Advanced Research
                                     Projects Agency's Vela Hotel pro-
                                     gram cosmic monitors impedance
                                     p r o d and radio propaghion experi-
                                     ment.' Also IO-pound Oscar (Or-
                                     biting Satellite Carrylng Amateur
                                     Radio) experiment.
              1961 Alpha-
Oscar                                                                         81.21O..   -.
                Kappa 2.
 $%
 Ed
                                                         APPENDIX B
                                                   X-15 FLIGHT LOG
  Conceived in 1952 and begun as a NACA-USAF-USN program in 1954, the
rocket research aircraft X-15 had achieved a highly productive record by the end
of 1961. The following chronology of successful flights, prepared by NASA’s
Office of Public Information (62-95), provides a useful listing of flight research
milestones with the X-15 through April 30, 1962.
                                                               X-16 $Right log

                             1                           1             Maxi-
                                                                       mum                    Remarks
              Flight                  Pilot                  Mach
  Date
                                                                      altitude
               No.*                                          No.
                                                                        (feet)


                     ____ .____do
  1969
                                                                              Planned glide flight.
                     ____ __---do___________
                            Crossfleld          0.79 37,550
June     8 1-1-5
                                  ___________
                                            _._____
                                                                       52,341 1st powered flight.
                      ___ ..-.-do ______ - __ - -             2. 11
Sept.   17 2-1-3
                      ___                                     2. 15    61,781
Oct.    17 2-2-6-
                                                                       45,462 Engine &e; fuselage structural failure on
                                                              1.00
Nov.     5 2W-9-
                                                                                landing.
  1960
                                      _____ __ __ --
                      - --
                        . . - __- - - __.
                                       - _ 2.53
                         . .do
Jan. 23      1-2-7-                               66,844
                        --
             2 4 11- . - ._do        ---   2.22   88,116
Feb. 11
                                      -____ ___
                         .
                         -               -
             2-5-12. - ---.-do             1.57   42,640
Feb. 17
                                      ___________
             2-6-13.-- .-...               2.15
                             do                   52,640
Mar. 17
                                       __________
                     ____Walker            2.00   48.630 1st Government flight.
Mar. 25      1-3-8
                                          _______
             2-7-15--- Crossfield          1.96   49,982
Mar. 29
                                      ___________
             zS16.-. -...-do                      51,356
                                           2.03
Mar. 31
                     ____             ___________                      3z
                         White             1.94
Apr. 13      149
                                       __________
                         Walker            2.56
Apr. I9      1-5-10.--
                                      ___________
                                           2. m
                         White                    60,938
May 6        1-6-11..-
                                       __________
                         Walker            3.19   77,882
May 12       1-7-12.--
                         White_ _ _ . _ _ _ _ _ _ _
                                           2.31  108,997
             1-8-13---
May 19
                                          _______
                                           2. m
                         Crossfleld               51,282
May 26       2-9-18---
                                               __
                         Walker_ _ _ _ . _ _ _ _ _ m.p.h.
                                           3.31   78,112 2,196
Aug. 4       1+17.--
                                      --_______
             1-10-19-- white                     136,500
                                           2.52
hug. 12
                                       __________
             1-11-21-- Walker              3.13   75,982 1,986 m.p.h.
Aug. 18
                         white - _ _ . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ m.p.h.
                                           3.23   79,864 2,182
Sept. 10     1-12-23..-
                                         ________
                                      _____ -     53,043
                         Petersen          1.68
Sept. 23     1-13-25--
                        -
oct. m                               - ---
                                                                       3%
                                           1.94
                         . . do
             1-14-27- . . -
                                           2.02
             1-15-28-- McKay- ..______
Oct. 28
             1-16-29-- Rushworth ____._ 48, m
                                           1.95
Nov. 4
                                            _ ________
                                                ____
                                                  81,200 1st flight with XLR-99 design engine.
                         Crossfield        2.97
Nov. 15      2-10-21--
             1-17-30-- Rushworth           1.90   54,750
NOV.17
                                             ______-
                        -Crossfield-. -           61,900 1st restart with XLR-G3 design engine.
                                           2.51
Nov. 22      2-11-22..
                                           1.75
             1-18-31-- Armstrong
Nov. 30
                                            _______
                                                  4% 840
             2-1%23-.. Croas5eld           2.85   53,374
Dec. 6
                                             ______
                                                  50,095 1st hot nose flight.
             1-19-32-- Armstrong           1. 80
Dec. 9
  1961
                                                              1.88   49,780
Feb. 1
                                                              2 275 m.p.h last LR-11 flight,
                                                              3.60   78,150
Feb. 7
                                                                     77,450
                                                              2 h 5 m.p.h:f 1st Government XLR-99 flight.
Mar. 7                                                        4.43
                                                              2 760 m p h.
                                                              3.95  169,500
M r 30
 a.
                                                              4.62  105,OM)
                                                              3:074 m:p:h.
Apr. 21
                                                              4. @
                                                              3,300 m.p.h.
                                                                      I
                                                                    107,500
May 25
June 23                                                       5.27  107,700
                                                              3,603 m.p.h.
                                                              2,735 m.p.h.
                                                              4.11   78,200
Aug. 10
                                                              5. 25 114,300
                                                              3,614 m.p.h.
Sept. 12
                                                              5.30  100,800
                                                              3,600 m.p.h.
Sept. 28
                                                              2,830 m.p.h.; flight made with lower ventral o f
                                                              4.30   78, OM)                                f.
Oct. 4
                                                              3,647 m.p.h.; outer panel of left windshield
Oct. 1                                                        5.21 217, OM)
      1
                                                                 cracked.
                                        _________
                                                5. 74 108,600 3,900 m.p.h.
Oct. 17 1-24-40.-                Walker
                                 White ____.._.___ 4,093 m.p.h.; outer panel of right windshield
                                                6.04  101,600
Nov. 9 2-21-37--
                     ____                                        cracked.
                                 Armstrong_ _ . _ _ _81, OM) 2,502 m.p.h.; 1st flight for X 1 No.3.
                                                                                           -6
                                                3.76
Dec. 20      3-1-2
  196.9
                                     ________
Jan. 10 1-25-k-                                                .97     44,750
                                 Petersen
                   ____ Armstrong- _____
Jan. 17 3-2-3                                                 5.51    133,500
             3-3-7- - - - arm s do_____ - __ -                4. u    179,OM)
Apr. 6                                        ._
                           Walker__________
             3-4-8- ___ Armstrong______
                                                                      150,OM)
                                                              5.84
Apr. 19      1-2&-46--
                                                              5. %    207,000
Apr. 20
             1-27-48-- Walker__________                       4.s     246,700
Apr. 30
-
  1 Flightaetivitv code:
    1stlnumber,-2-15 &plane number.
    2d number, Eight number for speci6ed airplane.
    3d number, X-15lB-52 airborne mission number.
                                                                                                            91
92         AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL EVENTS O F 1961

                                                  X-16 Pilots
   A. Scott Crossfield, North American Aviation, Inc.
   Joseph A. Walker, research pilot, NASA Flight Research Center.
   Maj. Robert M. White, U.S. Air Force.
   Comdr. Forrest S. Petersen, U.S. Navy.
   John B. McKay, research pilot, NASA Flight Research Center.
   Capt. Robert A. Rushworth, U.S. Air Force.
   Neil A. Armstrong, research pilot, NASA Flight Research Center.
                                                    Box score
                                                                               ,             I
                                     Aircraft


  -
1- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    .....................................                                               47                  27
a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  ......................................                                                38                  21
3_ . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    _ . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
               ..                                                                                            4
                                                                                         9
                                                                               __-
      Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
            .................................                                                               52
                                                                                        94              1


  1 Includes 2 glide flights without power.

  NOTE.-Project offlcials estimate mission primary objectives were attained on 49 of 52 X-15 flights.
INDEX
                       INDEX




3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47, 50, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 63, 64,
65, 66, 68, 70, 71, 73. 74, 75, 76.
           95
INDEX




        56, i i
            66
              3
             1
            69
            69
        25, 63
            11
         8, 22
            19
            22
            40
            23
            77
            10
            80
            47
            45
            69
             8
        47,50
            25
96                                       INDlDX




                                                       __
Cape Canaveral (see also Atlantic Missile Range) - - - - - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - 9,
                                               21. 25. 29. 33. 36. 37. 39. 41. 44. 65
INDEX
98   INDEX
INDEX
100   INDEX

              Page




                 46
                 11
                  2
              1, 30
                 64
                 32
              7, 55
              8, 17
         101
INDEX




             2
            53
        31,63
            71
         2, 16
            8
           50
           65
           20
           76
        24,62
           55
102   INDEX
        103
INDEX
104                                             INDEX

Nahional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)-Continued                                         Page
    Ames Research Center __________________________________                                 2, 5,20,39, 43
    Awards________________________________________----59                               2,20,24,26,34,
    Contracts_ _ _ _ _ _ 1, 3, 7, 9, 10, 13, 21, 24, 25, 27, 30, 31, 32, 35, 38, 39, 41, 42,
                                                                                    50, 57, 64, 68, 72, 76
    Deep Space Tracking Station_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1       _
                                                       ____            __
                                                              _ _ - _ _ _ - - _ _ - _ _ - 3,10,21,39,74
    Goddard Institute for Space Studies- -
    Goddard Space Flight Center _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 3, 10, 12, 17,25,32,39,41, 58, 74
    International programs _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 2 , 3 , 6 , 7 , 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16
    Jet Propulsion Laboratory_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1,3, 9,20,25,29,32,36, 41, 65, 66, 67
    Langley Research Center _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1,3, 10, 18,20,21,26,30,36,37,39,
                                                                                    41, 48, 61, 62, 64, 75
    Launch Operations Directorate_-_- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - -.- -               63
                                                                                               -
                    105
            INDEX




82534-568
106   INDEX
                                                                                         107
                                          INDEX




                                                                                             2,
                                                                                        46, 50,
                                                                                        46, 55
                                                                                            68
                       _              ____ 1-__: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - -
Schmitt, Dr. Otto- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1                ______                                           62
                                               _
School of Aerospace Medicine (USAF) - - - _ _ - _ _ - - - - _ - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - 25, 38
Schriever, Gen. Bernard A. (USAF) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ 14, 42, - - - - 76  _ _ - _ 49, 54,
                                                          ___ _    _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-_ _ _ - ’ 11
Schwarsschild, Dr. Martin _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _                          -
Science Advisory Committee-- - - - _ - _ - - _ _ _ - - - - - _ - - _ - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - 45
108   INDEX
        109
INDEX
110   INDEX
                                                                                                111
                                              mEX


U.S. Air Force _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 16, 17, 20, 29, 31,33,37,40,
                                              ,.,,
                                           50. 51. 54. 55. 60, 63, 64, 65, 69, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77
                                                                                 ...
    Air Defense Command_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 1_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _     6
    Air Force Ballistic Systems Division_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _                                           39,66
    Air Force Missile Test Center _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ -    41
                                                     ............................
    Air Force Proving Ground Command                                                                       20
    Air Force Space Systems Division _______________________________                                       25
    Air Force Systems Command _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _       14,31,47,50
    Air Research and Development Command________________________ 6, 14
    Air Training Command _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ - - _ _ _ - _ -            10,47
                                               . . . . . . . . ._________. ______ ___ ______
    Arnold Engineering Development Center-                                                               4,35
                                                                 ........ ...
     Cambrid e Research Laboratory                                                    1, 15,25,29,58,69
     Chief of 8taE________________________________________-__                                         6,1421
    Launches:                                                                                                -
          Balloons__-________-___,_-_-__-____-___-____--_-__________                                       15
          Missiles_ _ , _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _              3,5,7,19,21,22,28,31,34,38,
                                                    42, 45, 46, 47, 52, 53, 57, 61, 63, 64, 66, 75
                       _________     4 7, 25, 27, 31, 37, 42, 47, 55, 56, 57, 62, 63, 66, 73,76
                                      ,
          Satellites
          Sounding rockets _________________________________                             16,20,25,29,32
          Space p r o b e s _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ - - _ _ _ _ - - _ _ _7 4 8 8 _ - _ _ _ _
                                                                                                         -___
     Office of Aeros ace Research _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 14,48,62,68 _ _ _ _ _    ___-___
                                    ________________________________________
     Strategic Air & m m d                                                                              55,72
              ___________________________________________-_
W.8. Army                                                                                      14,23,25,73
     Chemical Corps _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ , _ _                                                          23
     Corps of Engineers ________________________________________-                                   25,48,73
     Launches:
          Missiles_________________________________________                              30,64,68,70,76
          Target rocket _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ , _ _ _ _ _                                                    64
                                                                                       ___ -        -
United States-Australian Ultraviolet Survey of the Southern Skies-_                                        47
U.S.Congress_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
                                                                  2,4,20,22,34,38,41,46,51,59
                                      ______________________---_-___---_
    House of Representatives                                                                               16
          Appropriations Committee__________________________________                                    17,20
                                                                        _        _ ___ _ __
                                                                __
          Committee on Science and Astronautics- - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - _                                      7,
                                                                      8, 11, 15, 19, 47, 48, 52, 53, 54
     Senate_--___-_-_____-___-__--___--_______-_-__-_________                                   6,16,44,46
                                                                     _________
          Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences                                      5, 6, 28, 29, 44
                                                             _______________________
          Committee on Government Operations                                                            15,27
          Committee on Small Business, Subcommittee on Monopoly__-_, 62,63
U S M a r i n e s _ _ _ _ _ , _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ _13_ _ , _ _ _ _
 ..                                                                                                         _
              ________
U S Navv
 ..                     6, 7.9. 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 29, 30,32, 36, 55,63, 67, 70, 75, 78
112                                           INDEX




White House _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _20, _34, 44, 46, 47, 53, 59
                                                                             __ _
White, Maj. Robert (USAF) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 5, 9, 16, 27, 29, 50, 54, 62, 63, 68, 01, 92
White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 25, 44, 68, 70, 76
     113
mx
 E




0