                                                            NASA SP-4004




ASTRONAUTICS AND
A E R O N A U T I C S , 1963
Chronology on Science,Technology, and Policy




                            NASA Historical Staff,
          Prepared by the
                  Office of Policy Planning




                                                                  1964
        Scirntrfic and Tccbnrcal Informatron Drsrsron
        N A T I O N A L AERONAUTICS A N D SPACE ADMINISTRATION
                                                      Washington, D .C .
                              FOREWORD
   The National Aoronautics and Space Act defined the national effort
in the exploration of s p a c e t h e largest, most complex research and
development effort ever undertaken. It also provided for the continu-
ation of the long tradition of research in aeronautics begun under the
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
   During the past five years, an immense effort has been set in motion.
That this effort has borne fruit is evidenced by the events of the years
since the passage of the Act, some of which are recorded in the pages
that follow. These events constitute at least a partial record of the
raw material which is giving shape to the space effort. I n some in-
stances, they represent the growth of space technology and equipment :
improvement in the percentage of successful launches; the develop-
ment of large boosters capable of supporting larger payloads in more
complex missions. The overall increases in reliabdity, sensitivity, and
accuracy of equipment are all signs of the increasjng breadth and
depth of our knowledge of the requirements for space fight. In othw
instances, these events portray our increasing capacity to explore both
the near and far reaches of spaca and to benefit from knowledge gained
by exploration. Though our knowledge has increased at a dramatic
rate, the demand for new information-which has become such a
pressing demand for practical reasons, for defense urposes, and as
part and parcel of the persistent human drive to inow-threatens
~~~sc._n_~~n kc --+&r;ln thn c*innl-.
                       p     ""PY'J
                        "I
                         *"


   The wide range of events recorded here portray the wide scope of
this tremendous scientific undertaking. But perhaps even more indic-
ative than the variety of events, is the broad social, economic, and
political impact of the many projects and programs. For instance,
Professor Frederic Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, said recently that there was no part of university activity re-
lated to science and technolog "which is not involved in a funda-
mental way in the space effort. Or, in another field, we note that by
the end of 1963, some 65 political entities were cooperating in our
international space program.
   These are developments, perhaps trends, which are emerging as the
S ace Age becomes more and more a part of the Nation's daily life.
TEeir parts are recurded here as past, but, more importantly, they are
also prologue.
                                             HUQH DRYDEN,
                                                 L.
                                            Deputy Administrator.
                                                               m
CONTENTS
           PW
           i11
           vi1
             1
            33
            76
           118
           174
           224
           262
           293
           331
           364
           43
           456
           501
           513
           515
                            PREFACE
  This chronology of the sixth -par of the space age was prepared
 from open public sources. Like its annual ancestors, it was intended
 to rovide a compilation of known events related to the scientific,
   R
 tec nological, organization and policy aspects of space exploration
 and exploitation. Although its index is a ready vehicle for informa-
tI;olra+i.entryit w a s not conceived as historical assessment. It pro-
 vides a comprehensive listing of the growing welter of events in their
 own date and place. The pace and complexity of the challenging and
 sometimes dramatic endeavor as man learns and masters nature
 beyond planet Earth is a t least chronicled in a useful form. Hope-
 fully, it provides some of the much-needed perspective for most
 readers, many of whom are undoubtedly as breathless as contempo-
 rary historians.
    In the re aration of Astrmautks and Aermutics, 1963, Mrs.
 Helen T. b e i s carried major responsibilities for drafting and edit-
 ing. The entire NASA Historical Staff read? screened, and digested
available source materials and comments, including Dr. Frank W.
 Anderson, Jr., Miss Molly Holme, and Miss Sara Corbett. The index
w&s drafted by Miss Nanc Ebert (ATBP). Indispensible contribu-
tions were made by the Ledicated overtime work of Mrs. Dema
                             T
Nappier (AFEE-I)      as well as Center Historians and monitors, in
                  A.
particular David       Akens (MSFC), James Grimwood (MSC), Robert
 iviuiac (LaRcj, an4 Aifreci Eosenthai jasmj. Lioyci Iiobbins and
 Creston Whiting (ATBB-T) were unfailingly helpful in translation of
 Russian materials. Many busy scientific and managerial personnel
 were generous in their comments on preliminary drafts.
    “Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned S ace Flights-1963,” A p
                                             5
 pendix A of this volume, was prepared by r. Frank W. Anderson,
Jr., Assistant NASA Historian, carrying on the annual operational log
compiled for previous years. Appendix B, “Major NASA Launchings,
 1963,” adds another year to the NAEA Historical Report which now




                                               M.
                                      EUGENE Emm,
                                          Eistorian ( A T P H )
                                      NASA
           Office of Technology Uti2ization and Policy Planning.
                                                              VII
                          JANUARY 1963
Janumy I: Effective this date, the International Code would desig-
   nate all orbiting artificial satellites and s ace robes with Arablc
                                              R6
   numerals (1963-1, 1963-2, etc.) rather t an reek letters (1963
    Alpha, 1963 Beta., etc.) ,National Academy of Sciences announced.
    New system had been agreed upon by all national members of
    COBPAR in May 1962. ( NAS Release)
  NASA Ames Research Center was assigned direction of future Pie
    neer space probes, first of which would be launched in 1964.
    Newly created Space Sciences Div. would direct scientific aspects
    of the project. (San Jose News,1/1/63)
  Walter C. Williams and J. C. Elms assumed duties as deputy direc-
    tors of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, under M ~ C       Director,
    Dr. Robert R. Gilruth. Williams, formerly M ~ Associate Di-
                                                         C
    rector, became Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and
    Flight Operations; concurrently he was named Director of Flight
    Operations in NASA OfEce of Manned Space Flight. Elms was
    appointed MSC Deputy Director for Development and Programs,
    with primary management responsibility for spacecraft develop-
    ment. (MSG Roundup, 11/28/62,1)
  Sen. Robert S. Kerr (D.-Okla.) died of heart attack in Wash-
    ington. He had been Chairman of Senate Committee on Aero-
    nautical and Space Sciences since January 1961. (Wash. Post,
    1/2/63, Al)
January 2: Washington Post quoted informed DOD oFciais a saying
                                                              s
    USAF was considering converting Skybolt development program
    into project for exploring antisatellite problems or for use in
    space probes. (Wash.Post, 1/3/63, a 9 )
  Contract awarded to RCA Services Company to create the sun's inten-
    sity in two space environmental chambers. The largest chamber
    would measure 120 ft. high and 85 ft. in diameter; it would house
    the Apollo vehicle, consistin of command, service, and lunar
                                  fi
    excursion modules. The sma er chamber, measuring 85 ft. high
    and 65 ft. in diameter, would house the Apollo command module
    and provide the space environment for astronaut training. (Fact
    Sheet #96, MMJ)
January 3: Both U.S. communicationssatellites, TEMTAR I and RELAYI,
    came to life. TELSTAR I, silent since Nov. 23, responded to signals
    sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories; later in the day, RELAYI,
    silent since f r t being orbited Dec. 13, responded twice to
                   is
    television test patterns sent from New Jersey and Maine.
.    (Wash.Post, 1/4/63, Al)
  NASA was tentatively plannin      to extend one-day MA-9 flight of
    Astronaut Leroy Gordon &ope! (Maj., USAF) from 18 to 22
    orbits (27 to 34 hours), John Fmney of iVem Yo& Times re-
                                                               1
2             ASTRONAUTICS AND AEHONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    ported. Scheduled for April 1963, MA-9 would be last flight in
    Project Mercury. (NYT Co., Atlanta Constitution, 1/3/63)
January 3: Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) speaking for Republican
    Party’s Advisory Committee for Space and Aeronautics, charged
    Kennedy Administration had failed to build a strong military
    space program and recommended USAF be given authority to un-
    dertake an immediate military .space program with priority over
            manned lunar landin program : “Very little of the hard-
    NASA’s
                                  %
    ware developed by NASA can e used militarily. But the Kennedy
    Administration tends to lead the public to believe that the oppo-
    site is true . . . . [NASA projects such as Mercury and Apollo]
    could no more be converted to competitive militwy space systems
    than could a Liberty ship into an aircraft carrier or a truck into
    a tank . . . .” (AP, Boston Herald, 1/4/63)
  British sources reported U S . would disclose details of its space
    launch vehicles to European Launcher Development Organiza-
    tion (ELDO) in exchange for cooperative work on joint space
    projects. (Manchester Guardian, Wash. Post, 1/3/63)
January 4.: TELSTAR I communications satellite transmitted 10-min.
    television pictures across. the Atlantic, the satellite’s first trans-
    atlantic transmission since Nov. 23 when radiation damaged on-
    board circuits. Eugene S. O’Neill, director of satellite communi-
    cations for Bell Tele hone Laboratories, said BTL scientists
                             i
    “tricked TELSTAR’S deco ers into receiving commands” by chang-
    ing the command signals slightly. Remote-control repair mas
    performed after BTL constructed laboratory model of TEWTAR I
    with its faulty circuits and experimented with it to devise cor-
    rective signals. ( UPI, Wash. Post, 1/5/63 ; AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
    1/5/63, A1, A3)
  MARINER 11 ceased transmitting scientific data to earth. The space-
    craft was 5.7 million mi. beyond planet Venus and 54.3 million
    mi. from earth. This was new commuiiications record, previous
    record having been set by PIONEER v n-hich in 1960 stopped trans-
    mitting scientific data at 17.7 million mi. and position signal at
    22.5 million mi. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/5/63, A3)
  U.S.S.R. unannounced launching (1963 1-A, 1-C), with fragments
    re-entering from Jan. 5 through Jan. 11. Launch re orted by
    GSFC in Satellite Sittiation Report, June 15, 1963. ~ S F C       Sat.
    Sit. R t., dune 15 1963)
  Soviet ifkdemy o? Sciences announced that Soviet scientists had
    successfully bounced first radar signals off planet Mercury. Per-
    formed last summer when Mercury was 52-54 million mi. from
    earth, experiment was credited with confirming value of the
    Astronomical Unit calculated in 1961by US., U.K., and U.S.S.R.
    using Venus as radar target. Eberhardt Rechtin of JPL called
    Soviet Mercur achievement “another significant step in radar
    exploration 0; the solar system.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
    1/5/63, A3 ;S u n Francisco Chronicle, 1/5/63)
  President Kenneth S. Pitzer of Rice Univ. announced establishment
    of a Dept. of Space Science, first of its type. Headed by Dr.
    Alexander J . Dessler, new department would offer study in eo-
    magnet ism, dynamic characteristics of interplanetary space, f a n
                                                                          3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

     Allen radiation belts, auroras, atmospheric structure and dynam-
     ics, planetary structure, and meteoritics. (Houston Post, 1/5/63;
     AP, Newport News Daily Press, 1/5/63)
January 4: Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said in Palo Alto, Calif.,
                                                                     rm
     press conference: “People who do the spectacular things in s
     are few-they owe their success to many, many people behin the
                                                 ition-scientists, k h n i -
                           f
     m n e s who are not m n proper
                                         -T
     cians, industrial wor ers-people m d walks of life . . . .” (Palo
     Alto Thn&8,1/5/63)
  Soviet news aper Krasnaya Zvezda (Rea? Star) quoted Edward
            (2s.      nuclear physicist), Gen. L. Lemnitzer ( U ~ A ) , and
     Teller
     other Americans regarding U.S. plans to “militarize the moon,
     including the delivery of an ‘absolute’ weapon there for the con-
     duct of interplanetary nuclear war.” (Krasnuya Zveada,
     1/4/63,3)
Januaiy 5 : RELAY I communications satellite made two successful
     intercontinental television test transmissions between Andover,
     Me., and Goonhilly, England, one for 23 min. and the other for
     an hour ; teletype tests were also successfully made from Nutley,
     N.J., to Fucino, Italy. NASA said m 4 y 1’6 power difficulty had
     apparently corrected itself, but “project officials have ex rienced
     difficulties with RELAY responding properly to c o m m a n g Tests
     during the past three days were possible by employing special
     operational procedures and altering command sequences to the
     satellite. Experiments will continue to evaluate the satellite’s
     communications and command systems.” (AP, Wash... Post,
     1/6/63, A8)
  A Russian Embassy official in Washin n quietly collected
                                                 f?
    from the US. State Depamment the ussian satellite fra,g-
     ment that fell in Manitowoc, Wis., on September 5, 1962.
     U.S.S.R. had previously ignored U.S. offer; made a t U.N. last
                                                 ( W a h .,.
     fa!!, tc rztsr:: the ;--entered f z @ e l .                1/8/63, 2 )
                                      rsiii               &n
                                                           i
  Gov. Nelson Rockefeller was preparing his proposal for establish-
     ment of New York science and technolo institution, it was
                                                   T
     reported. Proposed state institution wou d offer both under-
        aduate and graduate study in science and technology. Rocke-
     %ler and state university trustees were expected to a p int com-
                                                               .p”
     mittee of educators and scientists to develop detai ed plans.
     (Orlando Sentinel, 1/5/63)
  AEC expenditure for military .nuclear-reactor =D was reported:
     $1,355,700,000 through start of current fiscal year. (A-N-AP
    J w d & Reg., 1/5/63,6)
  President of MIT, Julius A. Stratton, announced plans for new Cen-
    ter for Space m r c h on MIT campus. NAEA would provide $3
    million of the total $4 million cost. (Boston Sun. Advertiser,
     1/6/63 )
January 6: Review of space Research, report of eight-week Space
     Science Summer Study sponsored by National Academy of Sci-
     snces in support of NASA, was transmitted to NASA Administrator
     James E. Webb. Consensus of the more than 100 U.S. scientists
     from Government, universities, and industry: “Of all the dis-
     coveries that have come from or can now be anticipated from
4             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    man’s eff orts in space sciences, none more easily captures the im-
    agination nor is more likely to focus interest and acclaim than
    the empirical proof that there is in this universe a biota other
    than our own.
       “On solid scientific grounds, on the basis of popular appeal, and
    in the interests of our prestige a a peace-loving nation capable
                                       s
    of grea.t scientific enterprise . . finding and exploring extra-
    terrestrial life should be acclaimed as the top-priority scientific
                                      .
    goal of our space program . . .
        “What is at stake is an opportunity to gain a new level of dis-
    cussion of the meaning and nature of life.’’ Even without “defin-
    itive evidence” of extraterrestrial life, report said there was no
    basis for rulin out possibility of life on Mars, Venus, or the
                    4
    moon ; it strong y endorsed NASA policy of sterilizing interplane-
    tary s acecraft to prevent contamination of possible extraterres-
          P
    trial ife.
       The report also recommended th& kra.ined scientist-observers
    be assigned important roles in future U.S. space missions. “By
    his presence, man will contribute critical capacities for scientific
    judgment, discrimination, and analysis ( ecially of a W l sit-
    uation) which can never be accomplish3 by his instrumenk,
    however complex and sophisticated they become.
        “Hence manned exploration of space is science in space, for man
    will go with the instruments that he has designed to supplement
    his capacitieslto observe what is there, and to measure and de-
    scribe the phenomena in terms that his scientific colleagues will
    clearly understand. A scientifically trained and oriented man
    will be essential for this purpose.” Report asked NASA to take
    immediate stsps to train scientists for space investi titions so that :
                                                          F
    a “scientist-astronaut” would be member of each roject Apollo
     (lunar mission) crew; meteorologists could ~ o - p i l ~ t    future
    manned orbiting space observatories, beginning with two-man
    Gemini flights in 1964; biologists would be available for first
    manned flights to Mars; astronomers would be prepared for ad-
    vent of space observatories and for maintenance and modification
     of these facilities.
        Urging “maximum possible participation of scientists in all
    space missions,” report outlined iour specific levels of training:
     scientist-astronauts (men combining experience and resouxeful-
    ne8s of trained scientist and trained astronaut) ; scientist-passen-
    gem (experienced, maiture scientists with adequate training in
     critical and emergency spacecraft operakions) ; ground scientists
     (leading scientists in pertinent fields collaborating with space-
    craft personnel in accomplishment of scientific mission) ; astro-
    naut observers (astronauts with varying degrees of special erain-
     ing in making scientific observations). (NAB, Review of Xpace
     Sciences; NAS Releases)
Janullary 6: AFSC announced 13-month Asset program would begin with
     first launch of six unmanned, non-orbiting vehicles from Ca e Ca-
                                                                   !$true-
    naveral in mid-1963. Asset ( Aerothermodynamic/elastic
     tural Systeans Environmental Tests) re-entry tests would provide
     data on environmental control, guidance and control, instrumenta-
                                                                        5
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 8 3

     tion, recovery techniques and equipment, structural cooling, and
     radar tracking under ion-sheath conditions. Recovery of the
     delta-wing vehicles was planned. (AFSC Release 31-R-2; UPI,
     Wash. Post, 1/6/63)
January 7: U.K. sent television signals across the Atlantic for first
     time via LAY I communications satellite. S als sent from
                                                      i
     Coonhilly Downs to Nutley, N.J., were dmribe? as “very good”
     and “extreme1 clear”; they were a.lso clearly received at grqund
     station of Italian s ace communications agency Telespazio in
     Fucino. (Reuters, 8hicago Trib., 1/8/63)
  USAF launched Thor-A ena D space vehicle from Vandenberg AFB
                          7
     with undisclosed pay oad. (UPI, Wash. Post, 1/8/63, A l )
  Nhsi2es and Rockets reported NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
     was studying Mariner B and Voyager projects to determine if the
     center could acquire’management responsibility for all or part of
     them planetary projects, study having been initiated a t request
     of NASA Hq. Unnamed Hq. spokesman pointed out that J-PL is
     now responsible for all NASA unmanned lunar and planeta pro-
     grams and has heavy workload with Ranger, Surveyor, an?Mar-
     iner R projects; Goddard may be asked to perform major sub-
     sy*m work in Mariner B and Voyager, perhaps leading to even-
     tual overall direction of the projects. (M&R, 1/7/63,14)
  Moscow Radio said U.S. astronauts “become bourgeois exploiters
      [of the people] in their own right,” but the Russian people had
     “profound respect” for U.S. spacemen, who needed “no little brav-
     ery” It0 let themselves be launched in rockets “whose reliability is
     highl dubious” (Reuters, Bdt. Sun, 1/8/63)
        Fy
  Soviet hief Malshal of Aviation Konstantin Vershinin was quoted
        ”Y       that, air-launched missiles had become basic form of
     as
     weapon or Sovieh aircraft, replacing bombs. (Av.Wk.,        1/7/63,
     25)
                       :cmz f a sh:=rt c its p!wa& i%.Ege f; ht fEiE
  VSaF Mir?llteZ?...                    f                    ,
     Cape Canaveral, and USAF was conducting study to &ermine
     cause of the advanced Minuteman‘s malfunction. This was second
     flight of new, more powerful Minuteman model. (DOD Release
     25-63 ;AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/63)
E a d y January: United Technolo Center made first U.S. test-firing
                                 e
                                 Y
     of cluster of large segment solid rocket motors. Four rocket
     motors consisting of six segments each were fired for 14 sec.,
     producing 140,000 lbs. of thrust. Test was to demonstrate tech-
     niques for ignition of clusters “which appear applicable to the
     simultaneous i ition of clusters of solid booster rockets produc-
                   !
                   ?
     ing millions o pounds of thrust.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63;
     AV.Wk.,1/14/63,33)
  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded preliminary, 90-day
     contract for development of variable-thrust RLlO rocket engine
     to Pratt and Whitney Aircraft. The hydrogen-powered en ine
                                                                    f
     would be capable of operating at as little as 12.5 per cent o its
     rated thrust and be capable of restarting in space. Throttleable
     RL-10 engines had been test-fired in feasibility studies a t Pratt
     and Whitney plant and NASA Lewis Research Center. (Hunts-
     ville Times, 1/8/63)
6            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

Early January: Dr. Wernher m n Rraun, Director of NASA MSFC,
    visiting West Berlin’s Technical University to receive hon-
    orary doctorate, said: “I am convinced personally that the
    Russians will not succeed in making a manned space flight to the
    moon and back before the Americans. The Russians now could
    send a man to the moon but that would be a one-way trip.” (New-
    port News Times-Herald, 1/12/63)
danuary 8: NASA reported RELAY I communications satellite’s low bat-
    tery voltage had been result of faulty voltage regulator in one
                                                                 8‘
    of its twin transponders. Continued tests by RCA and NASA en i-
    neem pinpointed the difficulty and also discovered that t e
    regulator fails to function roperly when it becomes too hot or
                              P
    too cold. Despite the di culty engineers would attempt live
                                                 a
    television transmission via RELAY I by sendin special command
    signals to the satellite and concentrating on t e remaining good
    transponder. (Wash.Post, 1/9/63, C8)
  Task force from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center sent to Rocket-
    dyne, Canoga Park, Calif., where F-1 engine had developed “com-
    bustion instability,” William Hines reported in Washington
    Evening Stw. Five-engine cluster of 1.5-million-lb. thrust, F-1’s
    would power first stage of Advanced Saturn ( G - 5 ) . (Hines,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 1/9/63)
  Results of recent radarastronomy and radioastronomy studies
    of planet Venus were reported by Howard Simons in Wash-
    ington Post. Studies conducted at NRL, Washington, con-
    centrated on detecting water in atmosphere of Venus; NRL radar-
     astronomers and radioastronomers concluded that Venutian
     atmosphere contains very little, if any, water. Their research
    suggests surface temperature of Venus may be 600” F, as previ-
    ously reported. Meanwhile, radioastronomy studies at JPL,
     Pasadena, indicated Venutian surface was characteristically
    desert; that Venus appears to rotate very slowly, perhaps only
    once every 250 earth days; and that Venus a pears to rotate in
                                                 Y
    direction opposite that of earth. These resu ts combined with
    those from MARINER 11 Venus probe, provided evidence that Venus
    is swept by winds at hundreds of mph, which in turn constantly
    churn UD hiEh sandstorms. JPL’S Eberhardt Recht.in mid. Wash.
    Post, lf8/6g, 1)
  World’s largest radiotelescope, developed by National Science
    Foundation. was now oDerationa1. Thomas R. Henrv rewrted in
    Washington Evenin S’tar. Locaied on Papago Indiankeserva-
    tion in Arizona, raiiotelescope has antenna of 300-ft. diameter.
    Among first objects of study were radio waves emitted from planet
    Jupiter; later study would be devoted to outer planets Uranus
    and Neptune and to distribution of neutral h drogen in Milk
                                                 de.    Star, 1/8/637
    Way Galaxy and nemby galaxies. (Wash.
  Charles H. Zimmerman, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research
    addressed Aero-Space Luncheon Club in Washington on short-
    range, intermediate-range, and long-range aircraft. Short-range:
    “I think there is a tremendous future in the helicopter and the
    V/STOL aircraft in the short range and feeder line application.
    However, in order to take full advantage of the capabilities of
                                                                     7
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    these aircraft, we have to find some better way of utilizing the
    air space and the airport space that is available. I think we will
    do it. It is a matter of time and effort . . . .    99
       Intermediate range :“Iam speaking of 2,000 miles and up . . . .
    We are working closely with the FAA and with the DOD in steps
    leading-we sincerely hope-to the development of a supersonic
    commercial transport . . . .
       “I might point out that NASA today is opening the proposals
    that were submitted on feasibility studies which are a part of
                                 program. This is one of the steps that
    the overall FAA-DOD-NASA
    we are taking to help this program along . . . . 9,

       Long range : “At this stage of history, we can send ‘a man
     from the C.S. to Australia in about an hour in a Mercury
    capsule.. . .
        “Now, conceivably in the future we will be able to put a
    number of people in some sort of hypersonic aircraft and send
    them to Australia in an hour. This is looking out into the blue.
     But I really think that mankind will not quit in this develop-
    ment of transportation through the air till they have made this
    a practical possibility . . . .” (Text)
January 8: Opening of Technical CTniversity of Berlin’s Institute for
    Elements of Space Travel was attended by Prof. Eugen Saenger,
    Dr. Wernher von Braun, Prof. Hermann Oberth, and other
    dignitaries of West Berlin and Unir. of Berlin. Prof. Saenger,
    former head of Research Institute for Physics of Jet Propulsion
     at Stuttgart, has been nominated as director of the new in-
    stitute. (Bild [Hamburg], 1/8/63, in MSM: S I N , 3/63, 5 )
Jn;n?mm~ RELAY I communications satellite transmitted its first trans-
          9:
    atlantic television programs, sending British and French viewers
     clear pictures of ceremonial unveiling of Mona Lisa in Wash-
    ington and 10 min. of network program ‘‘Today.” ( UPI, Wmh.
    Post, 1/10/63,A3)
  Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, told
     Chicago press conference that trouble in Centaur launch vehicle
     had been corrected. Centaur was proceeding at Lewis under
     highest national priority (DX) and would be developed on
     schedule to launch Surreyor lunar spacecraft and Mariner inter-
     planetary spacecmft in 1965. Dr. Silverstein pointed out new
     testing philosophy for Centaur called for more extensive and
     qualitative p o u n d test before flights. (Chicago Sun-Tims.
     1/10/63 ; Chicago Daily News,1/10/63)
  Enea Bossi, international aviation pioneer, died in Dayton, Ohio.
     Native of Milan, Bossi built and flew his ovn airplane in 1908;
     he designed first, Italian seaplane. ,4fter coming to U.S. in 1919,
     Bo& designed first US. stainless steel plane, most successful
     manpowered aircraft, and an ewly helicopter. He also invented
     racuum fuel-intake system used in U.S. automobiles during 1920%.
                    Pmt, 1/12/63)
      (AP, W a ~ h .
January 10: EXPLORER XIV energetic particles satellite developed radio
     transmission dijEculty, not repairable by remote control. Exact
     cause of difficulty, apparently in one of the binary counters of
     satellite’s encoder system, was not determined. (NASA EXPLORER XTV
     Program. Rpt. No. 4; NASA Release 63-6)
8               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

                       announced MARINER 11 Venus probe had been so
Jnnuary 10:     NASA
      successful that repeat flight scheduled for 1964 had been can-
      celed. Interplanetary efforts would be concentrated instead on
      such projects as sending probe toward Mars in 1964 and later
      flight to Venus with advanced Mariner probe in 1965. (NASA
      Release 63-3 ; JPL Release)
    Dr. Robert C. Seamans, NASA Associate Administrator, told Wash-
      ington Representatives Chapter of National Security Industrial
      Asmciation : “The goals of this [accelerated national space]
      program and of our nation in space are to achieve a position
      of pre-eminence in every aspect of space science and technology
      for the benefit of all mankind . . . . Four main reasons underlie
      the tremendous effort we must make to achieve the goals stated
      by the President. Our position as leader of the Free World
      requires it. Our national security requires it. The fact that we
      are a practical people, dedicated to the improvement of life on
      earth for ourselves and our world neighbors, requires it. And
      man’s age-old urge to explore and our national traditions of pio-
      neering require it . . . .”
          Dr. Seamans also discussed the Pioneer space probe program :
      ‘L.. . We are initiating a competition for a new probe, PIONEER, to
      develop a better understanding of solar flares. These probes
      will be used, commencing in 1964 (the International Year of
      the Quiet Sun), to measure the characteristics of the inter-
      planetary medium such as magnetic field, solar plasma, solar and
      galactic cosmic radiation, and micrometeorites. The probe will
      provide information of intrinsic scientific value in addition to
      measurements in direct support of the manned lunar landing. . . .”
       (Text)
    French Scientific Research Minister Gaston Palewski told French
      Natioii:il Assembly :L satellite launching site would be established
       in Eastern Pyrenees Department near the Spanish border.
      France‘s first satellite W R S scheduled for launching in 1965; other
      European sitellites may also be launched from the site. (Reuters,
       Wmh. Post. 1/12/63)
    Finnish Foreign Ministry announced Finland had obtained per-
      mission from U.S.S.R., C.K., and other Western allies to obtain
       defensive missiles, forbidden since signing of Paris peace treaty
       in 1947. Finland would bu air-to-air missiles and squadron
      of MiG-21 fighters from U.ZS.R., antitank missiles from U.K.
       (UPI, Wosh. Post. 1/10/63)
    White House published report by President’s Science Advisory Com-
       mittee, Scienw, Government, and Information. The Committee
       found communication of technical information to be a necessity
       to a healthy scientific and technical community. To this end it
       made a series of s ecific recommendations to both the technical
                          P
       community and to Tovernment agencies involved in technical pro-
       grams, following the general principle that technical informa-
       tion must be an area of major commitment on the part of the
       U.S. Government but not in such              as to stifle independent
                                             ”;;i  cience, Government, and
       efforts of the technical communityf.
       I nf ormatiwn)
                                                                        9
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

Junwz7-y 10: Titan I1 ICBM launched from Cape Canaveral fell short
                                                                T
     of its intended 6,300-mi. range after developing second-s
                                                                     di5-
     culties. UBAF said many of the flight’s objectives were ac ieved.
      (M&R, 1/21/63,. 10)
Jamuary I1 : Anal sis of radar observations of lmet Venus indicatad
                                                 P
                   9
     Venutian sur ace is smoother than that o earth or the moon, it
     waa remrtd. Observations were made Nov. 2 9 - k . 7. 1962. bv
     NatioGal Bureau of Standards’ radartellescope at J i c k c a , P &
                                                                     k.
      ( Wmh.Post, 1/11/63,65)
  Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Chancellor Edward H. LiWMeld announced
     plans for $3O-&illion p e a research and cx>ordination center.
     Center would be used for study in natural and social sciences and
     engineering and health areas connected with aerospace activities.
            Wash.Post, 1/12/63,1)
      (KJPI,
  Dr. Knox Millsaps resigned as chief scientist o USAF OD and execu-
                                                    f
     tive director of AFOSR. ( A v . Wk.,12/17/62,25)
  Thor missiles being returned to US. from U.K. would be madified
     for use as space vehicles, UBAF announced. Three of U.K.’s 60
     operational Thorn already had been returned to Douglas Aircraft
     Co.for conversion, so that they could be used in space assignments
     similar to those of conventional Thor space hostem (Waah.
     Post,.1/12/63)
  USAF announced Titan I1 missile had been test-fired While locked in
     its 155-ft.-deep silo a t Vandenberg AFB. Firing of “brief” dura-
     tion was to ts the missile’s resistance to noise and vibration.
                    et
      (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/63)
  Translation of article on Soviet VOSTOK III and IV by H. A. Vilter,
     East German engineer, was quoted. Of the Soviet vehicle used
     to place Vostok capsules in orbit, Vilter said: “The power of the
     six rockets of the initid stage was roughly 20 million horsepower”
      (or 880,000-lb. thrust)-abut 2/s power of first two Saturn vehi-
     cies, whose eight clustered engines developed 1.32-million-lb.
     thrust (30 million horsepower). Vilter’s article appeared in East
     Berlin ublication Die Technik; abstract af his report was pub-
            E
     lished y Dept. of Commerce’s Ofc of Technical Semcer;.
                                            fie
      (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/63)
  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and IAM broke off contract negotiations
     indefinitely; still unresolved was dispute over “union shop.”
    ’ (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/12/63)
Jnnuury 19: Houston Chr&Ze            reported NASA Manned Spacecraft
     Center was planning 30-man space station that could stay in orbit
     for five years; MBC had solicited contractors’ proposals for elec-
     trical power system capable of producing 40,OOO watts. (Houston
     (7hrm. in UPI. Boston S d y Advmtiser, 1/13/63)
  US. De t. of Commerce translationOhebotarev, was reported. to
                                             of article, “How to Fly
          ,P
     Mars, b Soviet scientist Prof. G.
               h
        “The ‘ ars-1’interplanetary station was launched from a heavy
     satellite in a circular earkh satellite orbit; the velocity of the
     satellite was 4 9 miles a second. “he rocket was launched fmm
                     .
     this mtellite at a velocity of 3.1 miles a second, but the rocket left
     the orbit at 8 mil- a second.
10              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

        “It headed toward Mars in a hyperbolic trajectory and left the
    earth’s sphere of attraction at 4 miles a second. For it to assume
    an orbital path around Mars the station would have to be braked
    to a velocity of 3.2 miles a second . . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star,
    1/12/63, A5)
Janmry 12: David Sarnoff, k i t i n g in Saturday Review, said : “The
    technology of electronics is reaching toda for summits of na-
    tional, global, and space communications teyond anything con-
    ceived snce the invention of movable type.
        “The year 1962 brought conclusive proof of the utility of orbit-
    ing satellites to relay across ocean or wilderness the immensely
    high-capacity signals in the upper reaches of the radio frequency
    spectrum.
        “The way is thus opened technically for the establishment over
    the next few decades of a communications system by which gov-
    ernments, organizations, or individuals may establish contact with
    anyone, anywhere, at any time b voice, sight, or document, sepa-
    rately or in combination . . . . A
        He predicted development of satellite communications in three
    phases: “Phase I , between 1965 and 1970, should see a global sys-
                 r
    tem of low- wer synchronous satellites, each with a capacity of
    2,000 voice c annels or two television channels . . . .
                                                                    a
        “Phnse ZZ,between 1970 and 1980, may mark the beginnin of
    international satellite communications between cities rather t an
    through centralized national terminal facilities . . .
        “Phase ZII, beyond 1980, envisages an all-embracing satellite
    communications system : direct personal transmission of voice and
    sight through satellites without intermediate routing . . .” (Sat.
    Review,1/12/63,88)
  Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board and chief executive
    officer of ATBET,was cited by Saturday Revieto as “Businessman of
    the Year” (1962). Mr. Kappel spearheaded A T ~ T ’ S $50-million
    commitment to Telstar ever since it was envisioned by Bell Labs
    scientist, Dr. John R. Pierce, in 1954. Xaturday Review called
    Telstar “more than a triumph of the modern technolo
                                                            7
    communications. It was also n symbol wise men coul approve,  Of space
    of a new era in human communications, a work of peace that
     sought only to bring men together, not to destroy them. Finally,
     it was the product of a promising new teamwork in space between
    government and industry, in this case the largest private enter-
    prise venture in the world . . . .” ( S a t . Review, 1/12/63, 46)
  USN launched its 16th Polaris-carrying submarine, Nothan Hale,
    equipped to fire Polaris &3 now being developed. (AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 1/12/63)
Jonuary 1<3: I n his State of the Union message to Congress, President
            a
    Kenned wid:
        “In t ese past months, we have reaffirmed the scientific and
    military superiority of freedom. We have doubled our efforts
     in space, to assure us of being first, in the future. We have under-
     taken the most far-reaching defense improvements in the peace-
     time history of this country. And we have maintained the
                                                                    11
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1988

                                                        . . . .” (Text,
    frontiers of freedom from Viet Nam to West Berlin
    Wash. Post, 1/15/63, A10)
Junua~y  13: NAEA Goddard Space Flight Center announced sodium-
    vapor cloud ex r h e n t s by Goddard during past two years had
    shown wind bel?avior 4-4-50 mi. above earth becomes erratic and
    un redictable. Below that altitude, winds generally follow
    glo 1 pattern, regularly reversing with the s88solls. Region be-
        %a
    tween 56- and 68-mi. altitudes is characterized by “remarkable
    wind sheers”-within altitude span of less than thme miles, wind
    speed was observed to increase swift1 by more than 250 mph
    and even to reverse direction. I m m d a t e l above this band of
                                                9
    maximum wind velocity, wind diminishes a most to zero. Above
    70 mi., research adicated region of “strong but more uniform
    minds” with velocities of about 200 mph. Goddard exprimen
                                                                    3
    launched on sounding rockets from NAEA Wall0 Station, di
    not extend beyond 105-mi. altitude. (Goddar%SRslease; AP,
    Wmh. Post, 1/13/63, A16)
  Moscow Pruvdu announced Yevgeny Alexandrov, head of research
    laboratory in Moscow Mining Institute, had discovered a new
    law of physics which corrects the laws of Sir Isaac Newton.
    Newspaper did not indicate which laws of Newton were corrected
    nor how they were corrected, but it said : “Up t now, mechanisms
                                                     o
    and machines of an impact nature [presumably mining equip-
    ment such as pneumatic drills] quickl went out of commission.
    Now their life will not only be e x t e n i d immeasurably but also
    their power will incmase many times over.
       “Innumerable examples can be given,” the newspaper said, but
    did not offer any. (AP, Wmh.Post, 1/14/63, A3)
  Soviet Cosmonaut Pave1 Popovich, boarding Soviet aircraft, in
    Havana bound for MOSCOW,      made the comment: “The world will
    soon know about the first female cosmonaut.” (~CTPI?   Wmh. Pod,
    1/14/63, A3)
Jonwzry 14: NASA announced signin of Memorandum of Under-
    standing with India’s Dept. of fjtomic Energy, .providing for
    cooperative U.S.-India space program. Joint scientific experi-
    ments to explore equatorial electrojet and upper-atmosphere winds
     from geomagnetic equator would be launched from Thumba,
    India, during 1963. For equatorial electrojet experiments NAEA
     would provide nine Nike-Apache vehicles ; ground launching,
     tracking, and telemetry equipment, ground instrumentation on
    loan basis; and training in US. for Indian personnel responsible
    for telemetry and launch operations. Univ. of New Hampshim
    would provide instrumented payloads through NASA. India
    would provide launching site and facilities; rsonnel for launch
    operations, telemetry, and data analysis; anEupporting F u n d
    magnetic and meteorological observations. For atmospheric-wind
    measurements, NASA would provide four Nike-Cajun vehicles,
     appropriate launching device on loan basis, and training a t NAEA
    centers for Indian personnel responsible for launch operations.
    India would supply four sodium-vapor-release payloads, photo-
    graphic equipment, launch site and facilities, personnel, and sup-
    porting meteorological data. ( NASA Release 63-5)
12            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

January 14.: French President Charles de Gaulle, speaking in press
    conference in Paris, referred to President Kennedy’s offer of Pola-
                   I
    ris missiles as oint defensive weapons for NATO: “Nobody in the
    world, especia ly nobody in America, can say, if, where, when,
    how, and to what degree American atomic armaments wdl be
    emplo ed to defend Europe. Therefore we will construct and
    if n K b e will emplo our atomic force ourselves.
                           c9
       “Of course, this 08s not exclude the combined action of our
    force with an analogous allied force of the m e kind, but for us
          mtion is unthinkable in this case. . . .
           e have neither the submarines to launch them [Polaris
    missiles] nor the nuclear warheads to arm them. By the time we
    have them, what good will the Polaris be? Without doubt, by
    then we will have our own missilw. For us, this matter has no
    present application. . . .” (Wash. Post, 1/15/63, Al, A?’)
  NASA decision to procure Atlas-Agena B vehicles diredly from
    contractors, thus eliminating USAF a s procurement a
                                                          Yt9     was pre-
    dicted in Aviation Week. NASA would name ang e responsible
    contractor for vehicle integration and would standardize the
    Atlas-Agena B for space missions. NASA already had used Seven
    of the vehiclesfive for Ranger and two for Mariner-and was
      lanning t o use 20 Atlas-A ena B’s over next three years-in
    6emini rendezvous flights, ago, Oao, Ranger, and Mariner R.
    Prime vehicle contractors were General Dynamics/Astronautics
    for Atlas stage and Lockheed for Agena; GSAF had vehicle i n t e
    gration responsibility. (Av.    Wk., 1/14/63,38)
  Article in Soviet newspaper Pravda, reported in Missiles and
    Rockets, said the moon appears to be undergoi chan es :During
                                                    IT. P
    recent years, crater Linne has decreased to ha f its ormer size;
    crater Alhazen has disappeared; small craters have formed at
    bottom of Plato; and, at sunrise, g r e e n i s h - p y spots periodi-
    cally appear at battom of some craters. Pravda said s ots in bot-
    tom of crater Eratmthenes appear to some observers t o k moving.
     (M&R, 1/14/63,23)
  J. A. MacTaggart, managing director of Niagara Falls, Ontario,
     wax museum, said wax image of Astronaut John Glenn wa6 not
    on display beoausa of “astronomical” $3,000 it would cod to pur-
                                                                 e
    chase space suit from American manufacturer. Wax fi re of
     Soviert Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was on display, Soviet overn-
    ment having supplied copy of his space suit after request through
     British Aeronautid Board. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63)
January 15: EXPLORER XIV energetic particles satellite transmitted 38
    sec. of compl& data, and officialsof NASA Goddard Space Flight
     Center were hopeful the satellite mi ht eventually resume normal
                                         3
    operations. EXPLORER XIV develop transmission difficult Jan.
     10, after 100 da s of nearly continuous transmission. &-oject
                       d                           r
                         Marcotte of Goddard re rted ~ P L O R E R XIV
    Manager Paul
    received less than 10 per cent de radation rom space radiation
                                       4
     since its launch Oct. 2 ; project o cials did not believe radiation
    damage to be cause of satellite’s transmission malfunction.
     (NASA EXPLORER XIV Prog. Rpt. No. 4 ; NASA Release 63-6)
                                                                      13
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

January 15: TELBTAB communications satellite relayed pictures of
     opening of East German Communist party congress to television
    viewers in US. (Chicago Trib., 1/16/63)
  FAA announced Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby had told super-
     sonic transport advisory group to restudy cost details of super-
     sonic transport development and to prepare s ific proposal on
     management organization of the aircraft’s Eelopment. Ad-
     visory board, headed by Gen. Orval R. Cook ( UBAF,Ret.), had been
     studyin supersonic commercial aircraft for 13 months. ( Wmh.
    Post, l/e;l6/63)
  Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secreta of National Aeronau-
                                              ?
     tics and Space Council, told National Roc et Club in Washington :
     “From time to time, major public attention shifts from one space
     project to another. . . . It would be incorrect to conclude, how-
     ever, that any one of these projects or any other specific project
     encompasses the whole job of implementing our space
                                                                    , com-
     Rather, all of them, plus many projects not yet conceiredPdlcY.
     bined to make the national program viable, energetic and selec-
     tively ex andin . . .
              . . Bur mittary space activities are just as peaceful as our
        ‘6.

     non-military ones. Indeed, our space legislation labels both as
    ‘peaceful.’ Both, incidentally, are also scientific, so one cannot
     make the further distinction that NASA’s AEC’S pro ects are
                                                   and
                                                                i,
     scientific and the Defense Department’s are something ot er than
    that orviceversa. . . .
       “ h e t h e r or not enough is being done in either the military
    or non-military space field-and I am never satisfied-I would
    suggest that before one comes to a fr conclusion on such a ques-
                                            im
    tion, he should examine in considerable detail just how much has
    been accomplished during the past 12 months. I t is an impres-
     sive record and one need not skip over the failures or the delays
     iu specific projects in order to cieveiop a balance sheet which
     shows a remarkable degree of progress in a field in which we
    started late and moved slowly too long. . . .
       “In concluding . . . , I would emphasize several points: (1)It
    is in this nation’s intemt-emnomically, technologically, scien-
    tifically, militarily, and internationally-to carry out an accelerat-
    ing space program ; (2) to maintain our position of leadership in
    the free world we cannot afford anything less than first place in
    space accomplishment and there is no sound basis for complacency
    regardin our present position; (3) we must take risks and over-
             P
    come fai ures in this complex endeavor and we dare not let the
    risks or the failures slow our momentum; and (4)in spite of all
    the excitement and glamor of the s ace program, it must be-man-
                                        B
    aged and operated in a tough-min ed fashion so that we will get
    every one of its many benefits as soon and as efficiently as possi-
    ble.” (Text)
            solicited proposals from industry for development of solid-
 rs.4~
    propellant space booster capable of up to six-million-lb. thrust.
    USAF action stemmed from DOD-NASA a         eement of December 1962
    to advance the technology of large soliypropellant rocket motors.
     (DOD Release 53-63; AP, Wash. Post, 1/16/63)
14             ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 1963

                W. GillFpie, systems engineer of Lockheed Missiles
January 15: R.
     and Space Co., said in Los Angeles press conference : “America’s
    giant program for a [manned] lunar landing should be reoriented
    to allow for a manned landing on Mars and a manned capture
     [orbital flyby] of Venus by 1973. Most of the talent now work-
    ing on the lunar lnnding would have to be diverted for the Mars
    and Venus flights.’’ H e said he was “one of those who thinks
    there is some form of life on Mars” and that a landing there
    would be of more value than one on the moon; scientists already
    have a pretty good idea of what man would find on the moon.
    Gillespie was in Los Angeles for 9th annual meeting of American
    Astronautical Society. (L.A. Times to Wash. Post, 1/16/63, A7)
Jnnuary 16: Nike-Cajun rocket launched from NASA Wallops Stat’            ion
    to detect atomic hydrogen in the atmosphere and test theories of
     sodium airglow.             ayload released ozone into sodium air-
                                f
    glow layer of the 126-1b. iere at approximately 47-mi. altitude;
                         atmosp
    faint luminosity created by ozone cloud was measured by photom-
    eters in the paylod and photographed with telescopic camera
     itt Wallops Station. (Wallops Releaze 63-7)
  Background briefing in Pentagon on DOD budget proposals for FY
     1964 indicated a total request in new obligational authority of
    $53.7 billion. Of this, some $5.5 billion was earmarked for RBD
     for the three services: Army’s main emphasis would be on the
    modernized Nike-Zeus antimissile system and on antiguerrilla
     weapons ; Navy’s 011 antisubmarine warfare; Air Force’s on mis-
     sile and space systems development. The $1.66 billion for RDTBE
     itnd Astronautics represented the DOD portion of the national space
     program. (DOD Background Briefing on the F Y 1964 Defense
     Budget, 1/16/63)
  USAF announced the lannch of an unidentified sztellite with Thor-
    Agena D vehicle from Vandenberg AFB. (UPI, Wash. Post,
     1/17/63, A l )
  Biweekly Sntellite Ritirntion Report, by NASA Goddard Space Flight
     Center, initiated practice of reporting only thaw objects launched
     by NASA, with no coverage in future of launchings by DOD agencies
     or U.S.S.R. (Xnt. LS’it. Rpt., 1/16/63)
  180 workers of International I k t h e r h d of Electrical Workers
     struck McDonnell Aircraft Corp., but other unions crossed the
     picket lines and the plant continued to operate normally. (AP,
     Wash.Post, 1/17/63,4)
Jamwry 17: X-15 No. 3, piloted by Joseph A. Walker ( N A S A ) , reached
     271,000-ft. altitude and 3,677-niph speed (mach 5.47) in flight
     near NASA Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. Flight was
     second highestj nltitude achieved with rocket-powered X-15 and
     fourth to remh or exceed altitude for which aircraft.was designed ;
     it was X-15’s highest nltitude without ventral tail fin. (NASA Re-
     lease 63-8)
  President Kennedy sent F Y 1964 Budget Request to Congress, rec-
     ommending NASA appropriation of $5.712 billion. Of this sum,
     $3.10 billion was for manned spnce flight, with Project Apollo re-
     ceiving largest single increase in NASA b u d g e t f r o m $435 million
     in F Y 1963 to $1.2 billion in FY 1%4. NASA Administrator
                                                                          15
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    James E. Webb characterized the budget request as “au.stere”-it
    would neither speed up nor slow down the National effort to land
    an American on the moon in this decade.
       Total F Y 1964 space bud et, w s estimated at $7.614 billion-
                                        a
    NASA, $5.664 billion; DOD f1.668 billion; AEC, $254.3 million;
    Weather Bureau, $26.2 million ;and National Science Foundation,
    $2.3 million. (NASA Budget Briefing FY 1964; Wash. Post,
    1/18/63, A12; M&R, 1/21/63,13)
Janwrg 17: INJUN I satellite, silent m m Dec. 25, responded to signals
    of State Univ. of Iowa scientists, Who did not know cause of the
    cosmic-raysatellite’s transmission interruption. (AP,          Wash. Eve.
    Star 1/30/63)
  Nike-dajun sounding rpcket launched a Wallops Island, Va., to
                                              t
    46.5-mi. altitude, ejecting ozone about l O s e c . after trajectory peak.
    Objects of the NASA Lewis Research Center experiment were to:
    test excited oxygen theory of sodium airglow ;detect concentration
    of atomic hydrogen in the atmosphere; measure altitude of d u m
    and hydroxyl airglow layers; and test a new technique for study-
    ing atmospheric chemical releases with rocket-l>orne photometers.
    (NASA Rpt. of S. Rkt.Launching)

                                                            N.5
  RELAY I satellite transmitted 12-min. Voice of America mgmm a              s
    well as A P and UPI news dispatches from Nutley,                 to Rio de
    Janeim and back. Transmissions were report4 perfect, even
    though ordinary high-frequency radio wmmunication with Rio
    was not ossible because of atmosphere conditions (Wash. Eve.
                   ;AP, wmh. Post, 1/18/63,4)
    Star, 1 6
           1 /3
           /%!
 Queationed at NAEA Budget Briefing about NASA’s                  substituting
                                t
                                a
                                rg                         stage in Project
    pickaback rendezvous               .for
    Gemini flights, Associate A mistrator bert C. Seamans said :
                                                                        r-
    “That is definitely by the boards. We did study that kind of
    sibility. We feel it is very important to have a rogram w em
                                                         &
            wx
             ;                                       we                q *e
    +h .
      , pm            tFe -no=+-
                           -c---- a-n-\=
             .
    Agena. .” ‘t19 target object in Gemini fGghta training astronauts
                                       A
                                       ”
                                       --



    for Project Apollo lunar orbit rendezvous. (NASA Budge$ Brief-
    ing F Y 1964 Transcript)
  At NASA F Y 1964 Budget Briefing, NASA Administrator Jam- E.
    Webb acknowledged reported combustion instability in F-1 en-
    gine: “It isn’t ‘ust going to turn out to be a problem; it is a
                      h
    problem, and it as been a problem with every mgine as I under-
    stand it that has ever been develorwd. We will solve the mob
    lem.” (NASA Budget Briefing FYI 1964 Transcript; Wash.&Eve.
    Star. 1 /63 1
            /23
16            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    anticipate obtaining in the Coo er flight. . . .” (NASA Budget
    Briefing F Y 1964 Transcript, 1/1!/63)
January 17: Rainer Berger, senior research scientist a t Lockheed-
    California, Co., predicted man would probabl encounter some
    form of extraterrestrial life within 10 years. Jpeaking a t ninth
    annual meeting of American Astronautical Society, LOS      Angfles,
                     a
    Berger also sug ested “greenhouse effect” of lanet Jupiter might
                                                 \
               ible 2. e existence of warm oceans ospitable t life on
                                                               o
    that pp““ ( L A . Time.3,Wash. Post, 1/18/63,6)
    make anet.
  NASA Space Vehicle Review Board met a t NASA Marshall Space
    Flight Center, board being composed of 28 members re resenting
    Marshall, Manned Spacecraft Center, and Launch 6perakions
    Center. (Marshall Star, 1/23/63,3)
  NASA Langley Research Center announced selection of the Boeing
    Co.’s Transport Div. and the Lockheed-California Co. to nego-
    tiate two nine-month study contracts. Studies would evaluate
    four concepts of supersonic commercial transport investigated by
    NASA Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center and
    would rovide information on feasibility of these four concepts
    througf engineering investigations. Their evaluations would
    provide basis for and serve as guide to NASA’s    future su ersonic
    transport research programs. (NASA Release 63-7; Langley
    Release)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced U.S. and U.S.S.R.
    delegates would meet in March in Rome to work out “detailed
    arrangements to carry out proposals for co-opemtion in space.”
    Meeting would immediately precede meeting of COSPAR, also in
    Rome. (NASA Budget Briefing F Y 1964, Transcript; Wash. Eve.
    Star, 1/17/63
                ed   series of 27 upper atmosphere chemical releases
  USAF announc
     (Project Firefly 111), completed in mid-December, had “ended a
     four-point basic research program aimed at learning more abou
    the ionosphere.” Information gathered during tests,which were
    made at Eglin Gulf Test Range, would eventually aid pilots of
    X-20vehicle. (DOD Release 70-63)
  At the White House, President Kennedy was presented with one-
     eighth scale model of MARINER 11 Venus robe by NASA Adminis-
                                             P
    trator James E. Webb, JPI, Director Wi liam H. Pickering, and
    other officials. (AP, Wmh. Post, 1/19/63; Wash. Eve. Star,
     1/18/63)
  USN gave name “Phoenix” to its long-range air-to-air missile to be
     fired from TFX fighter plane now under development by Hughes
    Aircraft Co. (DOD Release 71-63; AP, Wmh. Poat 1/18/63, A5)
  NASA budget recommendation for F Y 1964 indicated that NASA Elec-
     tronics Center would bo established in the G m t m Boston (Mass.)
    area. (Boston Globe, 1/18/63)
  White House’s F Y 1964 budget request included $511,000 proposed
     appropriation to begin design of National Air Museum in the
     Smithsonian Institution. New building would re lace tempo-
                                                         R
     rary structure housin such historical vehicles as itty Hawk,
                          f
    S m’t of St. Louie, an Mercury spacecraft FRIENDSHIP 7. (Wash.
    z. ef3’tar, 1/18/63)
                                                                    17
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3

January 17: Dr. Soloman W.Golomb of Cal Tech, s p e a k y before
    American Astronautical Society in Los Angeles?warned. There’s
    been a great deal of thought given to preventing contamination
    of the moon and planets d u m g visits by earth space vehicles,
    but an even greater problem entirely overlooked is . . . micro-
    sco ic organisms carried to the earth on return flight.” Dr.
                                          isms inadvertently brouFht to
    Gocmb said extraterrestrial or
    earth mi h t be able to successEy compete with termstma1 or-
                f
       nisms or basic materials of life. (VI,Newport News Tima-
    gerald, 1/18/63)
  Tregaron, Washington estate, was ap roved by D.C. Board of Zon-
                                       B
    ing Adjustment as temporary hea quarters for Space Communi-
    cations Gorp. (Wash. Post, 1/18/63)
January 18: James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, mid in address to
    Charlotte (N.C.) Chamber of Commerce:
       “The most important of the major reasons for undertaking a
    broad national program of space research and developmentthe
    one which promises the greatest rewards for mankind-is the
    least understood and the most difficult to explain. It is the cer-
    tainty that the basic scientific knowledge gained, and the techno-
    logical applications which will flow from it, will offer the great.
    est return on our space investment over many years ahead . . . .
       “The road to pre-eminence in space ma
                                               1.d;                   It
    certainly will not end on the moon, rega ess of long nation
                                                    be a which   One.
                                          .
    lands the first explorers there . . .
       “Much of what we need for pre-eminence in s am will be ac-
                                                       R
    quired on the way to the moon. That is why we ave chosen the
    lunar exploration as an immediate national goal of prime im-
    portance.
       “When will we clearly achieve the pre-eminence we seek? This
    is not an easy question. The answer depends not only on the
    sustained &Tori and investment we make, but on what the Bus-
    sians do. Their system lends itself to concentration of resources
    on specific tasks, but their system like any other is faced with
    conflicting demands for priority. At the present time we simply
    cannot know what level of investment they expect to make on a
    long-range space program. We do know we must not be trapped
    into a n r m one-purpose program such as one limited to a
              ur
                              .
    lunar landing. . .
       “Unless the Russians unveil a new rocket on the order of Ad-
    vanced Saturn in the next few years, our chances for being first
                                      .
    to explore the moon remain good . . .” (Text)
  NAa A Flight Research Center announced award of contract t           o
    Bell Aerosystems Co. for design and construction of two manned
    lunar-landing research vehicles to be used in con’unction with
    Project Apollo. Free-flight test vehicles would be capable
                                  under their own power, of attaining
    of taking of and landi
                 f
    about 4,000-ft.  altitude, o hovering, and of horizontal flight. Ve-
                               I
                               ?
     hicles would be used in investigation of problems that may be
    encountered in landing manned vehicle on the moon; results of
    them studies would assist in preparation of flight-crew training
                           Release)
     devices.       (FRC
18            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

January 18: NASA Administrator, James E. Webb, addressed North
    Carolina Press Association in Chapel Hill : “Our goal is to be first
    in every aspect of space research, development, and exploration.
    To achieve it we must develop the same sort of capability in the
    space environment that we have achieved on land, on and under
    the sea, and in the air, and ‘be in a position second to none.’
        “ . . . I believe the challenge that faces us is to turn the scien-
    tific and technological revolution . . . into more of an e v o Z ~ ~ -
    into an orderly advance into a better world of tomorrow . . . .7,
     (Text)
  DOD announced new antimissile missile program, Nike X, to employ
    the Spring missile. (Space Log, Index supplement to space Bus.
    Daizy )
Januury 19: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator said,
     in accepting Gold Medal of the International Benjamin Franklin
     Society, New York: “. . . Space science and technology require
     research and development at the frontiers of almost every branch
     of science and technology. Any industrial nation which refuses
     to devote substantial effort to space exploration is incurring the
     hazard of future technological obsolescence of its industries, the
     hazard of potential loss of leadership, and the hazard of military
     surprise by potential enemies . . . .” (Text)
  Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) addressed the Columbian
     Women of George Washington Univ., Washington, D.C. :
        “From . . . space research and exploration will come knowl-
     edge-knowledge about the universe and its physical laws;
     knowled e about the earth on which we live; and knowledge about
     life itself
         “The space program will stretch the abilities and minds of our
      people for years to come. It will provide a continuing, long-term
      stimulant to our economy. The magnitude of the task will test
      the resources and cooperative will of all major elements of our
      society. Still, space exploration, and manned space flight in
      particular, offers the United States the opportunity for unparal-
      leled progress in the future.
         “Ultimately, within this century, the sum of all our efforts will
      give us the equipment, the knowledge and the skill to utilize space
      as we now utilize the seas and the air.
         “This then is our motive-our objective. To develop superior
      competence in space which will be available for any national
      purpose which may be required, whether it be for the peaceful
      use of space for the benefit of all mankind or to keep the
      peace. . . .” (CR,    1/24/63 A230-32)
   First S-IV stage for Saturn 6-1 vehicle left Dovglas Aircraft Co.
      for two-week trip to Cape Canaveral. This S-IV would not be
      launched but would be mated to S-I stage for checkout of NASA
      launch operation facilities at the Ca e.
 January 20: Team of four USAF and Eoclzheed exnerts, headed by
      Laurence Stoddard of Lockheed-California Co., Lunar and
      Planetary Sciences Laboratory, announced they would attempt to
      photograph moon during 37-sec. solar eclipse near Cape Town,
                                                                    19
                                                      19 63
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     South Africa, Jan. 25. “Knowledge of the exact shape of the
     moon will give us additional information on the effects of moon
     gravity. This information is of great importance in planning
     lunar landings and computing the lifetime of manmade \-chicles
     orbiting the moon,” Stoddard said. Stoddard photographed
     similar eclipse last JuIy in Senegal, West Africa. (AP, Wmh.
     Post, 1/21/63, A3)
January 20: French National Center for Space Studies announced it
     would launch 100 sounding rockets during 1963 in program to
     study upper atmosphere, double the number of rockets launched
     by France during 1962. (NYTWest. Ed., 1/21/63)
January 21: Saturn S A 4 vehicle left Huntsville, Ala., by barge oh
     10-da trip to Cape Canaveral, where it would be launched.
      (mr,&inningham Post-Herah& 1/59/63)
  I n memorandum to FAA, DOD and Commerce, NASA, CAB, and Director
     of Office of Science and Technology, White House requested a
     report evaluating the $1 million already spent or allocated to
     research for supersonic transport program and “firm recommen-
     dations for possible further action.” Requested report on super-
     sonic airliner program was to be submitted before the end of this
     year. (upr, Wash. Post 1/22/63)
  First flight-test of X-2OA”s inertial guidance system was announced
     by AFBC. First in series of 24, test was conducted in NF-lO1B
     “Voodoo” aircraft over Eglin Gulf Ts Range, Fla. ( o w
                                                et
     Regease 31-R-5)
  Raymond L. Risplinghoff, Director of NABA office of Advanced
     Research and Technology ( o m ) ,said in speech before ~ a in New
                                                                  8
     York :
        “Within the NASA, our philosophy of advanced research and
     technology is an extension and an expansion of its predecessor,
     the NACA. There may be said to exist two principal responsibil-
     ities in these activities. T i e iirst is a simpie extension of the
     NACA in which applied research, with a substantial com      nent of
                                                              B”
     basic research, is emphasized. Here, the principal e ort takes
     place within our field research centers. . . .
        “[The second] . . . could be described as the innovation of
     selected advanced subsystems to permit rapid development and
     engineering of future systems in the shortest possible time and at
     minimum cost.
        “Again, the mode of operation places the principal burden of
     responsibilit within the field centers, but nom we find them
                 3
     closely coup ed with American industry . . . .” (Text)
  Study on possibility of polluting outer space with rocket exhaust
     gases, made by Geophysics Corp. of America for ARPA, was
     reported by John W. Finney of Nezo York Times. Principal
     conclusion of study was that there is “strong probability that the
     accelerated rocket program with enormously large missiles i       n
     prospect in the near future may cause modifications over large
     local a m s or on a vorldwide basis in the upper atmosphere.”
     Modifications could include marked chan e in composition,
                                                      s
                                                  f
     structure, and temperature of upper atmosp iere and changes m
     electron density of the ionosphere. For example, large amounts
20                                                   19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,

     of hydrogen could absorb ultraviolet radiation from sun and
     thus decrease electron density in I region of the ionosphere.
                                             )
     ( NYT Co., Atlanta Constitution,1/21/63)
.January 21 : Reported that Russia‘s Aeroflot had increased its student
     fare discount from 25% to SO%, discount applicable to all college
     students, including those takin evening and correspondence
     courses, high school students, an I f persons enrolled a t military or
     naval institutes. (Av. Wk.. 1/21/63,52)
  Soviet scientist ,Qnatoli A. Blagonravov said in Izvestia article that
     dual flights of Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich in August
     1962 proved that, from a medical point of view, manned flight
     to the moon is novi possible. Neither cosmonaut has shown
     physiological disturbances since the prolonged space flights, he
     said; flights proved man could avoid dangerous radiation and
     could work in outer space over longperiods.
        Reviewing Cosmos series of 12 scientific satellites, to date, begun
     by Soviets in March 1962, Blagonravov said they could be con-
     sidered a preliminary stage in creating “inhabited” satellites.
      ( A v . Wk., 1/21/63,59)
   Atomic Energy Commission awarded full-power license to operate
     the 60 megawatt Plum Brook research reactor to the Plum Brook
     Station of NASA Lewis Research Center. (LRC Release 63-3, Lewis
     Chronology, 1)
   $331 million, or almost two thirds, of AEC’S F Y 1964 budget request
     of $537 million for reactor development would be directed toward
     space and military applications. (Av. Wk., 1/21/63, 31)
   National Aeronautics and Space Council’s budget request for F Y
     1964 amounted to $525,000--decrease of $5,000 from FY 1963.
      (Av.    Wk.. 1/21/63,25)
   Eastern Air Lines survey revealed that 17.3% of its air-shuttle
     passengers had been converted from surface transportation on
     Boston-New York-Washington route because of no-reservation
     commuter flights. (Av. Wk., 1/21/63,52)
   A statement from the American Meteorological Society expressed
     the hope that the T.S. would continue to provide leadership in
     the challenging new field of meteorolo ical rockets a n d urged
                                                fi
      support on an expanded and more en uring basis. The AMS
      recommended that the national program should pursue three
      objectives :
         (1) A U.S. Meteorological Rocket Network based on the exist-
      ing network should be established and cooperative programs with
      other countries should be arranged.
         (2) A first-generation meteorological rocket network capable
      of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and a t least 60
      km. to measure winds and either pressure or temperature or
      density as a function of height should be produced.
         (3) A second-generation meteorological rocket network capa-
      ble of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and 100 km.
      or higher, to measure winds and either ressure or temperature
                                                P
      or density as a function of height, and e ectron density above 60
      km. should be established. (Bulletin of the A M s , May 1963)
                                                                  21
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

              NASA Administrator James E. Webb and DOD Secretary
January 22:
   Robert S. McNamara announced NASA-DOD agreement establishing
   Gemini Program Planning Board, with Dr. Robert C. Seamans,
   Jr. (Associate Administrator for NASA) and Dr. Brockway Mc-
   Millan (Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for R&D) as co-
   chairmen. Planning Board would delineate NASA and MID
   scientific and technological requirements and monitor the Gemini
   program to ensure that the requirements are met. Agreement
   supplemented NASA-uw      Gemini management agreement in &e&
   since spring 1962; NASA would continue to be responsible for
   Project Gemini management. DOD would participate in develop-
   ment, pilot training, pre-flight check-out, launch operations, and
   flight operations “to assist NASA and to meet the MID objectives.”
   DOD also would assist in funding Gemini. (NASA Release 63-12;
   NASA-DOD Agreement; DOD Release 844.3)
 NASA-DOD agreement setting forth management responsibilities for
   operations in Cape Canaveral area was announced. Agreement
   provided that DOD would continue as the sin le manager of AMX,
                                                 8mn;
   extending from the Cape to the Indian                  USAF Missile
   Test Center, under DOD authority, would continue as host agency
   a existing 15,OOO-acre Cape Canaveral launch area; NASA Launch
    t
   Operations Center would manage and serve a host agency a
                                                     s              t
   new 87,000-acre Merritt Island launch a m , being developed
   primarily for us8 with very large launch vehicles such as NASA’B
   Advanced Saturn ((2-5). NASA and DOD would be responsible
   for their own, logistics and administrative functions in their r e
   spective areas; regardless of location, NASA and DOD would per-
   form most specific mission functions in their o m behalf such
   as preparation, checkout, launch, and test evaluation; DOD would
   continue to be responsible, in both areas, for certain fundamental
   range functions such as scheduling of launches, flight safety,
                L --J ---
                                         (NASA T b 3 a ~ M l j
                                                         G
                                   -Le
    ----^   ^^^_^
   l m s u x u aiiu xa i-uveiy,     ew.
            ui
 Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, director of President Kennedy’s Office of
   Science and Technology, was asked in Voice of America inter-
   view whether an attempt to land astronauts on Mars in 1971
   or 1973 “could be considered.’’ Dr. Wiesner replied: ‘LI think
   it could be considered, but I don’t think it would be done. I
   think it is a very major effort, even considerably larger than
   the moon effort. We have made estimates of a Mars program
   cost and a round number like one hundred billion dollars seems
   to be a reasonable figure. It is obviously technically possible,
   [but] I doubt whether one could do it in the time period be-
   tween now and 1970 without just an unbelievable crash program.
   I think that before the century is out we will robably have done
                                                  1
   just that, and it would be interesting to do, ut I don’t believe
   anyone can deny the vital reason for undertaki         the program
   of the kind you are talking about.” (Trannscriz
            a
 Speakin in New York on the histo and the future of television,
                                         7
   FCC C airman Newton Minow sai :
      “The year 1450 in Maim, Germany, marked a watershed in
   history-the introduction of the printing press and with it the
                                             .
   begmnmg o modern communication . . .
                 f
                                   J
22                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,

         66
         I n these terms, we are still a t the beginning of blevision-
    the year 1465, so to speak. Even Telstar, with its present tech-
    nological sophistication, is but a crude vision of what will soon
    be the everyday, lobal marriage of sight and sound. I believe
    television is now faving an impact on society as great as, if not
    greater than. the mintinn D r e s s had over the course of several
     u
    centuries . . .” (Text, 2R, 1/30/63, 1327-30)
January 22: Georg von Tiesenhausen, chief of future studies for
    NASA Launch 0 erations Center, told IAS meeting in New York
    that by 1970 U.8. would need an orbiting space station to launch
    and re air spacecraft; space station could double as a manned
    scientif! c laboratory. Describing station 300-ft. long and 33-ft.
    in diameter, von Tiesenhausen said it could be launched in two
    sections by Saturn C-5 vehicles and joined together in space
    rendezvous. (L.A. Herald-Examher,. 1/22/63)
  Institute of Aerospace Sciences awarded i s Honors and Awards for
                                               t
     1962 : Honorary Anierican Fellowship to Robert R. Gilruth,
    Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Louis W. Hill Space
    Transportation An-ard to Dr. C. Stark Draper, head of Dept. of
    Aeronautics and &4stronautics at MIT and Director of Instru-
    mentation Laboratory ; Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for achieve-
     ment in theoretical investigation in aeronautical sciences to
    Walter C. Williams, Associate Director of NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center; Lawrence B. Sperry Award to outstanding young
    man in aeronautics, Robert 0. Piland, NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center deputy manager of Project Apollo.
        NASA employees elected IAS fellows: John V. Becker, NASA
     Langley Research Center; Paul F. Bikle, NASA Flight Research
    Center; Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, NASA Office of Advanced
     Research and Technology; and Walter C. Williams, NASA
    Manned Spacecraft Center. (MSC space News Roundup.
     1/9/63, 1 ; A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 1/5/63, 12; Av. Wk.,
     1/21/63,23)
  DOD announced establishment of Directorate for Classification Man-
     agement, “designed to increase the flow of information, both gen-
    eral and technical, and to eliminate the unnecessary expense of
     protecting information which no longer warrants security classi-
     fication . . . .” ( DOD Release 79-63)
  USAF’S 1962 launching of six tin dipoles into orbit was disclosed by
    W. E. Morrow of MIT,at annual IAS meeting. The 14-in. dipoles
     were launched to measure effects of solar pressure, air drag, and
     electrical drag on small objects, so that scientists could predict
     how long Project West Ford copper dipoles would remain aloft.
     Lviorrow said the special tin dipoles were following their pre-
     dicted orbit and were still orbiting the earth. (Wash. Post,
     1/23/63, A l )
  James A. Van Allen, speaking at science hearing of House Commit-
     tee on Science and Astronautics, said : “The spectacular nature of
     many space achievements, especially those involving human pas-
     sengers, is such that the space race stirs the enthusiasm of all but
     the most obtuse or superstitious persons., and makes possible
     widespread support by the tax-paying public.” (AP, Wash.Post,
     1/23/63)
                                                                    23
                                                    19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

J a n m y B Rear Adm. Hugh Stirling MacKenzie was named by
            :
     Bntish Admiralty to direct Polaris project in Britain. Appoint-
     was “firststep in unplementing the decisions reached by President
    Kennedy and Prime Ministar Macmillan at Nassau” to make
    Polaris missiles available for Royal Navy. (AP, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 1/23/63)
Junuury ,23: International Association of Machinists (IAM) called
    nationwide strike against Boeing Co. for Jan. 26 ; President Ken-
    nedy invoked Taft-Hartley Act, naming three-man board of in-
    quiry to determine whether national emergency existed. (AP,
    Wash. Post, 1/25/63)
  Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, NASA Langley research
      ilots, reported to IAE meeting on research results of simulated
    fmar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmos-
    pheric re-entry made in simulated threeman spacecraft. Real-
    istic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete
    precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters
    and seven-day duration.
       Lam aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-
    senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability
    to rendezvous in space b visual means. Pennington and Bris-
    senden concluded that pirot could sight target vehicle from p r -
    haps as much as 200 mi. away if it is li6hted by sun or bright
    beacon ; he could then SuccRSsfully brake his own spacecraft along
    an intersecting path.
       Dr. Leonard Roberts, ~ a a c physicist, reported to IAS on impli-
    cations of lunar landi if moon has, as many scientists believe,
    dust layer on surface. %r. Roberts concluded that spacecraft de-
    scen&h to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket ex-
    haust. f f dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward
    and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to
    wcirrnlstr d m t i n rnvrlnpinrr clnnrj, $0 s+~-msiit’s vi4hility
    should not be reduced by lunar &st.
       Other Lam scientists presented research reports covering instru-
    ments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems and wind
    tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Lan ley Reiease)
  Two Beacon-Arrow rockets launched from Tonopat, Nev., test range
    carried six flares to 56-mi. altitude where flares burst in 6-mil-
    lion-candlepower brightness. Sandia Corp. conducted the test
    for AEC, in project developing spacecraft tracking techniques dur-
          atmospheric re-entry. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/25/63)
  Bell elephone Laboratones scientist, Walter L. Brown, head of
    in%
    semiconductor physics research, told American Physical Society
    that TEISTAR 1’s instruments detected sudden and large increases
    of energetic electrons in gap or slot between Van Allen radiation
    belts within a few hours after Soviet atmospheric nuclear tests
    Oct. 22 and 28; electron enrichment of p greatly exceeded that
                                            gt.
    of radiation belts themselves. Before          21, ga was relatively
                                                       i-)
    free of electrons, the electrons following U.S. nuc ear test in July
    havin decayed; after Oct. 22 explosion, gap was rilled. New elec-
          5
    trons ecreased a t rate of 50% daily in gap’s center, more slowly at
    gap’s edges. After Oct. 28 explosion, gap was almost refilled,
    and decay process was repeated. Nov. 1 explosion by U.S.S.R.
24            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    added electrons to Van Allen belts but not to gap, presumably
    because this test differed in size and altitude from the others,
    Brown said. (Wash. Post, 1/24/63, A4)
Janwx/ry a3: Secretary of Commerce Luther H. H d g e s told ASO-
    ciation of Public Affairs Conference of the Chamber of Com-
    merce of the United States, in Washin on, that only one fourth
                                            tli
    of total U.S. MD expenditure (about          billion) is being spent
    for civilian purposes. “By wrongly assuming in the first place
    that research and development for any purpose-space, military,
    or whatever-automatically       fosters economic growth, we have
    completely missed the point that this is a highly concentrated in-
    dustry, restricted by purpose, by geography, by company . . . .,,
       Noting that in last eight years the demand for scientists and
    engineers in Government UD has increased mor3 than 300%-10
    times the increase in private industry-Hodges warned : “Unless
    industry itself recognizes the basic problem-that we must find
    ways to make engineering education possible for everyone capable
    of it and desiring it, and that we must put more of science to prac-
    tical use-we shall not achieve the productivity rises or the new
    products that can lead us to faster growth.” (Wash. Post,
    1/24/63, A2)
  Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, addressing American Meteorological So-
    ciety in New York, said : (‘A global system of weather services and
    atmospheric research requires much more than the sum of separate
    national programs, much more than traditional cooperation or
    coordination. Its success depends upon a world-wide joint effort
    benefiting a world-wide task . . . .” (AMS Release)
  At annual dinner in New York, American Meteorological Society
    presented posthumously the Carl-Gustaf R w b y Award for
    Extraordinary Scientific Achievement to the late Dr. Harry Wex-
    ler, who had been head of U.S. Weather Bureau’s Office of Be-
    search ; Dr. Wexler was cited “for his contributions t~ knowledge
    of the atmospheric heat balance and dynamic anticyclogenesis, for
    his interdisciplinary studies in meteorology, oceanography, and
    glaciology, and for his outstanding leadership in international pro-
    grams in the atmospheric sciences.’’ Other awards : Charles
    Franklin Brooks Award for Outstanding Service to the Society,
    presented to Dr. David M. Ludlum “for his continuing effort, on
    behalf of the Society, to popularize meteorolo and to stimulate
                                                   g%
    the interest of young people in the field, for esta lishing Weather-
    wise, and for his effective participation in Society affairs over
     many years”; Cleveland Abbe Award for Distinguished Service to
    Atmospheric Sciences by an Individual presented to Dr. Lloyd V.
     Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center, Dallas, Tex., for
    “his scientific work on the upper atmosphere and for the stimula-
     tion he provided to the field of meteorology by his work as Chair-
    man of the Committee on Meteorology of the National Academy of
     Sciences”; the Meisinger Award, presented to Prof. Edward N.
     Lorenz of MIT “for his introduction of concephs leading to a bet-
     ter understanding of the energetics of the general circulation, and
     for his recent work on low order systems indicating aperiodic
     vacillations from one regime of motion to another”; Award for
                                                                  25
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    Outstanding Services to Meteorology by a Corporation, presented
    to RCA Astro-Electronics Div., “for contributions to meteorology




Jmuary 23: USAF Minuteman ICBM traveled more than 4,000mi. down
                                          Wash. Post, 1/24/63; M&R
   AMB in “flawless” test flight. (-1,
   1/28/63, 11)
 Dr. David Atlas, chief of USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories
   Weather Radar Branch, announced succBssful testing of Stradap
    (Storm Radar Data Processor),electronic device for short-range
   storm detection and forecasting. D .Atlas said a network of 100
                                        r
   long-range radars and Stradap units could provide automatic
   storm mapping for the entire country. (USAF OAR Release 1-63-2)
 Two major contracts for the Apollo project were awarded recently
   for (1) a lunar charting service by the IXAF Aeronautical Chart
   and Information Center, St. Louis, Missouri; and (2) an explora-
   tory study of guidance system techniques in emergency abort
   operation o the ,4pollo W,M durine lunar landing, a ~ a r d e d  to
               f
   Chance Vou ht Astronaut ics Division of Ling-Temco-Vought,
   Tnr., ~ n ~ n+ems. ( x s c ~ w sheet gofi)
                                     t
                   s,
 Turkish Foreign Minister, Feridon Cemal Erkin, announced U.S.
   \Tould dismantle Jupiter missiles deployed at XATObases in f i r -
   key. Lmd-based Jupiter IRBM was being replaced by Polaris sub-
   marine-launched missile. ( Wash. Post, 1/24/63, A l )
 Prof. Lloyd Motz, Columbia XTniv. astronomer, estimated at joint
   session of IAS and ANS that Milky Way Galaxy contains 200 million
   stars similar to our sun; if these suns allso possess planets, each
   might. possess as many a three planets inhabited by intelligent
                             s
   forms of life. “. . . There are in the galaxy millions of planetary
   systems like our solar system with similar physical and chemical
   properties. Hence life might have existed in many of these plane-
   tary systems, since biochemists have demonstrated that the com-
   plex organic molecules necessary to maintain life are synthesized
   if the physical and chemical conditions are proper.” (AP, Wash.
   Post, 1/24/63, A4)
 Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Cdr. of AFSSD, reported to L ~ that A F Sys-
                                                         S
   tems Command considered three fundiimentnl projects 11s “space
   programs of prime military necessity : rendezvous and inspection,
   space station development, and communications satellites.” (av.
   Wk.. 1/28/63,26f)
               0-4-
                -8-3
     741-823
26            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

January 93: W. Albert Noyes, Jr., prof. of chemistry at Univ. of
    Rochester, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics
    that, to produce more scientists, emphasis should be removed from
    awarding of graduate fellowships and grants and should be placed
    on increasing high school teachers’ salaries so as to attract teachers
    with enough scientific training to stimulate their students.
       Chemist Harold C. Urey said that only about three
                                                      $”’             (?nt
     (about $15 billion) of this count ’s GNP was s nt on ucation,
                                                    (g,      Wash. Post,
    and that amount “should be Toubled.”
    1/24/63, A4)
danua 24: Ernest J. Sternglass, physicist at Westinghouse Research
      T
    La oratories, proposed theory at American Physical Society in
    New York that would offer a unified concept of nuclear and elec-
    trical forces, heretofore considered separate phenomena, and
    would reduce all matter to two articles-electron and positron.
                                      P
    Sternglass hypothesized that al other particles found in atom
     (30 or more in recent years) are merely combinations and vari-
    ations of negatively-charged electron and positively-charged posi-
    tron. Simplest such grouping is single electron-positron pair,
    whirling near speed of light, which exhibits same properties as
    elementary article known as neutral pi meson. Two such elec-
    tron pairs, ,‘fternglass said, exhibit roperties of elementary par-
                                          t
    ticles K meson and Rho meson; ot er systems similarly account
     for all heavy mesons “within a few per cent of their observed
    values.” Combinations of electron-positron pairs with proton
     can explain other elementary particles classed as hyperons.
     Sternglass had assumed that Einstein’s special theory of rela-
     tivity, which states that an object’s mass increases with its veloc-
     ity, governs particles’ behavior; thus, if charged particles move
     fast enough and close enough in their orbits they will generate
     sufficient force to hold atomic nucleus together. (Wash. Post,
                                                  -
     1/25/63, A6)
  NASA report released on Project Mercury flight MA-8 (Oct. 3,1962),
     in which Astronaut Walter M. Schirra. Jr.. said: “I was also
     impressed with the fact that . . . [under the di5erent lighting
     conditions that prevailed, the separated sustainer stage] was al-
     most black in ap earance, rather than the shiny silvery vehicle
     that Astronauts 8lenn and Carpenter had seen at this time and
     that I had observed on the launching pad . . . .
        “At about 10 minutes 30 seconds, I went back to flying-by-wire,
     low, and tracked the sustainer as it traversed down through the
     window, and it was a thrill to realize the delicate touch that it
     is possible to have with fly-by-wire, low. . . . The control system
     was so effective that it just amounted to a light touch and maybe
     a few pulses in either axis to get the response I wanted. I could
     point the spacecraft at anything I wanted to. I could see the
     sustainer and track it, but I do not believe the relative motion
     problem would be so easy to solve that I would be able to steam
          a
     d o n and join u p with it. Although the relative velocity was
     on t e order of 20 to 30 feet per second, it was enough to cause
     a problem, particularly at a time when one is becoming acclimated
     to a new environment. These problems would be difficult to solve
                                                                                       27
                  ASTRONAUTICS ANI, AERONAUTICS, 1963

    b one’s own trajectory analysis, since there were no Wstems
    a&ard to aid the pilot in solving the problem. I think that when
    we build up to the rendezvous technique, one will need more time
    than that just at the point of insertion to effect this rendezvous,
    even with roper training. The use of time while orbitin in
                    f                                                              f
    space is on y earth relative, therefore if a rendezvous is not ur-
    ned, the task should be relatively simple . . . .
      “A smog-appearing layer was evident duri
                                                                   3
    while I was in drifting flight on the night si e, almost atpass
                                                        the fourth 32”
    South latitude. I would say that this layer represented about a
    quarter of the field of view out of the window, and this surprised
    me . . . . Seeing the stars below the lowing layer was probably
                                                       k
    the biggest surprise I had during the ‘ght . . . .’, (NASA SP-12,
    Results of 3rd U.S. Manned Orbit& SpaceFlight, 40-55)
January 24: President Kennedy was asked at press conference if he
    foresaw a need for “manned strategic bomber after the current
    B-52’s and B47’s are worn out,” to which the President replied:
      “Yes, there may be a need. That plane will last through 1970.
    We are securing, as you know, three B-70’s. We have no further
    plans to develo at this time, but there may be a good many stru -
                                                                                         E
                           f
    gles in the $0 e in the late ’60s or early ’70s which are not su -
    ject to solution by missiles, but which may be more limited war,
    and where manned bombers may be very useful? (Transcript,
    Wash. Post, 1/25/63, AB)
  President Kennedy accepted “with great regret” the resignation of
    Philip L. Graham as an incorporator of Space Communications
    Corp., established b legislation t~ direct U.S. communications
                                  d
    satellite activities. raham had served as chairman of the 13-man
    board of incorporators. (Wash. $%e. Star, 1/26/63, A9)
  William G. Bade, associate mathematics prof. at Univ. of Calif.,
    said at meeting preceding joint convention of American Mathe-
                                                  --                E *--.1_-- - -
                                                                                --2 &
                                             -1 A
                               XT_Ll..___
    -.-L!--l                                           --:.
                                                        :A-.
                O--!_A-.                  A:
                nwlaLy,                                           VI Lillltx l ,auu A
                               IVlaLIIelllaLlml K ~ w C l a M U l I
    Illablcal                                                                        -
                                                                              a
    ciation of Symbolic Logic in Berkeley, Calif., that U.S. needs
    “perhaps three times as many [mathematics] graduates as the
    250 now being produced each year.” (Oakland, Calif., Trib.,
    1/H/63)
January 25: NASA announced selection of Rohr Corp. of Chula
    Vista, Calif., to design, manufacture, install, and test advanced
    m n a system to be located a t Goldstone Tracking Station.
       bn,
    Expected t be completed in 36 months, antenna system would
                o
    improve oommunicaltions rnpability of p m n t Deep Space Net-
    work by factor of 10; for example, when used with future deep-
    space probes, antenna will make possible communic3ations over
    distances to the “edge” of the solar system. (NASA Release 63-13)
9 Unnamed U.S.     official was quorted as sayin Astronaut Gordon
                                                               1
    Cooper’s one-day Project Mercury flight M -9 was set for April
    2, “for planning purposes.” Flight would be 18 orbits (about
    27 hours) or, if all goes well, 22 orbits (about 34 hours). NASA
    had not yet officially announced precise launch date i April or
                                                            n
    len h of flight. (AP, Wash. Eve.     Star, 1/25/63, A2)
       8
  Maj. en. Don R. Ostrander ( OSAF), of USAF Office Q€ Aerospace Re-
   search and former NASA Director of Launch Vehicle Programs,
28            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    said in address to National Capitol Section of American Rocket
    Society, Washington, that formal definition of “basic research”
    as used by USAF is “effort directed toward an increase in funda-
    mentalknowledgeinascience . . . .
       “ I t is true that we have many unresolved roblems in this busi-
                                                   f
    ness of basic research. On the credit side o the ledger, however,
    I believe that there is a general and increasing reco ition at the
                                                           E?
    responsible levels of government and indust that ask research
    provides the foundation not only for our m x t a r y capability but
    for our economic progress as a nation. Thus, in its truest sense,
    basic research is everybody’s business, and everyone, t o a greater
    or lesser degree, has a responsibility toward it. I believe that this
    responsibility can best be exercised by a partnership of overn-
                                                                %
    ment, the civilian scientific sector, and industry. I don’t elieve,
    however, that we have yet reached a consensus as to the final terms
    of this partnership . . . .” (Text)
January 25: The first counter-insurgency (COIN) aircraft, a modified
    B-26, was rolled out in ceremonies at Van Nuys, Calif. The pro-
    gram is the res onsibility of the Aeronautical Systems Division
                    f:
     (ASD) , Wright- atterson AFB, Ohio. (AFSC Operational High-
    lights, 11)
  10-day injunction by U.S. District Court J u d e William J. Lindberg
                                                  geeing
    halted threatened IAM strike a e i n s t             Co. President
    Kennedy, after receiving report from special board of inquiry,
    had ordered Justice Dept. t o seek the in’unction on grounds that
                                              1
    such a strike would endanger nationa security. (AP, Wash.
    Post, 1/26/63)
  Atlas ICBM was launched from Vandenberg AFB in routine training
    launch for SAC missile crews. (DOD Release 105-63)
                                                                8s:;
January 26: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced assi
    of areas of specialization for NASA astronauts. Maj. L.
    Cooper, flight MA-9 pilot, and Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., flight
    MA-9 back-up pilot, would be responsible for pilot phases of
    Project Mercury ; Maj. Virgil I. Grissom’s area of specialization
    would be Project Gemini; Lt. 001. John H. Glenn, Jr., would
    concentrate on Project Apollo; LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter’s duties
    would cover lunar excursion training; Cdr. Walter M. Schirra.,
    Jr., would be responsible for Gemini and A p l l o operations and
    training. As Coordinator for Astronaut Activities for MSC, Maj.
    Donald K. Slayton would maintain overall supervision of astro-
    naut duties.
       Specialty areas of the 9 new flight-crew personnel: trainers
    and simulators, Neil A. Armstrong; boosters, Maj. Frank
    Borman; cockpit layout and systems integration, Lt. Charles
    Conrad, Jr. ; recovery systems, LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. ; guid-
    ance and navigation, Capt. James A. McDivitt; eleotrical,. sequen-
    tial, and mission planning, Elliott M. See, Jr. ; communications,
    instrumentation, and range integration, Capt. Thomas E.
    Stafford; flight control systems, Edward H. White 11;environ-
    mental control systems, personal and survival equipment, LCdr.
    John W. Young. (MSC Release 63-11 ; M&R, 2/4/63, 36)
                                                                    29
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

Januamj 26: 16-in. cannon shot a 475-1b. instrumented capsule 15 mi.
    into the upper atmosphere from Barbados, first launching of an
    altitude probe by gun and first such project undertaken by a non-
    governmental agency-McGill Univ. of Canada, with support of
    U.S. Army. Instruments in steel-encased capsule relayed data on
    conditions in upper atmosphere to ground tracking stations;
    capsule remained aloft about three min., fell into sea nine mi.
    southeast of Barbados. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1P228:’63)
Januury 87: Lt. Col. John A. Powers, Public Affairs Ofiicer for NASA
    Manned Spacecraft Center, said Astronaut Leroy Gordon
    Cooper’s MA-9 flight may extend to “as many as 22 orbits. I f
    the flight lasts that long it will be a 34-hour flight.” Speaking
    before Texas Associated Press Managing Editors’ Association,
    Powers said NASA had not yet decided whether Cooper’s flight
    would be last of Project Mercury; “the decision on whether an-
                                                   w l be made aftm
    other [MercurJ: flight] will be necessa         il
    Cooper’s flight. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/28/68
  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. employees approved three-year contract,
    after months of negotiations over union shog.gropOsa1. Con-
    tract, which did not include union shop clause, i pmmde unique
    procedure by which Lockheed would “encourage membershi in
    the AFL-CIO International Association of Machinists . . .‘‘by
    sending letters to new emplo ees suggesting they consider joining
    the union. (L.A. T i m s to 6 m h . Post, 1/28/63, A l )
January B: Ground-breaking ceremonies for eight-story NASA struc-
    ture to be used for pre-flight testing of Gemini and Apollo
                                                               T-
    craft were held near Cape Canaveral. $7.69-million bui ding
    would be first of 40 buildings in industrial complex located in the
    87,000-acre Merritt Island area NASA had acquired for is space
                                                               t
    pro’ects. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
       ci
  Presi ent Kennedy transmitted to Chngres the 1962 report on US.
    A e r m u t k 8 and space Actiuitk8, & t h g i Preface: L‘Theyear
                                                  n
    1962 was a period of acceleration, accomplishment, and relative
      regress for the United States in its space leadership drive. I n
    L t h numbers and complexity of space qrojects, the past xear was
    the most successful in our brief but active space history.
       I n accompanying message, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson
    told Congress that, durin 1962, U.S.         nerated a greater &e
                              5
    of progress in space than id the U.S.i.k? [However] . . . the
    reoords of the two countries were closely similar in regard to the
    ratio of s ace succe~se~ space failures” (Ann& Report for
                              to
    1968; L . 1 Tima, Wesh. Post, 1/29/63, A2)
  Reorganization at NASA Ames Research Center was put into effect
    by Director Smith J. &France, designed to accommodate new
    Pioneer spacecraft program assigned to Ames. I n addition to
    other changes, two new Assistant Directors were appointed :
    Assistant Director for Development, Mr. Robert 1 . Crane; and
                                                          1
    Assistant Director for Research and Development Analysis and
    Planning, Dr. Alfred J. Eggers. (Ames Memo For Staff,
    1/31/63)
  NASA announced selection of Philco Corp. for negotiation of contmct
    to develop and equip Manned Flight Mission Control Center
30              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

               a t NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston. To be
     (MIFMCC)
    operational in mid-1964, MFMCC would d i k t Gemini rendezvous
    and Apollo flights just as Mercury Control Centerat Cape Canav-
    era1 directed Project Mercury manned space flights. (NASA Re-
    1
    -      63-14)                                                     I
January 2 : Installation of new tracking system, Mistram (Missile
           8
    Trajectory Measurement), on Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas,
    was announced. Mistram would provide more precise missile
    guidance and nose-cone impact data than presently ossible on
                                                          cf
    rockets fired from Cape Canaveral; it would provi e accuracy
    required for controlling space rendezvous maneuvers in Project
    Gemini and for tracking return of Apollo lunar spacecraft.
     (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
  Jean Felix Piccard, pioneer Swiss balloonist, died in Minnea olis
    on his 79th birthday. Twin brother of Augusts Piccard, yean
    Piccard made his first flight in 1913, and on August 18, 1934,
    flew a Century of Progress balloon from Dearborn, Michigan,
    to an altitude of 57,579 ft. During summer of 1936, Jean Piward
    developed and flew first constant-level plastic (cellophane) bal-
    loons from the University of Minnesota, and was generally
    credited with the development of polyeth lene balloons for
    ONR’S Project Helios which led to widesprea2use of plastic bal-
    loons as research tools in Skyhook, James A. Van Allen’s
    Rockoons (balloon-launched sounding rockets), Strato-Lab, and
    Man High balloon research projects. ( AP, Wash. Post, 1/29/63 ;
    Aeronautics and Astronautics, Appendix C.)
  M. V. Keldysh, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciencw, was
     made member of Academy of Sciences of the Czechoslovakian So-
     cialist Republic, sixth Soviet scientist to have been so honored
     in recent years. (Tass, Pruvda, 1/29/63,6)
January 29: EXPLORDR XIV, silent since Jan. 10, resumed normal trans-
     mission. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
  Titan I missile successfully launched from Vandenberg AFB by SAC
     crew in routine training exercise, USAF announced. (AP, V u s h .
    Post, 1/30/63, A l )
                                                                    x
  NASA Aerobes 150A sounding rocket launched from KASA Wallo s
     Station failed to boost scientific experiment to desired altitu e
     because of launch vehicle malfunction. Experiment was to have
     studied spectral emission lines in upper atmosphere to help in
    determining “distribution of certain molecular and atomic species
     in the upper atmosphere.” (Wallo s Release 63-8)
  NASA Director of Communications ! t ystems, Leonard Jaffee, an-
    nounced NASA would attempt to launch Syncom communications
    satellite into synchronous orbit with Delta vehicle no earlier
    than Feb. 13. Previously announced for no earlier than Feb.
     6, Syncom launch was postponed “to insure that the [command
    and control] equipment is completely checked out” aboard USNS
     Kingsport, stationed in Lagos Harbor, and on the launch vehicle
     at Cape Canaveral. (Tech. Background Briefing, 1/29/63)
  At an extraordinary session of the. General Aviation Committee
     of the FBdGration Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) , held in
     Amsterdam, representatives of 14 countries agreed that there was
                                                                           31
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

     need for a permanent organization, to be called the International
     Bureau of General Aviation (IFMA), which would resent the
                                                               E
     views of general aviation before the International ivil Avia-
     tion Organization (ICAO) . Representing the National Aero Clubs
     of 55 countries, FAI’S IBGA would have two major objectives : (1)
     To gather and disseminate information pertaining to interna-
     tional general aviation; (2) T o bring about a reduction of re-
     strictions against an improvement in facilities for the free flow
     of general aviation flight operations between nations. (NU
     Release)
January 30: I n wake of rumors that NASA was planning three-day
     manned space flight for August, NASA affirmed its announced lan
                                                                       P
     to end Project Mercury with MA-9 flight in April unless un ore-
     seen problems arise in that flight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb told National Transportation
     Institute meeting in Chicago “. . . our national defens+-perhaps
     even our national survival-demands that we act to insure that
     no hostile force will be permitted to use space as an unchallenged
                                          s” (Chicago Trib., 1/31/63)
     avenue of aggression against u.
* I n report to House Armed Services Committee, Secreta
     fense Robert S. McNamara said USAF was conducting O f De-      T asic re-
     search on an “advanced hypersonic manned aircraft,” follow-on
       roject to X-20 (Dyna Soar manned orbital space glider. Mc-
     Ramara described the aircra I as “an ‘extremely advanced concept
                                        4
                  r         an aircraft that can take off from a conventional
     which envisa
     airstrip and y directly into orbit and return.” (AP, Wash. Eve.
     Star, 1/31/63)
  Unnamed spokesman for US. State Dept. confirmed reports that
     four unannounced objects had been launched into space between
     Sept. 1 and Jan. 7. “They are not our vehicles-that‘s all I can
     say,” spokesman said. Presumably of Soviet ori-tjn? objects were
     launched between Sept. 1 and 17 ; Oct. 20 and 26; Nov. 1 and 5 ;
     and Jan. 1 and 7. Their existence was suspected when US. report
     to U.N. Space Registry skipped the four Greek alphabetical
     designations in the international system of recording objects in
     orbit. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 1/31/63, 1 ; UPI, Wash. Post.
                  h
     2/1/63 A6
           A.
  Gen. B.           Sc riever, Cdr. of AFSC, told IRE Winter Conference on
                                             “.
                                      r
     Military Electronics in Los An les : . .Considering these three
     f a c t o r s t h e basic Soviet hosti its, their emphasis on technology,
     and their achievements in space-it would be a mistake to relax
     our efforts in any area of technology. Space is certainly one
                                                                           .
     area that calls for our best thinking and our b s efforts . . .
                                                             et
        “In recent years, we have been surprised more than once by
      Soviet technical achievements. We must not underestimate the
     capabilities of our opponent. It is equal1 important that we
                                                     %9-
     do not underestimate our own ca abilities.            e have vast natural
                                        cf
     resources, a broad and diversifie industrial base, and an immense
          1 of scientific talent and experience. I n all of these we are
     E m o r e than a match for the Soviets. It is essential that we
     utilize all these resources wisely. . . .” (Text)
32            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

January 30: Soviet newspaper Izvestia reported that a Warsaw poly-
     technical institute had developed technique for soldering alumi-
     num with aid of ultrasonics. Place to be soldered is first coated
     with a thin layer of tin, which b‘breaksinto” the aluminum under
     effect of ultrasonic vibrations being produced by a generator.
     (Zzvestk, 1/30/63,2)
  I n detailed explanation of decision to cancel Skybolt missile deve-
     lopment, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told Con-
     gress that Skybolt would have been overly costly, “unsuited” to
     the deterrent roles proposed for it, and the poorest of U.S. mis-
     siles. (Wash.Post, 1/31/63, A5)
  National Aeronautic Association announced First International
     Aeronautical Film Festival would be held in Nice, Sept. 16-22,
     under auspices of FAI and sponsored by City of Nice. (NAA Re-
     lease)
  Two-day strike by AFL-CIO against NRDS, Nev., nuclear test site
     ended ; union and Reynolds Electrical and Engineering Co.
     agreed to continue negotiations under Federal mediation. (AP,
      Wash. Post, 1/30/63, A7)
  National Aeronautic Association and International Air Pageant,
     Inc., jointly announced plans for Olympics of the Air inter-
     national air show, Labor Day weekend in 1964, in Southern
     California. (NAA Release)
danwcry 30-31: Representatives of Canadian Dafence Research
     Board and representatives of NASA met for preliminary explora-
     tion of scientific and technical aspects involved in proposed joint
     ionos heric research program. Extension of joint Alouette Top-
         8
     side ounder project, proposed program would involve design and
     construction of four satellites in Canada, with first launching
     proposed for late 1964. (UPI, Wash. Post, 1/12/63; NAaA A I )
Janunry 31: Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, EXPLORER I.
      Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to
     track EXPLORER I : at the time, network included Vanguard’s Mini2
     track stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since
     that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide
     tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and
      space probes launched by T I S : Minitrack network; Deep Space
      Instrumentation Facilities ; Manned Space Flight Network ;
      Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-
      Camera Network.
         Ceremonies a t NASA Goddard Space Flight Center featured
      talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, NASA Administrator
      James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio
      transmissions from VANGUARD I, second U S . satellite and oldest
      U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of God-
      dard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highli hting occa-
      sion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to amfassadors of
      16 nations that have cooperated with US. in establishing the inter-
      national tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in a t
      least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held
      OIL the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reportin
      special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazif
                                                                      33
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria,
    Peru, and s in. (NASA Release 63-10; UPI, Wash. Post,
    1/27/63, A6 ;&te Dept., USIA Field Reports-per AI/Robinson)
Jazumy 3 . A t ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary o              f
             1-
    Tracking a t NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President
    Lyndon B. Johnson, ChairmaR of National Aeronauties and
    Space Council, said in remarks delivered by NASC Executive Sec-
    retary Edward C. Welsh: LL. . . I would like to quote briefly
    from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics
    and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aero-
    nautics and Space] Act:
       LL. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-dehition of
    American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been
    the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the
    dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains
    unchanged.’
       “Ihare chosen this paragraph to guote because it is basic to our
    national philosophy. I n space activities, the lines of demarca-
    tion that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem
    to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of
    a realm as vast as the solar system-indeed, the universeshould
    lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
  At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at
    NASA Goddard S dce Flight Center, Secretary of State Dean
    Rusk said : “We!I nations have embarked on a cooperative effort
    to expand the knowledge of man to an unprecedented extent. We
    think we are creating a heritage for those who follow us in the
    coming generations in a great exploration for peaceful
    purposes.. . .
       “The world watches us in our success and our failures. And
        ..
    the whole world will benefit from our discoveries.
                    t- -..                                       We
                                  i! the kij~i~!iAg8 uii*vei.
       6CTTT, ---17                                WB
                                 t!
                          l.l:”L
                    uv ruU11311

    making it available to the world scientific community. I n this
    effort we regard ourselves as trustees for all the inhabitants of
    this little speck of dust in the universe . . . .” (Text)
  At Fifth Anniversary of Tracking ceremonies, NASA Goddard Space
    Flight Center, L4stronautWalter M. Schirra said that “the world-
    wide nature of the tracking network is a sign that the eople of
    the nations throughout the world are interested in space l i g h t and
    want to assist us in doing the best job possible . . . .” (Text)
  First ublic firing of escape rocket for Apollo spacecraft was made
    at f k k h e e d Propulsion Co. Static firing of the 150,000-1b.-
    thrust rocket was declared a success; NASA engineer George Lemke
    called test L‘amilestone-one of many that must be passed before
    we put men on the moon.” (AP, Newport News Times-Herald,
    2/1j63)
  Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight
    Center, commented on scientific achievements during the firkt
    five years of Space Age: “I have always thought that these
    things could be done, but the rapidity with which these things
    took place . . . actually came quite as a surprise to me. I
34                                                  1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    thought it would take more convincing and fighting to get the
    publicsupportwehavereceived . . . .
       “At the time [of orbiting EXPLORER I five years a 01 you could
                                                           2
    hardly talk about space flights. Nowadays everybo y talks about
    it . . . .” Dr. von Braun Was Director of ABMA Development
    Operations Division which provided Jupiter C vehicle for
                . (Huntsville T i m s , 1/31/63)
    EXPLORER I
January 31: Dr. Nancy G. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar
    Physics, NASA O5ce of Space Sciences, at, Marymount College,
    Tarrytown-on-the-Hudson, New York, stated that : “There [is]
    a great deal of discussion of whether the United States should
    have women astronauts, and I am frequently asked for my own
    opinion on this subject. Frankly, it makes little difference to
    me. I believe that there will be women astronauts some time just
    as there are women airplane pilots, but there are so many other
    ways that women can contribute importantly to the space pro-
    gram that the fact there are no women astronauts as yet should
    not worry us . . . . ,
                         9

       NASA had over 146 women who were classified as professional
    Aerospace Technologists, 77 of whom were professional mathe-
    maticians whose responsibility was the programing and opera-
    tion of NASA’s  highly complex computers and similar equipment,
    Dr. Roman said.
       “Moreover, I should emphasize that as badly as we need
    scientists and engineers, we also need educated women as well as
    men in other fields and no one, man or woman, should go into
    science simply because of its glamour . . . The space program,
    the country and the world need young peo le who have been
                                                  B
    trained to think logically and clearly regar less of the area in
    which the have specialized.” (Text)
  Thomas F. sixon, Deputy Associate Administrator of NASA, told
    American Rocket Society Solid Propellant Rocket Conference in
    Philadelphia: “From the programs of the past two years has
    come conclusive evidence that large se-mented [solid propellant,]
    motors are not only feasible but highly reliable . . . .
       “Also clear is the quality that is perhaps the greatest virtue of
    solid rockets: the relative speed with which major advances in
    performance can be achieved. I n a brief period, the technologies
    of weight, thrust, burn time, and thrust vector control have moved
    forward rapidly . . . .
          The new DOD-NASA program carried out by the U.S. Air Force
       66

    will ive us a great deal of information on the technology
          7
    and ogistics associated with these very large high-thrust
    en ‘nes . . . .
       ‘ s we move deeper and deeper into space, it seems likely that
       A
    we will come to rely upon solids for an increasing variety of
    missions for the same reasons that we have called upon them in
    the past-reliability ,storability ,ruggedness, low Gost of develop-
                                                               .”
    ment, and instant readiness, to mention a few . . .          (Text)
  NASA Flight Research Center announced award of $1.325-million
    contract to Lockheed-Georgia Co. to purchase Lockheed Jet-Star
    aircraft. Aircraft would be used for research investigation of
                                                                       35
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

     aircraft flying qualities, automatic and manual control systems,
     pilot instrument displays, and pilot training, with special
     emphasis on supersonic transport research. (FRC Release 2-63)
Janm?y 32 :Reported that the National Bureau of Standards would
     construct a new facility for improved standard frequency and
     time broadcasts so as to better coordinate the global network of
     missile and satellite stations. 400-ft. antennas svere being erected
     and 50-kilowatt transmitters were being built on a site near Fort
     Collins, Colo., to increase the coverage of the standard frequency
     and time transmissions of NBS stations WWVB (60 kc/s) and WWVL
      (20 kc/s). Both WWVB and WWVL have transmitted for several
     years from sites near the Boulder, Colo., Iktboratories of NBS, and
     the high stability and long-rangecoverage of the lower frequencies
     have been established. ( Chattanooga Tintes, 1/31/63 ; Current
     News, 2/18/63)
  Soviet newspaper Pruvda said MARS I space probe was more than
     26-million mi. from earth and successfully continuing its flight
     toward planet Mars. There was no mention of mid-course cor-
     rection maneuver to bring the probe closer than its estimated
     120,000-mi. distance from Mars in June. (Wash. Ewe. Star,
     1/31/63)
During January: Series of Gemini parachute design qualification tests
     was successfully completed a t E l Centro, Calif., for NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center. Parachute system would undergo
     two more test series before qualification; system would be backup
     mechanism for two-man Gemini spacecraft recovery in case of
     water landings. (MSC Roundup, 1/23/63,1)
  USAF Space Systems Div. requested proposals from 34 firms for
     development of medium-altitude communications satellite system.
     (M&R, 2/4/63,11)
  Basic concepts of ESAF five-year space plan contained in published
     nnicie ’37 L r . Gen. James Ferg-rison, USAF DC‘S;RB.T. Specific d i -
     tary objectives in space \\-ere: (1) to develop those military
     capabilities now beliered required for natioiial security ; and (2)
     advance technology in space (Le., “building blocks”) which can
     be converted to military space systems. DSAF vias primarily
     interested, he said, in space from the earth‘s surface to the sta-
     tionary orbit (22,000 mi.). (A-N-AF Journal & Reg.. 2/3/63,
     9,22f)
  New members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics
     of the 88th Congress: Democrats-Richard J. Patten (N.J.),
     Richard Fulton (Tenn.) , Don Fuqutt (Fla.) , Neil Staebler
      (Mich.), and Carl AlGrt (Majority Lender-Okla.) ; Republi-
     cans-Donald Rumsfeld (Ill.), James D. Weaver (Pa.), Edward
     J. Gurney (Fla.), and John W. Wydler (N.Y.). (NASA AC;
     AP, Wmh. Post, 1/25/63)
  NASA simplified its launch vehicld terminology for the Saturn space
     booster series: Saturn C-1 became “Saturn I”; Saturn C-1B
     became “Saturn I-B”; and Saturn C-5 became “Saturn V.”
      (MA, Holmes)
  I n Interntima.! Geophysics Bulletin, NASA proposed contributions
     to IQSY (1964-65) were outlined. Prominently among them:
36            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

   sounding rockets; ionosphere explorers and monitors ; atmospheric
    structure satellite; Om, Ego, Pogo satellites; Imp, Pioneer,
   Mariner, and Surveyor probes. ( I G Bulletin, 1/63, 12-19)
During Janwzry: Engineers Joint Council issued report, The Nation’s
    Engineering Research Needs, 1N5-85, which concluded : (1)
    present system of allocating resources to U.S. R&D is producing
    imbalance in technical effort; (2) non-defense agencies of Govern-
    ment do not have adequate research programs relating to prob-
    lems in public sector of the economy ; (3) =D by private industry
    is influenced heavily by Government =D allocations; and (4)
         efforts applied to creating new materials and products have
   R~D
    been highly successful, but have not been matched by development
    of systems to utilize these products and materials efficiently.
       EJC recommended: (1) periodic review of U.S. R&D allocations
    and “their compatibility with national goals” ; (2) council and
    professional societies make periodic studies of technical and
    social problems to which enaineering profession should make
    significant contributions, but ‘for which engineering programs
    and institutions appear to be inadequate“; (3.) educational insti-
    tutions and professional societies expand their programs of sys-
    tems engineering “aimed at optimizing the technical engineering
    and social systems within which improved materials and de-
    vices perform their designed functions.” (Industrial Research,
     1/63, 5 )
 Reportsd that General Electric scientists had succeeded in refining
    junction laser to point where out ut wavelength can be selected
                                       %
     for optimum system performance y changing the chemical com-
    position of the crystal. Output wavelength can be selected in
     the range from perhaps below 6,200 angstrom units to near 8,400
     angstrom units. (IndwtriaZ Research, 1/63)
 Yuri Marinin, Soviet space writer, wrote in article translated by
     U.S. Dept. of Commerce’s Office of Technical Services that “earth-
     orbit rendezvous” method of manned lunar flight “is regtrded
     a the most practical.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/63, A5)
      s
 John C. Sanders, chief of Dynamics and Controls Branch, NASS
     Lewis Research Center, obtained patent for and made preliminary
     design of interplanetary rocket using solar rays as ener source.
                                                              T
     Rocket uses 200-ft.-wide aluminized mylar mirror t gat ier solar
                                                           o
     ~ y s . (Marshall Stur, 1/9/63,3)
  Senes of studies for Congressional Joint .Economic committee re-
     ported that status of resources in U.S.S.R. force Soviet leaders to
     choose which of three areas to emphasize-ICBM production, anti-
     missile defense, or space fli ht-with inescapable detriment to
     other two areas. (M&R, 1/f/63, 17)
 According to three Ling-Temco-Vought aerospace scientists, astro-
     nauts opeding outside their gapsules in outer space would have
     considerable difliculty estimating distances to ot!ier objects, even
     of known size Results of experiments suggest that observers
     cannot make accurate distance estimates without the aid of some
     kind of artificial ran              The accuracy of visual observa-
                         g”pi
     tion will affect the camp exity of the guidance system and the total
                                device.
     thrust requirkment for close-in maneuvering. For this reason,
                                                                   37
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    man’s visual performance capability must be defined as accurately
    a are other design data for successful space missions. (Ling-
     s
    Temco-Vought, Inc.; Space Znfomnation Digest, Vol. 4, No. 4,
    1/28/63)
During January: Dr. Douglas McKie, Univ. of London, writing in
    Jan. 1963 Endeavour,traced the history of the metric system, a
    subject of renewed interest in the U.K. since Parliament was con-
    siderin the adoption of the metric system of weights and meas-
          8r.
    ures.       McKie pointed out that the recent adoption of the wave-
    length of a line in the spectrum of krypton-86 as the basis for an
    international unit of length was the realization of an old French
    dream at the time of the adoption of the metric system-the use
    of an invariable natural standard. At the time of the French
    Revolution, Dr. McKie asserted, France had become weary of the
    chaos of variable systems of weights and measures and the govern-
    ment and the National Academy urged the States-General to adopt
    a national system. The States-General authorized the Academy t o
    formulate a system of weights and measures based on measurement
    of an arc of the meridian as the universal standard and decimals as
    the notation system. This was done by 1793, but Revolut,iona.ry
    politics intervened, having done away with the States-General and
    even replaced the Academy. Not until Dec. 10,1799, did the new
    standards become legal, and by then it had been discovered that the
    earth was not a perfect sphere and therefore that the am of the
    meridian was not the invariable standard the Academy had
    thought. (SZlV,Mar. 1963,ll-13)
  A new submarine cable extension 700 nautical miles in length
    and due for completion by late August 1963, would be laid
    in two links-one from Grand Turk Island AFB to Ramey AFB,
    Puerto Rico; the second from Ramey to Coolidge AFB, Antigua,
    B.W.1.-to     substantially increase operational control at Cape
    Canaverai by providing downrange tracking and telemetry inputs
    faster and more reliably. The present operational system extends
    from the Cape to Grand Turk. (M&R, 1/14/63,28)
                          FEBRUARY 1963
February 1 : NASA announced launch responsibility for Agena and
   Centaur space vehicle programs had been transferred from NASA
   Launch Operations Center to NASA Goddard Space Flight Cen-
    ter’s Field Project Branch a t Cape Canaveral. Launches would
    be conducted under technical direction of Agena and Centaur
    project managers, NASA Lewis Research Center. Transfer would
    permit m to concentrate on manned space flight and associated
    launch vehicles, including Saturn series developed under man-
    agement of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Overall project
    responsibility for Agena and Centaur programs had been assigned
    to NASA Lewis Research Center in December and October, re-
    spectively. ( NASA Release 63-19)
 Unidentified space probe employing Blue Scout, Jr., booster was
    launched by USAF from Pt. Arguello, Calif. (M&R,          2/11/63,13)
 NASA announced its first contract to study overall systems rquire-
    ments for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite ( SMS) had been
    awarded to Republic Aviation Corp. Administered by NASA
    Goddard Space Flight Center, contract called for four-month
    study to determine “technical systems needed for 24-hour sur-
    veillance of the earth’s cloud cover and to identify the major
    scientific and engineering advances required for the ground sta-
    tions.” (NASA Release 63-18)
 NASA Flight Research Center announced award of $128,675 to Com-
    cor, Inc., for service and maintenance of computer system used
    to simulate flights of X-15 aircraft. Computer system is capable
    of providing actual X-15 performance and stability conditions
    that may be expected in flight. (FRC Release 3-63)
  Establishment of AFSC Office of Deputy Chief of Staff for Procure-
    ment and Production was effective this date, General B. A.
     Schriever announced. New ofice combined procurement and pro-
    duction to form a single major staff activity. Brig. Gen. Gerald
     F. Keelin ,formerly Director of Procurement in Office of Deputy
     Chief of taff for Procurement and Materiel, was named to hhqd
    the office. (AFSC Release 31-R-11)
  American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) offi-
     cially came into existence, a merger, after more than a year of
     study and debate, of the American Rocket Society (ARS) and of
     the Institute of the Aerosptzce Sciences ( I A S ) . AIAA is thus the
     leading technical society keyed to the dynamic developments of
     the space age. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPL, be-
     came the AIAA’S first President. (Astronautics and Aerospace
    Engineering, February 1963,19)
  Morton J. Stoller, Director of NASA Ofice of Applications, was
     awarded NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership. NASA Admin-
       38
                                                                      39
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    istrator James E. Webb, in making the award, commended Stoller
    for his “outstanding and dynamic leadership in planning, devel-
    opinf and directing a complex scientific or anization whose
                                                      f
    nota le achievements have significantly contri utBd to the pre-
    eminent position of this count in the space sciences,. the devel-
                                     7
    opment of space technology an the practical application of such
    research and development.?’ (NASA Release 63-20)
February I :General Curtis E. LeMay, USAF Chief of Staff, in speech
    to Executives’ Club of Chicago, quoted Gen. Douglas MacArthur’s
    statement to the West Point Corps of Cadets in 1962:
       ‘(‘You now face a new world, a world of change. The thrust
    into outer s ace of the satellite, spheres, and missiles marks a
    beginning o f another epoch in the long story of mankind. I n
    the five or more billions of years the scientists tell us it has taken
    to form the earth, in the three or more billion years of develop-
    ment of the human race, there has never been a more abrupt or
    staggering evolution.‘ ‘‘
       General LeMay went on to say that the “trained man, whether
    in a manned space vehicle or in a ground surveillance control
    point, will be one of our most valuable assets in our national space
    effort-andforoursurvival . . . .
      ‘We must remember that any medium . . . can be a region
    of danger to peace and security. I n this new medium of space
    I believe that the military defenses of the w s e n world must
                                                     etr
    be objective, applicable and evident.
      “The Air Force will use, to the benefit of military s ace ca a-
    bilities, all scientific advances and acquisition of Lowlelge
    achieved by NASA. We don’t plan to wait for a program of fall-
    out-if we can hasten advancement or increase its utilization
    through collateral efforts. This we are doing, in national interest,
    toward advancing our considerable space testing and develop-
    ment of approved space programs.” (A-N-AF J o u d and
    Register, 2/9/63, 15 ; Text, CR,4/6/63, A1202-1203)
 Incorporation articles for Communications Satellite COT. were filed
    by board of incorporators and ap roved by President Kennedy.
    Articles of incorporation provide i two series of common stock:
    Series I, to be issued to the public, to aerospace industries, and
    to noncommunications companies ; Series 1 ,to be issued to com-
                                                  1
                                                            v.
    munications common carriers with permission from                Shares
    of stock were not expected to be issued for at least SIX months.
       Incorporators were serving a company directors until first
                                       s
    annual meeting of stmkholders-expected about six months after
    public offering of stock-when stockholders would elect 12 d i m -
    tors and F’resident Kennedy would appoint three more. ( I V d
    Street Journul, 2/4/63 ; AP, Newport News Dady Press, 2/2/63)
  Three-year tektite research program described in Journal o Geo-
    physical Research by G. S. Hawkins of Boston Univ., Jmith-
    sonian Astrophysical Observatory, and Harvard College Observa-
    tory. On the basis of extensive data obtained in their research,
    combined with previously known data on tektites, the researchers
    concluded that tektites originated from terrestrial impacts b
                                                                   ST13
    meteorites. ( J a m . of Geophys Reaeamh., 2/1/63,i WFC n
    3/11/63,5-6)
40            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,          19 6 3

Febmqry 1-2: I n a paper entitled “Current Developments in Space
   Law,” Dr. John Cobb Cooper, member of the Institute for Ad-
    vanced Study, Princeton University, and legal adviser to the In-
   ternational Air Transportation Association, spoke to the south-
   eastern regional meeting of the American Society of International
   Law.
       “It is now apparent that grave dis Utes exist between members
                                          P
    of the United Nations as to possibe limitations on the use of
   outer space. The& is no understanding as to what constitutes
   authorized activities in outer space ‘in conformity with interna-
   tional law.’
       “It is to be hoped that in any final statement of basic principles
    as to the exploration and use of outer space some clear indication
    will be given of what constitutes authorized peaceful uses of outer
    space.
       66 . . . . the disputes that have arisen, as indicated above, make

    it clear that the manner in which this undefined area called ‘outer
    space’ may be explored and used has not yet been determined.
    International pence certainly requires that this position be clari-
    fied.” (CR,      3/12/63, A1349-A1351)
February 2 : Responding in K o m o m l s k a y a Pravda to a reader’s
    question, Soviet radioastronomer I. S. Shklovskiy discussed ques-
    tion of contacting intelligent extraterrestrial beings and noted
    that “highly sensitive radioastronomical equipment is under de-
    velopment at the Shternberg State Astronomical Institute. I f
    equipment of adequate sensitivity can be developed, and the at-
    tempt to detect artificially produced signals from the Andromeda
    nebula is futile, this may signify that in the regions of the uni-
    verse nearest us, the intelligent life does not have adequate re-
    sources to contact us.” Prof. Shklovski also commented on
                                                XT
    work being done by N. S. Kardashev a t S ternberg Institute re-
    garding attempts of other civilizations to communicate with us.
    (Komsomobkaya Pmvdn, 2/2/63, AFSS-T Trans.)
February 3: NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced appoint-
    ment of Julian Scheer as Deputy Assistant Administrator for
    Public Affairs. Scheer had been serving as consultant to NASA
    Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs George L. Simpson,
    Jr., since November 21, 1962. (NASA Release 63-21)
Februury 4 : Soviet interplanetary probe MARS I was nearing halfway
    mark on its flight to vicinity of Mars, news agency Tass announced.
    Tass quoted Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of
    Sciences, as saying MARS I was about 30 million mi. from earth.
     (UPI, Wash. Daily Neuw, 2/5/63)
  Maj. J. L. Reeves, USAF veterinary officer,warned at aerospace medi-
    cine conference, SAM, that new hazard may lie ahead in Project
    Gemini two-man flights because of poisonous nature of Titan I1
    launch vehicle’s fuel. Poisonous quality of Titan 11’s fuel com-
    bination has been “known in a general way for quite some time,”
    Dr. Reeves said, “[but] there is precious little knowledge of spe-
    cific antidotes for the harmful effects of most of the materials
    now in use.” Most dangerous component is mixture of two
    hydrazines, one of which induces fatty changes of the liver and the
                                                                       41
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

   other causes “peculiar central nervous system excitement and even
   convulsions.” (Wash. Eve.Star, 2/4/63)
February 4: Joint AEC-DOD-NASA report on radiation resulting from
   U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July 1962 said: LL. . ,
    Electrons having minimum altitudes below 500 km are decaying
    in periods of weeks to months. Once those electrons whose tra-
    jectories di into the denser portion of the earth’s atmosphere are
                   t
    eliminated y air scattering and energy loss, the remainin
                                                                   %
    trons may be expected to survive for some years in the a sence
   of pronounced magnetic storms or other perturbations of the
    geomagnetic field.
       “Certain high altitude components of the observed electron
    distribution, however, were seen to decay b a factor of two or
                                                    i
    more in a period of a few weeks. Most nota ly observations . . .
    [by Bell Telephone Laboratories] have shown a pronounced de-
    crease of intensity in regions associated with flux lines extending
    at the equator to distances of approximately 3 earth radii. Some
    more recent data indicate, moreover, that these secular changes are
    energy dependent. It has been noted that large time fluctuations
    somewhat similar to this phenomena [sic] were previously ob-
    served to occur in connection with the natural belts. The observed
    decrease of intensity in certain regions, and the other associated
    changes in the electron distribution, indicate a complicated phe-
    nomenon of considerable scientific interest. The results of the
    present series of observations may be expected to lead to an in-
    creased understanding of phenomena which determine the origin,
    intensity, and character of the natural radiation belts as they are
    sEected by geomagnetic f o m and the upper at:mosphere . . . .9,
       On effects of artificial radiation on spacecraft solar cells, report
    said : “Improved types of solar cells (employing X-on-P silicon
    junctions) which are rnnsiderahlj m n l ~a d i & c ~ resistant, arc
                                                 r
               ~




    available and were employed on =TAR.         With resped to manned
                                                                       r
    missions in space. the shielding provided by normal capsule desi
    effects a considerable reduction in the radiation exposure, and t e
    artificial belt is not regarded as placing any si ificant restric-
                                                        t?
    tions on the conduct of current manned space flig ts . . .” (AEC-
    DOD-NASA Status Report, 2/4/63)
  Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, speaking before aerospace medicine
    conference at SAM, San Antonio, said that all three U.S. astro-




               -
    tion of the air-launched missile had been stopped Dec. 31, but
    research “on various components of the missile system was per-
     741-828
42            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    mitted to continue pending further study of possible applications
    of the technologlr learned from the develoDment work.” (AP,
    Wash.Post, 2/5/uF;3,A7)
February 4: Maj. Harold W. Dietz (USAF) of Vandenberg AFB told
    aer0stmc.e medicine conference at SAM that it was “practdmlly
    impokible” for a single commanding officer of an ICBM site, even
    if he lost self-control in a nervous breakdown, to start a nuclear
    war. Major Dietz reviewed the safeguards built into the complex
    procedure for preparing and firing ICBM’s.(Wash.Post, 2/5/63,
    A6 )
  Mstislav Keld sh, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, re-
    ported on doviet progress in science at annual meeting of the
    Academy : Wew successes have been achieved by our scientists in
    the field of space radio communications. New data have been
    obtained as the result of the radar observation of Mercury carried
    out for the first time and the repeated radar observation of Venus.
    Communications were made possible by reflecting telegraphy sig-
    nals from the planet Venus . . .
       “Research by satellites and rockets . . . [is] opening new pos-
    sibilities for understanding the powerful effect of cosmic factors
    on electromagnetic and hydrodynamic phenomena in the atmos-
    phere which, in turn, decisively influence life on earth. I think
    that very important discoveries will be made in the near future in
    the field of physics of the atmosphere . . . .” (Pravda, 2/5/63,
    AFSS-T Trans.)
  Aviation Week and Xpace Technology reported that, within past
    18 months, four F-1 rocket engines had been damaged or destroyed
    in static firings and that another 12 firings had ended with re-
    mature shutdowns. F-1 was under development by Rocket c yne     f
    for use in Saturn V launch vehicle. ( A ” . Wk., 2/4/63,26)
  AFSC announced improved US.-Canadian antiaircraft control sites,
    Buic (Back-up Interceptor Control), were being built at several
    locations in North America. Buic system would be back-up to
    Sage air defense system; each site would house electronic com-
    puter, associated equipment, and display consoles to “aid Buic
    commander in directing and controlling his forces.” (AFSC Re-
    lease 31-R-9)
  First test-flights of missile warhead over continental U.S. were
    scheduled for next summer, it was reported. USAF Project Athena
    would evaluate unarmed warheads’ re-entry into atmosphere in
    series of flights from near Green River, Utah, to White Sands,
    N.M. A major objective of the project would be “to obtain
    data that will permit defense units to tell the difference quickly
    between real warheads and decoys.” (L.A. Times, Wmh. Post,
    2/5/63, A7)
  Dr. Slbert J. Kelley, NASA Director of Electronics and Control, said
     in Electronic Netus interview that NASA’s    immediate need from
     electronics industry was greater reliability : “By far the great
    majority of our flight failures are due to the failure of electronic
     components . . . . We need more ground testing [of electronic
    components] .”
                                                                  43
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 83

       To gain this, Dr. Kelley urged, private industry should invest
    more of its own funds in space electronics research: “The com-
    pany that wants to get ahead and get its share of the business
    must pitch in with its own resources . . . . Some of the money
    we put in contracts is geared to Steer firms to a certain phase of
    MD, encouraging them to handle it independently . . . .” (Elec-
    tronic News,2/4/63)
February 4.- President Kenned sent message to U.N. Conference on
    Applications of Science anBTechnology in Geneva :
       “The United States delegation comes to Geneva to learn, to
    share experiences and to probe jointly with the other delegations
    the great opportunity which we all share to seize upon the techno-
    logical achievements of the industrialized world and reshape
    them for the benefit of the newly developed nations.
       “We come to this task with a firm conviction that rapid and
    even radical progress can result if we join forces with rigor. We
    come with enthusiasm for a task that is the most constructive un-
    dertaking of this or any other age. And we come with a rest-
                                                   a
    less sense of urgency to get on quickly with a ‘ob that can mean
    so much to so many of the peoples of ohr inter ependent world.”
     (AP, Balt. Sun,2/5/63)
Febmulry 4-20; United Nations Conference on Applications of Science
    and Technology for benefit of less developed areas (UNCAST) was
    held in Geneva. Heading U.S. delegation mas Dr. Walsh Mc-
    Dermott, chairman of public health dept. at Cornell Univ. Medi-
    cal Center, NYC. (Wash. Ewe.Star, 1/8/63)
February 5: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center confirmed that Astro-
    naut Lero Gordon Cooper‘s MA-9 space flight would be delayed
    because o?“eledriwl wiring problems in the launch vehicle con-
    trol system which are peculiar to *Qtlas 130-D,” the vehicle for
    EA-9 !suncE. (XSC Edc%se 20)   63
 NASA announced it would negotiate contract with Fairchild Stratos
    Corp. for two meteoroid detection satellites to be launched by
    Saturn I vehicles. Once in orbit the two-ton satellite would ex-
   tend its two “wings” totaling 96-&. length and providing a m of
    more than 2,000 sq. ft. exposure to possible meteoroid hits.
    Aluminum skin of wings would be electrically charged; pene-
    tration of skin by meteoroid would trigger an electrical pulse
    which would be recorded and radioed back to earth. First of the
    satellites was scheduled for launch in late 1965. (NASA Release
    63-24)
  House Committee on Science and Astroiiautics held its organiza-
    tional meeting, with Chairman George P. Miller of California
    announcing names and ranking of committee members. (New-
    port News Daily Press, 2/6/63)
 Maj. Gen. 0. J. Ritland (USAF) told news conference in conjunction
    with aerospace medicine conference at SAM that ‘‘this nation needs
    a [m.mned] laboratory in space” and that such a laboratory was
    within state of today’s technology. Under USAF concept of
    “Mods” (Military Orbital Development Systems), he said, perma-
    nent manned stations yould orbit in space and would be remanned
    and resupplied by spacecraft similar to Gemini. (AP, Balt. Sun,
   2/6/63)
44             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

F e b m r y 4 : Adm. Sergei Gorshkov, Commander-in-Chief of Soviet
     Navy, wrote in Krasnaya Zveada ( R e d S t a r ) that US.S.R. had
     successfully fired missiles from underwater submarines during
     training exercises last year. H e said “radical re-equipment” had
     provided Soviet navy with submarines and surface vessels armed
     with missiles capable of striking anywhere in the world. (AP,
     Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A15)
February 5 : System to determine composition of moon’s crust by
     explosions on lunar surface was described by Francis E. Lehner,
     senior project engineer on lunar seismology, Cal Tech. Under
     development for NASA by Lehner and Dr. Robert L. Kovach, eo
     physicist at JPL, system was designed to be sent to moon in ‘%nI
     manned instrument package weighing about 50 pounds . . . .
         “We propose to obtain subsurface information about the moon
     by touching off a series of small explosive charges and then with
     one or more geophones placed at some distance from the explo-
     sives detect the resulting waves that have penetrated into the crust
     and have been refracted again to the surface.
         “A geophone converts a mechanical wave into an electrical one
      that may be amplified and recorded. Different kinds of rock
      formation, and cracks and layers of material will affect the wave
      patterns, which can be am lified and radioed back to earth.”
      ( CTPS, Chicago Trib., 2/6/635
February 5 4 : First intra-agency technical conference on optical
      communications and tracking held at GSFC with representatives
     of NASA’s centers and installations attending. Purpose of
                  field
     the conference was to provide for an exchange of technical infor-
      mation on laser optical and tracking programs a t each of the
     centers. (Goddard News, 2/25/63,2)
February 6 : NASA announced it would use T V to monitor Astronaut
     1,. Gordon Cooper during his Project Mercury s ace flight MA-9.
     Slow-man television monitoring equipment h been i s a l d atntle
      Cape Canareral and aboard tracking ship to be stationed in South
      Pacific; third monitor might be established in Canary Islands.
     Television pictures received at Cape Canaveral could later be fed
      into U.S. networks, it was reported. (VI, Wash. Post, 2/7/63,
     A4)
  N.MA requested industry proposals for design and construction of a
     “prototype six-month life support $stem for four men”-a 2,600-
      cu.-ft. cabin in which four-man crews would make simulated space
      flights lasting six months. Proposals were due at NASA Langley
     Research Center by Feb. 26. (UPI, Wash Post, 2/7/63, A13)
  Titan I1 ICBM flown 6,500 mi. do\m AMR with heaviest payload ever
      to travel that far on a U.S. rocket vehicle. This was first Titan
      1 launch conducted by an a1l-us.m crew. (DOD Release 166-63;
        1
      UPI, Wash.Post, 2/7/63, A2; M&R, 2/11/63,13)
  D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and Di-
      rector of Manned Space Flight, said that spectacular “ ‘firsts’ in
      space are not truly accurate measurements of technical and scien-
      tlfic progress. The question of who is first in space will be decided
      by the total accomplishment and the total ability of each nation
      to sail this uncharted sea. Dramatic events, such as the first
                                                                      45
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     flight of a man in orbit, or the first landing on the moon, make
     u p only a part of this assessment . . . .” Holmes was addressing
     Sidwell Friends School Forum, Washington, D.C. (Text)
F e b m r y 6 : Senator Estes Kefauver (D.-Tenn.), Ohairman of the
     Senate Antitrust Subcommittee told the Senate that NASA pro-
     posed regulations would “waive &e Government’s rights to patents
     on taxpayer-financed research and defelopment in most cases” and
     u r p the proposal be killed. AP, Chattanooga Times, 2/7/63)
                                     \
  S p a mg in New York at a specia seminar at the Goddard Institute
     for Space Studies, Dr. Wernher von Braun, ~ s ~ c d i r e c t otold
                                                                       r,
     scientists that ‘ h e k i t s from America’s space program would far
     outweigh the cost. The revenues from communications satellites
     alone would, by 1975, exceed the cost of NASA’s       program in that
     a m . There would also be benefits on which no pnm t g could a
     be placed, such as discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts and
     the accomplishmentso the weather satellites. Dr. von Braun said
                                f
     that man himself is a very important link in space exploration,
     and that the value of placing a man on the moon cannot be
     debated.
        “Instrumen‘ted equipment can do the jdb if one knows exactly
     what he is seeking,” he said. “However, if one doem’t know. then
     automated equipment is not quite good enough.” ( G o d d a d News,
     2/25/63, 2)
  Presentation on Project Gemini, prepared by Drs.Stanley C. White
     and George B. Smith of NHSA Manned Spacecraft Center and pre-
     sented at Lectures in A e r v Medicme Series, SAM, said that
     present Gemini “flight program includes the erformanm of
                                                        f
     manned extra-vahicular operation. The m m p ishment of this
     maneuver q u i r e s the opening of the hatch over the astronaut
     who will venture outside. During this period, the cabin p r w u r e
     is lost, and both astronauts are dependent upon the suit for prim.e
     environmentai protection.
        “. . . The program as it is now planned would start out with
     flights of two-days duration and move forward to flights of up
     to two weeks duration upon successful completion of the f r t     is
     phase. Ultimately, the more complex 14-day duration mission,
     the inter-vehicular rendezvous, and the extra-vehicular manned
     operation goals would be achieved. The intermediate steps offer
     an excellent o portunity to study the man, the vehicle, the man-
                  2
     machine inte ace,and to accomplish other bioscience experiments
     while the program move toward its final objectives . . . .9,
      (Text, MSC Fact Sheet 134)
  The consuls of 19 foreign nations were the guests of the Manned
     Spacecraft Center at a special pragram arranged to familiarize
     them with the Center’s activities and goals in spaice, (MSC Space
     News R d u p , 1/8/64,2)
February 7: Dr. Stanley C. White, of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center
     told aerospace medicine conference a t SAM of Soviet report that
     Cosmonauts Nikolayev and P o vich lost an abnormal m o u n t of
     calcium during their extende$%ndem space flights in August
     1962. Dr.White said same abnormal increase of calcium in body
46            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    waste occurs in bedridden patients after 10 or 12 days; in Soviet
    cosmonauts, condition occurred “earlier than either we or the Rus-
    sians would have thought-that is, about two or three times ear-
    lier.” Soviet findings had -been reported to international astro-
    nautics conference in Paris in November, Dr. White said. H e
    recommended that U.S. officials closely monitor forthcoming
    mpnned space flights to determine if this condition would consti-
    tute a problem; if it did, he said, preventive measures would be
    necessary because “in an extreme situation there would be demin-
    eralization of the bone, the stren h of the bone would be reduced,
    and the h n e s might eventually ecome plastic or elastic.” (AP,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/63, A3)
FebruamJ 7: Senator Howard Cannon, speaking on Senate floor, said :
    “. . . It is my ersoml belief-and a belief held by many other
                   B
    people knowle geable in the field-that our entire scientific effort
    in the decades ahead might well run aground bemuse of an insuf-
    ficient supply of trained technical personnel.
        “. . . I ?gain ask this body to consider the shortage of engineers
    and scientists to be a matter of most vital national urgency; and I
    reiterate my resolve to see that the legislative branch does not
    default in its obligation to take action in this area.” (CR,   2/7/63,
    1949-50)
  Dr. James E. Roberts, USAF scientist, told aerospace medicine confer-
    ence at SAM that permanent five-man space station could be estab-
    lished “in the late 1965 or early 1966 time period.” Such a station,
    called “Mark I,”could be placed in orbit by Saturn I or Titan I11
    vehicle, he said. Mark I1 station, three times as big as Mark I,
     could replace the initial station by the end of the decade. The
    space stations discussed by Dr. Roberts would be primarily for
    scientific and engineering research. (Wash. Eve. Stnr, 2/7/63,
    A3 )
  At banquet of “Lectures in Aerospace Medicine,” School of Aero-
    space Medicine, San Antonio, Southwest Research Institute presi-
     dent Martin Goland said : “Our age is one of quickening technol-
     ogy, of economic opportunity accompanied by sharpened domestic
     and international competition, of changing social patterns and po-
    litical structures. I n the kaleidoscope of this environment, a.
     major source of strength will be on the side of the nation which
     is creative and productive; the nation whose people are capable
     of exploiting for sound purposes the seemingly inexhaustible po-
     tential of science and technology.
        “Within this framework, it seems clear that we must view our
     space program as more than an assembly of scientific goals and
     technical objectives. So considerable is our intellectual and ma-
     terial investment in space that we cannot judiciously ignore its
     by-products, the opportunity to transfer knowledge and capabili-
     ties from spaca technology to other portions of our national effort.
     Each one of us must ‘act as a catalyst in this diffusion of
     ideas . . . .” (Text)
  Polaris A-3 missile successfully test-flown 1,800 mi. down the AMR,
     first full success in seven test launchings of the advanced model.
      (AP, Wash.Post, 2/8/63, A13)
                                                                      47
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

February 7: Boston Globe carried article which cited leading elec-
    tronic industrialists who endorsed NASA’s        placement of an Elec-
    tronics Center in the Boston area. .Public discussion had been
    triggered by WaU Street J r a article which said that “elec-
                                     wn Z
    tronic and other scientific Yankee businessmen are looking criti-
    cally at a proffered Federal gift [NASA proposed electronics cen-
    ter].” Ephron Catlin, executive vice resident of Greater Boston
    Chamber of Commerce, commented : ‘The story completely mis-
    represents the true feeling of the vast majority of the business and
    academic community in this area.
       “Almost the entire area is in favor of the center, and in fact,
    working for it . . . .?’ (CR,2/11/63, A663)
 Frederick R. Kappel, Chairman of the Board of A T ~ T mas presented
                                                              ,
    Silver Quill Award of National Business Publications at 12th
    annual State-of-the-Nation dinner, Washington. In acceptingthe
    award, Mr. Kappel said that A T ~ T ’ STELSTAR communications satel-
    lite had ‘‘provided basic assurance that satellite communications
    are indeed feasible and practical, and that design and construction
    of commercial satellites, and ground stations to work with them,
    can now be approached pretty much as a straight engineering
    project. There is no scientific obstacle to designing a commercial
    system immediately, and bringing it into being as won a the         s
    satellites could be manufactured and put into orbit, say in 2 or 3
    years . . . .” (CR, 2/11/63,A656)
 Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of MSC, was named Visiting Profes-
   .sor of Aerospace Engineering at Texas A ~ XCollege. (aasc
    Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2)
 Thomas F. Dixon, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in
    address before faculty and student body of Vanderbilt TTniv.,
    Nashville, that for the U.S. space program, “1962 was an active and
    successfulyear . . . .
       “Arr,cng $hemar,- and -;aried zccoiq3!:shE*eiitsof 1362, I irould
    like to stress three t i a t have very far-reaching significance.
       “First, we demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt that the
    TTnited States has the capability for manned travel and manned
    exploration of the solar system . . . .
       “Second, . . . we completed the difficult round of decisions on
    how toget to themoon . . . .
       “Third, in the past year we more clearly defined the long-range
    goals of our space program . . . . Our loiiglrniige goals [are]
    to make America the leading spacefaring nation and to achieve
    pre-eminence in all major aspects of space science and space ex-
    ploration . . . .” (Text)
FPhiunry 8: R. J. Parks, JPL Manager of Lunar and Planetary Pro-
     gams, lold aerospace medicine conference that MARINER 1 inter-   1
     planetary probe recorded unexpected temperatures on its flight
     pnst planet Venus. When spacecraft passed Venus, temperature
     of solar panels exceeded 250°F and temperature of batteries
    reached 130°F (compared to 70” at launch time), Parks said.
     (Wash. Eee. Stnr, 2/9/63, A5)
  First meeting of N.\SI-USAF board to coordinate joint participation
     in Project Gemini. Board included NASA Assoclate Administrator
48                                                   1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    Robert C. Seamans and USAF Assistant Secretar Brockway Mc-
    Millan as co-chairmen; Maj. Gen. 0. J. BitlanJ DOD special as-
    sistant for space, L. L. Kavanau ; NASA Director of Msnned Space
    Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes; and NASA Deputy Associate Ad-
    ministrator for Defense, Adm. W. F. Boone. (M&R, 2/18/63,9)
February 8: Hawker Aircraft, Ltd., P-1127 jet fighter completed
    vertical take-off and landing test aboard aircraft carrier Ark
    Royal. Spokesman for the British company said P-1127 was
    first aircraft other than helicopter to achieve this feat. (AP,
    Wash. Post, 2/9/63 ;National Observer, 2/11/63)
  Field Enterprises Educational Corp., publishing subsidiary of Mar-
    shall Field, was reported as having offered NASA astronauts a
    multimillion-dollar contract for their personal stories. Spokes-
    man for Field Enterprises said proposition was under discussion
    with C. Leo DeOrsey, Washin ton lawyer representing original
    seven Mercury astronauts, an$ Harry A. Batten, Philadelphia
    advertising man representing nine Gemini-Apollo astronauts.
     ( N Y T [Western Ed.], 2/9/63)
February 9: First U.S. three-jet-engine airliner, Boeing Co.’s model
    727, made its initial flight, with Lewis Wallick as test pilot. Air-
    craft was designed to cruise at 550-600 mph, carry 70-144 pas-
    sengers, and operate from airports with runways as short as 5,000
    ft. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 2/10/63)
  Eight senior members of the Committee on Science and Astronautics
    of the U.S. House of Representatives paid an informal visit to
    MSC. ( MSC Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2)
February 10: Development and successful testing of laser demodulator
    by Douglas Aircraft Co. and National Engineering Co. was re-
     ported. Device converts laser beams-highly concentrated light-
    into electrical current to produce sounds in radio receivers and
     patterns of light in tdevision tubes. (Wash. Post. 2/11/63, A3)
February 10-16: National Engineers’ Week in the U.S. The White
     House released statement b President Kennedy : “Once again
     the observance of National Engineers’ Week underscores Amer-
     ica’s vital need for the engineer and his work in the development
     of procedures and products which contribute to the improvement
     and security of our citizens.
         “Trained engineers are indispensible to our efforts of meeting
     the recognized scientific and technological challenges of today
     as well as those unknown challenges of the future which we, as
                                                 x
     a nation, must be fully prepared to antici ate and meet.
         “It is therefore essential ti, the sustaine growth of American
     technology and to the well-being and prosperity of the people
     of the world that more able young men and women study engi-
     neering.” (Text; NAA sdt~Xkywriter, 2/15/63)
February IO-.%’h: FAI world soaring championships held a t Junin,
     Argentina. ( NAA Release)
February 11: Editorial in New Y o r k Times (Western Edition), in-
     serted in Congressional Record by Senator William Proxmire
      (R.-Wis.) ,said : “. . . Energetic research and development efforts
     in space are vital, as a report just issued by the President makes
     C l e m , but intensive work (and expenditures) in the vast expanse
                                                                      49
               ASTRONAUTICS ANI, AERONAUTICS, 1963

    of space studies is f a r different from-and far more important
    than-a mere race with the Russians. Whether the $20 billion
     (or $40 billion) race to the moon is justified on scientific, politi-
    cal, or military grounds, we do not think the matter has been
    su5ciently explamed or SufEciently debated. We hope it will be
    in the present Congress.” (CR,2/11/63,1989)
February I 1 .-New NASA-DOD Contractor Performance Rating System
    would be “just like pulling a Dun and Bradstreet report on a
    contractor’s performance,” NASA Director of Procurement and
    Sup ly, E n s Brackett, said in Mzkdes a d Rockets. System
               ret
        P
    wou d provide central file of past contractor performance evalu-
    ations which DOD and NASA would be required to consult before
    awarding future contracts. It would apply only to engineerin
                                                                        Ei
    and systems research and development cuntractorsnot to s d      m
    study contracts. Bracket disclosed the plan was first considered
    by committee in oftice of John Rubel, Assistant Secretary of De-
    fense for Rasearch and Engineering. “We joined the e f r        fot
    laker,” he said. (M&R, 2/11/63,14)
 ~ - 4 devices for detecting life on Mars, to be ejected from Mariner
         s~
    interplanetary probes and soft-landed onto planet‘s surface, were
    discussed in article in T w National Obsermer. Gulliver, first in
                              J
    series, would be 1.5-lb. dome-shaped device equipped with two 23-
    ft. sticky strin s; upon landin strings would shoot out of dome
                    %                %
    and then reel ack inside, gat ering up samples of whatever is
    on surface to be deposited in solution of distilled water, sterile
    beef broth, malt extract, vitamins, other nutrients, and d i e
    active carbon. I f adhesive gathers microbes similar to those on
    earth, micrijbes would multiply in the solution and produce
    radioactive carbon dioxide which would be detected by Geiger
    counter in dome and radioed back to earth.
       Anothcr demcpj known ag Midtivator, rle$pcd hv n J d m n
                                                             p
    Lederberg of Stanford Univ. and still under devefopmenc was
    designed to make 24 different biological and chemical tests of
    micro-organisms. Third life-detecting device is Wolf Trap,
    named after its designer, Dr. Wolf Vishniac of Univ. of Roch-
    ester; it would suck in samples of planetary soil or air and in-
    troduce them to broth somewhat like that of Gulliver. (Natkmd
    Observer, 2/11/63)
  NASA announced manned orbital flights were being considered for
    three months’ duration, to study human reaction to prolonged
    weightlessness in space. “If men can tolerate weightlessness for
    three months they probably could withstand the rigors of a year-
    long planetary mission.’’ (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/12/63, B8)
 First series of tests of Gemini spacecraft back-up parachute recov-
    ery system was successfully completed at El Centro, Calif., NASA
    Manned Spacecraft Center announced. 20-test series checked de-
                                                                    y
                                                                    ?
    ployment characteristics of the system and structufal inte
    of individual parachutes. Parachute system, primanly a bac up
    to araglider recovery system, would be used for wet landings of
       f
    ear y unmanned and manned Gemini spacecraft. Paraglider, de-
     signed for dry landings, would be primary recurery system in
    later Gemini two-man space flights. (MSC Release 63-25)
50               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

P e b m r y 11: Writin on possible effects of subgravity on human
                       5?
     beings, Dr. Tau- i Toong, consultant, USAF OAR, said: “Two
     major difficulties present themselves in a study of such effects in
     earth-bound laboratories; first it is difficult to simulate subgravity
     on earth for long durations and, secondly, it is impossible to scale
     human beings up or down. . . .
        “It was pointed out to the author by Dr.Harold J. von Beckh
     that part of the effort of a human heart is spent to overcome
     gravity. It would seem that a lighter load is imposed on the heart
     of a man on the moon and thus his heart beat slows down. . . .
     The human heart might possibly degenerate to such an extent
     that its beat slows down further to something corresponding to
     the ‘normal heart beat of an abnormal giant’ on the earth. The
     situation might become even worse should he again return t~ the
     earth’s gravitational field with his weakened heart. . . .” (OAR
     Research Review, 2/11/63, 3)
  NASA Argo D-8 (Journeyman) rocket launched from Pt. Arguello,
      Calif., the four-stage sounding rocket carrying 104-lb. instru-
     mented payload to probe hazards of the radiation belts. De-
     signed by Univ. of Minnesota scientists, payload reached 990-mi.
     altitude and relayed valuable information during its 27-min.
     flight, then impacted in Pacific Ocean 1,250-mi. south of Pt.
     Arguello. Launch was conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight
     Center with support by NASA Wallops Station personnel. (Wal-
     lops Release 63-12 ; AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 2/12/63)
  USN announced successful flight-test of advanced Polaris A-3, the
      missile traveling 1.800-mi. down Atlantic Missile Range after
     being launched &om land pad at Cape Canaveral. ( A C Wash.
     Post, 2/12/63, A13)
  Prof. V. Kovda. Director of UNEBCO’S Der>t.of Natural Sciences. told
     UNCAST in Geneva that up to 25 per c&t of the newly trained sci-
     entists in underdeveloped countries emi rate to other countries.
                                                5
        Charles V. Kidd, Associate Training irector at National In-
     stitutes of Health (U.S.), told conference that as many as 20
       er cent of the 43,500 scientists and engineers who moved to U.S.
     ktween 1949 and 1961 had come from Asia and Latin America.
     H e called the migration “a national catastrophe” for emerging na-
     tions because “not only are the talents of the individuals as scien-
     tists lost, but the nucleus of people who can alone build an indige-
     nous base for science is dissipated.” (Manchester Guardian,
      Wash. Post, 2/12/63, A9)
  National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council announced
     receiving $200,000 Ford Foundation grant to support its study of
     U.S. utilization of scientific and engineering manpower. I n ac-
     cepting the grant, Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the Academy-
     Research Council, said: “The study, already in progress . . .
     reflects the growing concern in all sectors that heightened compe-
     tition for highly qualified scientists and engineers may be leading
     us into policies and
        “Our oal is to                         and suggest measures that
             f
     will ena le this
     most creatively
                                                                    51
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

February 11: MSC announced the award of a formal contract to Ray-
      theon Company’s Space and Information Systems Division of
      Lexington, Mass., for industrial support to NIT, which is devel-
      oping the idance and navigation systems for Apollo, in the de-
      sign and g e l 0 ment of the onboard digital computer for the
      command mod&. (=so F c Sheet #96)
                                  at
F e b m m y 11-12?: Second NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference
      held in Washin n, featuring NASA briefings on all major NASA
      programs. (A%,          Agenda)
  Ernest W. Brackett, Director, Procurement and Supply, at the
      NASA-InduStry Programs Plans Conference, Wmhmgton, D.C.,
      explained the role of small business in NASA contracting. “Dui.-
      ing fiscal year 1962 small business companies received 66 percent
      of the total number of contractual actions, large and small,
      placed by NASA. This small business share of NASA procurement
      amounted to approximately $125 million, or 12 percent of the
      total NASA procurement placed with all business f rms . . . They
                                                          i
      are able to compete sucmssfully for many of NASA’s       contracts,
      particularly in furnishing components and supplies. During fis-
      cal year 1962, of the hundred contractors who received the largest
      dollar value of NASA prime contracts, 24 were small business con-
      mrns. I n those procurements where small business concerns sub-
      mi-     bids, they were successfuI in receiving 57 percent of the
      dollar value of the awards.” (Proceedings, NASA SP-29 ; Text)
Pebrzlary la: NASA announced dela from a previously planned April
                                   %ray
      launching data of Astronaut           Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 or-
      bital space flight, because of decision to rewire Bfercury-Atlas
      flight control system. Rescheduled date of flight was not given,
      but NASA Manned S acecraft Center’s Chief of Manned Flight
                        8.
      Operations, Walter Williams, estimated delay would be at least
      three weeks--putting launch date no earlier than mid-May.
       (MSC Release 63-26; Wash. Ewe. Star, 2/13/63)
  Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in NASA
      Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said problem of
      communications blackout during manned spacecraft re-entry may
      be solved by spraying water from the spacecraft as it re-enters the
      earth’s atmosphere. Kelley told NASA-Industry Program Plans
      Conference that experiments conducted a t NASA Langle Re-
                                                                P
      search Center had found that water suppressed ionized p asma,
      which creates shield around re-entering spacecraft and blocks
      radio communications. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
  NASA wlected Marion Power Shovel Co. to design and build crawler-
      transport vehicle for lift’ and transporting three-stage Satmn
                              Y
      V launch vehicle mated to pollo lunar spacecraft and associated
      launch equipment. Vehicle would be required .to haul the 400-ft.-
      high, 12-million-lb. assembly a distance of a little more than two
      miles-keeping it within 1/10 of a degree of true level-and de-
      posit it on Merritt Island (Fla.) launch pad. Crawler would
      weigh 5.5 million lbs. and would measure 130-ft. long, 115-ft.
      wide, and 20-ft. high. Plans called for Saturn V-L4polloto be
      assembled in Vertical Assembly Building at NASA Launch Opera-
      tions Center’s Complex 39, then transported via the crawler to
52              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    launch pad. NASA planned to buy two crawlers at cost of $47$5
    million each. (NASA     Release 63-27; MSC Release 63-24)
F e b m y 1 ’ Because of weather conditions at Cape Canaveml,
             5:
    launching of Syncom communications satellite was postponed
     from Feb. 13 to Feb. 14. (UPI, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
  NASA announced it had awarded letter contract to RCA Astro-El%-
    tronics Div. for fabrication and test of addikional Tiros weather
    satellites; negotiations of final contract were continuing for total
    purchase of seven s a t e l l i t e t h r e e R&D type, two operational, and
    two backup. Before this order, eight Tiros satellites had been
    funded in R&D phase of the program; six had besn placed in orbit
    since April 1960 and two would be launched in 1963. (NASA
    Release 63-29)
  Mr. Oran W. Nicks, NASA Director of Lunar and Planetary Pro-
    grams, told NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference that “we
    anticipate the development of spacecraft capable of trips to
    J u iter, Saturn, and Pluto in the 1970’s.”
       6r.  Joseph Shea, Deputy Director for Systems, NASA Office of
    Manned Space Flight, indicated manned exploration of Mars
    might not be attempted before the 1980’s: “We consider Mars
    to be the most likely choice for our first [manned planetary]
    ahtempt, since its enmronment appears to be less hostile than that
    of Venus. It is also more likely to have some form of life, and
    is therefore of greater scientific interest.” (Wash. Eve. Star,
    2/12/63, A3)
  NASA’s  concern with reliability was stressed at NASA-IndUstV Pro-
    gram Plans Conference b Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director
    of NASA Office of Space Jciences. “We must now- develop tech-
    niques of realizing nearly 100 percent reliability from the outset
    on our space projects . . . . This point of view is widely shared
    within the Department of Defense, and you may expect a co-
    ordinated attack on this most difficult problem.” (Wash. Eve.
    Star, 2/12/63, A3)
  Soviet Power Minister Pycytr Ne orozhni told news conference that
                                       f
    two nuclear-powered stations or generating electricity would be-
    gin o erating this year. Considered experimental, the stations
    woulcf be l m t e d at Beloyarsk (in Ural Mountains) and at
    Voronezh (south of Moscow). (AP, Wash. Post, 2/13/63. A19)
  Chief Justice Earl Warren, speaking a t ceremony commemoraking
    75th anniversary of Georga Tech, Atlanta, said that law had not
    kept ace with science and warned thak, if science were to serve
          K
    peace 1 purposes of mankind, it “must be given a peaceful setting
    in both domestic and world law.” Warren said the Space Age
    posed many new world legal problems that man must solve or be
    faced with danger of self-destruction. “How high into space
    over his property does the right of an individual go? Does flight
    over national terriitory violate the right of a nation t o the space
    above i t ? Can the privacy of our homes and offices be invaded
    by the us8 of electronic instruments that are far removed from
    the property ? These are only a few of the problems which you
    men of science pose to us whose vocation it is to protect human
    life, human rights, and human property.” (UPI, Wash. Post,
    2/13/63, A6)
                                                                          53
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

February €2: S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite
     Center, told Metropolitan Board of Trade, Washington, that
     weather satellites would probably make possible prediction of
     weather trends by as much as a year. By photographing cloud
     formations and measuring moisture content of atmosphere, satel-
     lites should enable meteorologists to discover conditions causing
     weather trends. ( Wmh. Post, 2/13 163, A4)
  Ei ht professors of physics and geology at XIT, Harvard, and
     f&wton signed statement urging public t o support U.S. nuclear
     disarmament position : “Our future depends on controlling the
     spread of weapons of mass destruction, The U.S. proposal in-
     cludes both detection stations and on-site ins &ions. These to-
                                                      f
     gether can identify almost all nuclear exp osions. Only some
     small underground tests mighk o unidentified.
                                      %
        “We believe that nothing can e learned from these smallpnder-
     ground tests which can upset the balance of power.
        “In the long nm,a ‘no-test ban’ policy would result in a P T t
     loss of national security. By contrast the US. proposal realistic-
     ally offers us a practical first step forward.” ( AP, W a h . Post.
     2/13/63, A19)
Februury €3: Herbert D. Rochen’s appointment as NASA Deputy
     to Program Manager of joint AEC-DOD-NASA Snap50 Program
     Ofc was announced by NASA. I n this ca acity Roclien m u l d
      fia
     provide liaison bejtween NASA programs a n 8 Snap-jO/Spur (nu-
     cleiar electric power plant) program. Rochen n-as former1 as-
                                                                      9
     signed t NASA Ofc of Advanced Research and Teclinoogg,
                        fie
                 o
     Nuclear Systems Directorate, where lie was NASA proegpm man-
     ager for Snap-8 project. ( ~ ~ s - 4
                                        Release 63-28)
 USAF launched Atlas missile from Vandenberg AFB in “mutilie train-
     ing launch.” (DOD Release 220-63)
  J-2 rocket engine first successfully test-fired, at siiiinlated space
                  ~f
     d t i k i d ~ 90,093 ft. The OIE-SX. test Si-iTs cuiirlticiec‘i iii sl~e-
     cially designed vacuum chamber at XAA’S Rocketdyne Propulsion
     Field Laboratory. (MSFC Historian, 5/22/63)
 EXPLORER XVI meteoroid detector satellite recorded 16 punctures by
     meteoroids d u e its first 29 days in orbit, NASA reported.
     Charles T. D’Aiutolo, manager of meteoroid research programs in
    NASA office of Advanced R~xm-cli      and Teclinology, said that Kith
     EXPLORER XVI “we have established conclusively that there are
    micrometeoroids out there which can penetrate thin surfaces.”
     Other spacecraft had reported hits by cosmic debris, but this was
     first time actual punctures were recorded. I f EXPLORER XVI con-
    tinued as expected to report meteoroid data, for R full year, it
    should enable scientists to determine whether meteoroids are hnz-
    ardous to spacecraft-both manned and unmanned. D’Aiutolo
    said the satellite, which exposed 25 sq. ft. of surface to meteoroid
    impacts, was not large enough to provide good statistical data on
    larger and rarer particles in space. (Earlier this month, NASA
    announced plans to orbit two meteoroid-detector satellites, each
    with exposure surface of more than 2,000 sq. ft. See Feb. 5.)
     (Langley Release, 2/19/63; UPI, Wash. Post, 2,/14/63, A l )
54            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

February 13: Invitation to European scientists to participate in
    ground experiments usin lasers to track the NASA Polar Iono-
    sphere Beacon Satellites fS-66) was made at Third International
    Symposium on Quantum Electronics, Paris, by represenkatives
    of NASA Hq. and Goddard Space Flight Center. Under p r o p o d
    program, NASA would provide orbital prediction data to European
    participants, who would attempt to track the satellite b bouncing
    a laser beam from ground off corner refledors on wtelfke. NASA
    would be conducking similar experiments in the U.S.
       Lasers were expected to provide useful supplement to existing
    radio and radar tracking systems by providing extremely precise
    range and bearing data. (AI, Robinson)
  Reorganization of Apollo Spacecraft Project Office of NASA Manned
    Spacecraft Center was announced, with Robert 0. Piland named
    as Deputy Project Manager for the Lunar Excursion Module and
    James L. Decker as Deputy Project Manager for the Command
    and Service Modules. Deputy directors would be responsible for
    cost, schedule, technical design, and production of the three-
    module Apollo spacecraft under overall direction of Apollo Proj-
    ect Manager Charles TV. Prick. Other organizational changes
    included establishment of a Spacecraft Systems Office for the
    Command and Service Modules, with Caldwell C. Johnson as
    Manager, and a similar office for the LEM with Owen E. Maynard
    as Acting Manager. (MSC Release 63-27)
  “Astrovoice,” device to enable voice communications with astro-
    nauts during manned spacecraft re-entry, was displayed publicly
    by Avco Corp. Device adds voice channel to tracking radar,
    which is not blacked out during re-entry ionization. Modifica-
    tions to existing ground radar receivers would require only “a few
    hours,” Avco spokesman said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)
  Senator Edward M. Kennedy (D.-Mass.) ,addressing Massachusetts
     delegates to NASA-hdUStry Program Plans Conference, Wash-
    ington, reaffirmed his pledge to foster Government contracts for
    space and electronics industries in Massachusetts, and said : “It
    is my responsibility as a member of Congress to see to it that NASA
    lives up to its responsibility and make Sure your case is heard. It
    it NASA’s responsibility to see to it that the bids made by Massa-
    chusetts companies get the fullest examination and the fairest
    consideration . . .” (Boston Record American, 2/13/63)
  According to Soviet press agency Tass, MARS I spacecraft was
    59,460,000 km. from Earth at 9 :00 a.m. Moscow time, traveling at
    12.7 km/sec as it moved away from Earth. Routine interroga-
    tions had been conducted during the past week and scientific
    information from MARS I had been obtained. (ms Translation,
    3/6/63, of Tass, Pravda, 2/13/63)
  Mirage I V aircraft, French protoype bomber, crashed near Orleans
    because of trouble in one of the twin jet engines. The super-
    sonic aircraft had logged 400 flying hours during past three years.
     (Reuters, Wash. Post, 2/14/63)
Pebrutzry 1.4: NASA SYNCOM I communications satellite launched into
    orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle frpm AMR, entering a highly elliptical
    orbit. About five hours later, apogee-kick motor was fired for
                                                                   55
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    about 20 seconds in maneuver designed to place the satellite
    into near-synchronous, 24-hour orbit 22,300-mi. above the earth.
    At about the time the apogee-kick motor completed burning,
    ground stations lost contact with the satellite and could not
    confirm a synchronous orbit. NASA officials assumed that “the
    satellite’s spin axis was misaligned a t the time of the apogee
    motor f r n . Beatuse of this they have been unable ;to d e t e m e
             iig
    whether the satellite is damaged.” Attempts to make contact
    with SYNCOM were continued.
       SYNCOM I was to have hovered a t a nearly b e d longitude over
    the Atlantic Ocean and traced every 24 hours a figure-8 pattern
    approximately 30” north and 30” south of the equator; this path
    would be close enough to true synchronous o r b i t e i o n a r y
    hovering at speed equal to that of earth’s rotation-to d e b m i n e
    if synchronous orbital communications satellites Fere feasible.
    Experiments with SYNCOM were to have included telephone and
    teletype communications transmitted between n’ea Jersey and
    Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. Syncom was NASA project, supported by
    DOD ground stations and communications experiments. (NASA
    Statement, 2/14/63 ; AP, Wash. Post, 2/14/63, A1 ;NASA Syncom
    Release, 1/29/63)
Pebruclry 1 . Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, ad-
            4:
    dressing Cleveland-Akron sections of American Institute of Aero-
    nautics and Astronautics (AIAA) and American Society of Me-
    chanical Engineers (ASME), stated “a few of the social and moral
    responsibilities of scientists working in this field [of space
    science and technology] :
      “(1) To search for howled e of the facts and to conduct
                                    P
    our work with devotion to inte lectual honesty and objectivity.
      “(2) To carry out our part of the national program of space
    exploration in such a manner as to obtain maximum benefit to the
    we!fEe nf t!X r?eticr.R71d E!! ? E E 2 E E d .
      “(3) As citizens t~ lend our influence to the eshblishment of
    societies of free men in a peaceful world providing not only
    material benefits but also incentives for mental and spiritual
    growth and accomplishment.
      “(4) To realize in our job and daily contacts the highest moral
    aspirations and ideals of which we are capable.” (Text)
 Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter addressing the USAF School of Aero-
    space Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Texas, said :
       “The main goal of Project Mercury is to prove the design and
    engineering concept and the usefulness of Man in space, but the
    capabilities of the Mercury system can be streched only so far.
    I had hoped that the flight of “Aurora Seven” would be a humble
    beginning in the gathering of scientific data from space about .
    the universe in which we live. I n the three short months that
    preceded the flight, we developed many special instruments for
                    .
    this purpose. . . There is untold wealth of information to be
    gained as a result of space flight if we turn our talents and
    curiosities in that direction.
      “I have worked closely with scientists from many fields, but
    perhaps most closely with those in medicine.
56                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       “There have been some wonderful intangibles . attaoh t o work-
                                                         I
   ing with them men. They are more than vein probers, brain pick-
    ers and pulse takers. I am continually challenged by their curios-
    ity and insight, and fascinated by their research. I respect their
    intelligence and I treasure their friendships.
       “Itis this intelligence, this special education and innate curiosity
    scientists of all types have in common that demands they be
    included in future space flights.
       “Perhaps one day the astronaut will be the least important
      erson aboard as he ferries a cargo of astronomers, geologists,
    &iologists, and flight sur eons to Mars.” (Text)
                               f
February 14: Arthur S. F emming Awards for outstanding con-
    tributions to Federal Government were presented to five admin-
    istrators and five scientists a t D.C. Junior Chamber of Com-
    merce luncheon. Among the scientists were NASA’s           George M.
    Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of
    Manned Space Flight, and Edgar M. Cortright, Jr., Deputy Di-
    rector of Office of Space Sciences. Other three scientists were
    Joseph F. Saunders, liead of NRL Medicine and Dentistry Branch;
    Norman J. Doctor, physicist at Army Diamond Ordnance Lab-
    oratories; and Charles M. Herzfeld, director of DOD Ballistic
    Missile Defense. (Wash. Post, 2/11/63, A8)
  Catalytic Construction Co. of Philadelphia was selected by NASA for
    negotiations of contract to build, install, and test synchro-
    cyclotron and related equipment and services for Space Radiation
    Effects Laboratory, to be built in Newport News, Va., under
    NASA Langley Research Center mana ement. Expected to be
                                              T
    completed in mid-1965, laboratory wou d be used for simulating
                   corpuscular radiation encountered in proposed NASA
     high-enerf?
    space flig t , and studies would include effects of radi at’ on ion
                  s
    spacecraft materials and components as well as means of shielding
    against radiation. (NASA Release 63-30)
  Representative George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted article by
    A. A. Mikhailov, Diredor of the U.S.S.R.’s Pulkovo Observatory
    on the American astronomer, William Wallace Campbell (1862-
    1938) in the Congressional Record. Appearing in Soviet journal
    called Nature, article reviewed work of Dr. Campbell at the Lick
    Observatory in San Francisco, where he pioneered in stellar
    photography and the determination of stellar motions (1890-
    1923). (CR,      3/1/63,1086-87)
  Dr. Franklin A. Gifford,. rJr., was awarded Dept. of Commerce’s
    Gold Medal for Exceptional Service for his “major contributions
    to science and administration, for extremely significant research
    and outstanding h d e r s h i p in the study of turbulent diffusion in
     the atmosphere, and for highly distinguished authorship in the
    field of meteorology.” Dr. Gifford is Meteorologist in Charge of
     che Weather Bureau Station at Oak Ridge, Tenn. (Dept. of
    Commerce Release WB 63-1)
Mid-February : A F Cambridge Research Lqboratories conducted at-
    mospheric-density experiment by drdpping instrumented mylar
    sphere to earth from 160-mi. altitude. Aerobee rocket carried
    inflatable sphere to desired altitude from Eglin AFB, Fla., the
                                                                       57
                                                            1963
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    sphere’s telemehring equipment transmitting linear mlerometer
    data measuring atmospheric drag on the sphere. (MID Release
    3543)
February 15: Unnamed us= spokesman disclosed USAF had orbited
    “thermonuclear converter” aboard one of its unidentified satellites
    launched from PMB. Device was designed to convert sunlight into
    electricity with efficiency of solar cells but with more resistance to
    space radiation. UBAF received signals from the converter for
    four days, according to spokesman, and “test was considered a
    major step in proving this concept.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 2/16/63)
  U.S. worldwide tracking network was not able to locate SYNCOM I
    communications satellite; radio contact with the satellite had been
     lost Feb. 14, seconds after onboard rocket had fired to transfer
    SYNCOM I from its highly elliptical orbit into near-synchronous
    orbit. ( A P Wash. Eve. Star, 2/15/63)
  Intsrnakional ‘kelephone and Telegraph Corp. (IT&T) announced it
    had filed application with KC for authority to purchase stock in
     newly-formed Communications Satellite Corp. ( m ~ ,             Wash.
    Post, 2/15/63, C6)
  Speaking at “ground makin ” ceremony for Titan 111 launch fa-
     cilities, Cape Canaveral, 801. Joseph S. Bleymaier (AFBC Titan
     I11 program manager) disclosed that 17 development tests were
     planned for Titan I11 launch rehicle, beginning autumn of 1964.
     Ceremony took lace on dredge Pittabu~gh         anchored in Banana
     River, n-est of 8ape Canaveral; dredge would move land from
    nearby swamps to form island in river for Titan 1 1 (AP,   1.
     Balt. Sun, 2/16/63)
  U.S. Army conducted successful test-firing of Nike-Zeus intimissile
     missile at White Sands Missile Range, the missile climbing to
     “a high altitude” after launch from underground cell. (DOD Re-
     lase 222-62)
                ----
-                                                      ____
- IILLLll TT 1UDlVl G A y 1 - W 1vP, v v v A po0; nFPnn -____ __ .
                                                                _- _
                    ..--i,.a-a       ruw      ,u-fc             qllppmqfiI1
    -L--
          IJ.                   I        vv            vl
                                                        l
                                   IY.        UA   I



     launch from silo, Vandenberg A=. us- said the missile de-
     stroyed itself as a result of automatic signal within its guidance
     system after 56 seconds of flight.
        Results of Titans I and I1 launches through February 16,
     1963: Out of 47 Titan 1’s launched from AMR, 34 were success-
     ful, 9 were partial1 successful, and 4 were failures; out of 8
                            P
     Titan 1’s launched rom PMR, 7 were successful, and 1 was par-
     tially successful; out of 11 Titan 11’s launched from AMR, 7 were
     successful, 4 were partially successful; and the Titan I1 launched
     from PMR was partially successful. (SID, 4/22/63; AP, Wash.
     Eve.Star, 2/14/63)
Pebrecary 16.- President Kennedy relaased report by special panel
     of President’s Science Advisory Committee, report concluding
     that exchange of scientific information “is an inseparable art
     of research and development . . . . [Scientists should] &ire
     many of the burdens that have traditionally been’carried on by
     the professional documentalist . . . . Science c n ultimately
                                                            a



                    -
     cope with the information expansion only if enough of its most
     gifted practitioners will compact, review and interpret the lit-
           741423
 58                                                  19 6 3
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

      erature both for their own use and for the benefit of more spe-
      cialized scientists . . . .7,

        I n releasing the report, President Kennedy said : “Strong
      science and technology is a national necessity, and adequate
      communication is a prerequisite for strong scieiice and tech-
      nology.” ( NYT Co., Atlanta JoumZCE. Constitution, 2/17/63)
 February 16: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, addressing Rural
     Electric Cooperatives Association‘s annual meeting in Las Vegas,
      said: “In less than 5 years, our country has assumed a solid and
     secure lace of leadership in developing the peaceful and practical
            P
     uses o outer space. V’liere once we were, in the judgment of
                a
     some, lag ‘ng behind, today n-e are, on the basis of clear evidence,
     forging a ead. Our efforts in space are in no way dictated by
     a policy of duplicating the activities of the Soviet. We are not
     engaged in a race with the Communist scientists-we are engaged
     in a race to extend the horizons of man‘s knowledge and to in-
     crease the benefits n-hich will better the lives of all men who live
     on this earth . . . .“ (CR.2/18/63,2299)
   Instruments onboarcl MARS I interplanetary probe confirmed exist-
     ence of a third radiation belt, Soviet news agency Tass announced.
     Third radiation belt had been cliscorered in 1959 by Soviet rockets
     which had gathered particles at 50,000-mi. altitude, Tass said,
     and its existence was verified n-hen MAS I recorded stream of
     charged particles far beyond the second radiation belt. Number
      of particles in this outermost belt greatly exceeded that in first
     two belts, according to Tass. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/17/63)
. Cumberland Plateau Seismological Observatory, near McMinnville,
     Tenn., was dedicated. Observatory was last of four US. observa-
     tories designed to measure earth movements as small as one-
     millionth of an inch and built to s ecifications set by 1958 nuclear
     testban conference in Geneva. (XP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
 Febrwzry 17: Scientists Institute for Public Information was foimdecl
     by about 100 U.S. scientists representing 22 independent infor-
     mation committees at meeting in Xew York. Dr. Jules Hirsch,
     research physician and biochemist at Rockefeller Institute, was
     named temporary chairman of the board. (AP, Wmh. Post,
     2/18/63, A2)
   Senator Clifford Case (R.-K.J.), in interview taped for radio and
     television, urged public spotlight on awards of multi-million-
     dollar defense and space contracts to prevent “political payoffs”
     and other improprieties. (AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 2/18/63)
  Soviet Army newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda reported Soviet en ineers
                                                                 i
     had successfully tested “flying saucer” aircraft which ta es off
     vertically, lands on cushion of air. ( GPI, 1Va.h. Post, 2/18/63)
 February 28: Attempted launch of sodium-vapor cloud experiment
     from SASA Wallops Station was not successful because second
     stage of Sike-Asp launch vehicle failed to perform properly.
     (Wallops Release 6.3-16 ; ill&&?, 2/25/63)
  Internal temperatures of Mercury and Mariner spacecraft could
     have been reduced by 50” to 80” F-while in orbital flight but
     not considering effect on re-entry-if       the exteriors had beell
     painted white, according to Konrad Buettner, Prof. of Atmos-
                                                                          59
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

     pheric Sciences a t Univ. of Washington, Seattle, in M s i e andisls
     Rockets. (MdR,            2/18/63,23)
February 18: County Judge Thaddeus Pruss ruled in WisconSin that
     metal particles allegedly from SPUTNIK rv satellite were to be re-
     turned to their finder, Thomas Williams, Brown Deer, Wis., said
     to be firstknown test case involving space law. (UPI, Wash. D d y
     News,2/18/63)
  NASA determination “to go ahead with its liberalization of patent
     licensing regulations, despite Congressional opposition,” was re-
     ported in Missiles and Rockets, which added that NASA had “been
     encouraged by a still-unannounced Kennedy Administration deci-
     sion t o favor a similar policy throughout the government.”
      ( M d R ,2/18/63,9)
  Polaris A 3 missile fired bv‘ USN from CaDe Canaveral headed off
     coursf! and had to be dekoyed by ranie safety oficer. (UPI,
     Wash.Post, 2/19/63)
  Six-man task group to formulate contractor evaluation group sys-
     tem was reported by Missiles and Rockets to be working under
     office of DOD Director of Defense Research and E n ‘neering. In-
     cluding five DOD staff members and one NASA memtr, group had
     already selected six contracts as “representative of medium and
     large development programs documenting contractor performance
     in the two major categories being studied [engineering develop-
     ment and operational systems development] .” (M&R, 2/18/63,
     11)
 USAF announced first silo-launching of Titan I1 Feb. 16 was con-
     sidered partially successful; despite autodestruct 56-sec. after
     launch, the ICBM performed well in leaving the silo and in gaining
     altitude. ( A P , Wash. Post, 2/19/63)
Februury 18-27: FAA, NASA, and DOD conducted a test program at Ed-
     wards AFB to determine the effects of the sonic boom on light air-
                                   Pcteztis! 4mgeI-s cf strIx!tl.ra! damawP to
     C r n H RE4 hn,!iC!?l;t~rnS.                                        e”
     aircraft other safety-of-flight factors were investigated by sub-
     jecting light aircraft and helicopters to sonic booms while on the
     ground, in cruising flight, in turning flight, and near-stall config-
     uration in the cas8 of fixed-wing aircraft. A report on test re-
     sults will be issued following dpis and evaluation of data.
      (FAA-19)
Fe6ruary 19: USAF launched unidentified payload with Blue Scout
     booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. (Wash. Post, 2/20/63, A l ;
     M&R,2/25/63, 11)
 Number of engineering students studying for doctoral degree tripled
     in U.S. during last seven ears,said report in Journul of Engineer-
                                    ahPost,2/20/63, B11)
                             (AP, d s .
   ’ ing Education.

 Senator John 0. Pastore (D.-R.I.) , chairman of the Senate Com-
     merce Committee’s Communications Subcommittee, questioned
     the wisdom of continued Government financing of experimental
     communication3Btellites : “We were led to believe that prac-
     tically all this work would be done by the private [communi-
     cations satellite] corporation.” ( Wash.Post, 2/20/63, A 8 )
 Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before
     Communications Subcommittee of Senate Commerce Committee
60                                                     19 6 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     that experiences of both                and -        I communications
                                 TELSTAR I         Y
    satellites were being “used continuously to review projects such
    as Syncum . . . . in an attempt to achieve the 24-hour, synchron-
    ous orbit, as well as all of our other satellite projects.
       “Ishould like to add, finally, that the experience of Telstar and
    Relay .to date have merely reinforced the opinion which I gave
    before this committee last year; that considerable research and
    development have yet to be performed before economic operational
    systems can be sstablished . . . .” (Testimony)
February 19: Lt. Col. Robert E. Warren (U.S. Army), NASA Deputy
    Director of Communications Systems, reviewed launchin and
                                                                     sg
    performance of SYNCOM I communications satellite before enate
    Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Communications. After
    SYNCOM was successfully launched by Delta vehicle, NASA God-
     dard Space Flight Center had determined apogee of SYNCOM’S
     elliptical transfer orbit would occur at 21,700-mi. altitude, about
    600-mi. short of synchronous altitude but well within allowable
     error. So that more nearly synchronous orbit could be achieved,
    signal was sent from USNS Kingsport in Lagos harbor, Nigeria,
     commanding satellite’s apogee motor to fire 10 min. earlier (at
     5:42 a.m.) than firing time set on onboard timer. SYNCOM re-
    ceived and stored signal, and at 5:42 a.m. signal was sent from
    Kingsport to execute the command. 20.1 sec. later, ground recep-
    tion of satellite telemetry abruptly ceased. Because apogee motor
     was to have fired for 21.2 sec., Colonel Warren said it was “diffi-
    cult to imagine that these two events are unrelated . . . .
       “So,what can we make of all this ? First we know that SYNCOM
    is in orbit. I f the apogee motor did not fire, it is still in the ellip-
    tical orbit and will eventually be found, either by optics or by
    radar. I f the apogee motor did fire, SYNCOM is in a very high
    altitude orbit, and without telemetry, there is only a slim chance
    that it will be found. A search has been organized which will
    continue until such time as it is found, or until further search
    seems unwarranted. I f it is found, we will have another chance
    to try out the command system, and if it works, we could again
    be in business.
       “Secondly, we know that one of the communications transpond-
    ers worked well in the transfer ellipse.
       “Thirdly, we have shown once more that the Delta, launch
    vehicle is a reliable booster, this being its 15th successive flight
    with performance well within amptable error.” (Testimony)
  Bill to create Commission on Science and Technology (S. 816) intro-
    duced in Co ress by Senator John McClellan (D.-Ark.) . Com-
                 Y
                 f
    mission woul be charged with bringing about more economy and
    &ciency in scientific programs carried out and funded by Federal
    Government. (Xpace Bus. Daily, 2/20/63,224)
                                                           a
Pebrmary 20: Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun soundin rockets were
    launched from NASA Wallops Station with scienti c experiments
    designed t measure atmospheric temperatures, winds and diffu-
                a
    sion rates at high altitudes. Nike-Apache’s payload ejected so-
    dium vapor trail from 25-mi. altitude to 100-mi. altitude, the
    vapor clouds visible for several hundred miles. Nike-Cajun’s pay-
                                                                      61
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    load consisted of 12 special explosive charges ejected and d e b
    nated at intervals from 24- to 55-mi. altitudes. Experiments
    were part of continuing program by NASA Goddard Space Flight
    Center to study charadsristics and composition of the upper at-
    mosphere. (Wallops Release 63-17)
February 20: Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with experiments to meas-
    ure winds and temperatures and to derive densities and pressures
    up to 90 Inn.was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada. Twelve
    grenades ejected and exploded successfully a t altitudes from 39
    to 91.3 km. A simultaneous launching with Wallops Island was
    achieved. (NASA Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launchin f , 3/11/63)
 On anniversary of f r t U.S. manned orbita space flight, Kenneth
                          is
    S. Kleinknecht, Mercury Project Manager at NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center, said :
       “Three U.S. Astronauts have accumulated 1,144.51 minutes in
    orbital space flights. The flights of Glenn, Carpenter and Schirra
    have co&rmed that man can perform in a space environment and
    that he can enhance the mission success and flight safety by virtue
    of his flexibilit and his capability to exercise judgment to solve
                    t
    operational pro le-.
       “The flights have also confirmed that the approach and philoso-
    phy followed in the design of the Mercury spacecraft was techni-
    cally sound. Each of these flights has elevated our confidence
    level in the spacecraft systems and has demonstrated that, al-
    though not a simple task, the r e s o u r n of the United
    that IS, the National Aeronautics and S a e Administration, the
                                              pc
    Department of Defense, private industl-y and other e l e m e n h a n
    be unified toward a common end with unparalleled cooperation t      o
    accom lish a national objective on a minimum time schedule.
       “Alfthese benefits derived from the Mercury Projeot. are di-
    rectly applicable to future manned space flight programs and
                                                    fl&rfifii iiE&A-p;I0
                                          to brn+tL&
    p”&
     i’                           “E j
                    f”-~i&&fi
             1?,                     -
                                     &
                                     &
    programs.” (MSC Release 63-30)
 I n realignment of NASA Office of Manned Space Fli ht, two new
                                                          8
    deputy directors were appointed: Dr. Joseph F. hea, Deputy
    Director for Systems, and George M. Low, Deputy Director for
                            All major OMSF directorate had previously
    reparted “tly to D. Brained Holmes, Director, OMSF. I n
    OMSF
    realigned structure, reporting tD Dr. Shea would be Director of
    Systems Studies, D .William A. Lee; Director of Systems Engi-
                           r
    nering, John A. Gautrand; and Director of Integration and
    Checkout, James E. Sloan. Reporting to Low would be Director
    of Launch Vehicles, Milton Rosen ; Director of Space Medicine,
    Dr. Charles Roadman; and Director of Spacecraft and Flight
    Missions, presently v m n t . Director of Administration, William
    E. Lilly, would provide administrative support in both major
    areas. (NASA Release 63-32)
 On first anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Astro-
    naut John H. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft FRIENDSHIP 7 was pre-
    sented to Smithsonian Institution by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA
    Deputy Administrator. Astronaut Glenn presented to the Smith-
62            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    sonian the flight suit, boots, and gloves he had worn and the tiny
    American flag he had carned during his threelorbit space flight.
       Making the presentation, Dr. Dryden remarked: “It is appro-
    priate that John Glenn’s FRIENDSHIP 7 spacecraft should join the
    Wright Brothers’ first airplane in this hall, dedicated to man’s
    pioneering efforts in flight.
        “These two machines . . . stand as constant reminders that
    mankindaspirestothestars . . . .
        “As in the early days of aeronautics we can only dimly €oresee
    the future of space exploration, what we @hallfind, and what
    benefits will come to us. We know only that we must move for-
    ward in knowledge and practical accomplishment as we strive to
    discover the nature of our univem . . . .
        “We are surrounded here by the cherished treasures o the Na-
                                                                f
    tion. Today, we add still another to bring to mind the romise of
                                                            7
    the future that men of imagination and courage will a ways find
    new frontiers to conquer . . . .” (Wash. Post, 2/21/63, B1;
    Text)
February 20: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of
     formal contract to General Dynsmics/Convair for four Little
    Joe I1 vehicles, two launchers, and launch support for testin
                                                                      7
    boilerplate models of Apollo spacecraft in unmanned, suborbita
    flight from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. (MSC Release
    63-31)
  NASA plans for new Electronics Research Center in the Greater Bos-
    ton Area were outlined by Albert J. Kelley, Director of Elec-
    tronics and Control in NASA Office of Advanced Research and
    Technology, in his address before Engineering Societies of New
    England, Boston: “. . . The principal function of this research
    center will consist of research and component technological devel-
     opment in the related fields of communications, data processing,
    guidance, instrumentation, control, and energy conversion. It
     will be staffed and equipped to perform original work and applied
     research as well as evaluation of indust and university efforts.
                                             7
    I t will s nsor NASA researc‘h and deveopment efforts in these
     areas witrindustries and universities and act as a focal point for
    NASA research in these related fields . . . .” (Text)
 USAF announced Minuteman ICBM was flown on 3,000-mi. research
     and development flight from Cape Canaveral, the launch con-
    ducted by an all-usm crew. (DOD Release 247-62)
  U.S. Army announced successful test-firing of Nike-Zeus antimissile
    missile at White Sands Missile Range. Colonel I. 0. Drewry,
     Nike-Zeus Project Manager, said test objectives were met. (DOD
     Release 239-62)
  John Hawkinson, president of Television Shares Management Corp.,
     said in St. Louis that electronics and aerospace industries pmvided
    more favorable investment prospects than any segment of U.S.
                      Chic. Trib., 2/20/63)
    business. (TTPI,
  Appointment of Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel to NASA Industrial Applica-
     tions Advisory Committee was announced by NASA Administrator
     James E. Webb. D .Kinzel w s vice president for research at
                           r            a
    Union Carbide Corp. since 1955. (NASA Release 63-31)
                                                                         63
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

Februa.ry 90: Soviet press agency Tass reported in Krasnaya Zvezda
    that routine radio communications with MARS I interplanetary
    probe were conducted Feb. 13-19 and that telemetry information
    was received from the probe. Tass said that at 9 :OO a.m. Moscow
    time MARG I was 67,432,000 km. from earth. (Krasnaya Zvezdu,
    2/20/63,1, AFSS-T trans.)
  Deputy Commander of Soviet Strategic Rocket Troops, Col. Gen.
    Vladimir Fedorovich Tolobko, said in Krmnuyu Zvezda that
    U.S.S.R. had perfected 100-megaton nuclear warheads for its
    missiles and had succeeded in creating antimissile defenses.
     ( UPI, Wmh.Post, 2/21/63, A21)
  Dr. Joseph Kaplan, U.S. Chairman of Intdrnational Geophysical
    Year, declared greatest success of IGY was in preparing the way
    for other international research. Such studies would increasingly
    fall within scope of United Natioiqlie said. Dr. Ka lan was
                                                                F
    speaking before joint meeting of Peninsula. Engineers lub and
    Institute of Aerospace Sciences in Newport News, Va. (New-
    port News Daily Press, 2/21/63)
  Special camera for optical tracking of satellites at Royal Radar
    Establishment, Malvern, England, described in London Times.
    Camera weighed 8% tons, had focal length of 24 in. with aperture
    of f/1. According to Ministry of Aviation, the instrument had
    been working since last November and had photographed Dis-
    coverer and Anna satellites in orbit. A second identical camera
    would be operating at Malrern in several weeks. (London Times,
    2/20/63,15, and 2/22/63,22)
  Report by Britain’s Royal Society said number of British scientists
    holding doctorates that had emigrated to US. had doubled be-
    tween 1952 and 1962 and the number was still rising. (IJPI,
    Wash. Post, 2/21/63, A5)
  Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that Goldstone Tracking Station
    had niadt: fii-si, radar wiiiact, $ail. 21 --it;, philei Ahis iii zz 12-
    hour per day experiment which would end early in March. 25-
    billion watt signal made 125-million mi. round trip Jan. 21 (the
    return signal being only one-billionth of one-trillionth of a watt)
    and indicated Mars has both rough and smooth surfaces. (JPL
    Release ;Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, A2 ; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A10)
Februury BI : Secretary of the Air Force Eugene hl. Zuckert testified
    to the House Armed Services Committee: “In recognition of the
    increased impact of space programs on our national resources
    and their direct effect on our future national security, Air Force
    space activities are closely coordinated with the National Aero-
    nautics and Space Administration. One example is the recent
    agreement between the Department of Defense and the National
    Aeronautics and Space Administration on the Gemini program.
    The intent is to insure that the scientific and operational experi-
    ments undertaken as a part of the Gemini program d l be directed
    towards satisfying both military and NASA requirements and
    objectives . . . .
        “Our forward space development program integrates the RKTD
    work of many years into a cohesive space program. Fundin for
                                                                     i
    all facets of the program is not included in the F Y 1964 bu get,
64             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 3

     but the program will provide for Air Force space activities for
     the near future.
         “The Air Force has developed a solid foundation of space on
     which military capabilities can be built. These efforts have
                                     significant military space possibilities
                               Utilizing the technological base SO far es-
                                must translate these technical capabilities
     into actual defense systems. The time required to move from a
     development state to operational systems is measured in years.
     Yet, it is the ready military capability, not the technological base,
     that accomplishes deterrence. Accordingly, the Air Force pro-
     poses to begin some of these conversions at once.
         “The forward program aims at two basic objectives :
         “FIRST, to enhance the general military posture of the United
      States by building a defense capability in space. Space is not
     only a new area of vulnerability to attack, but also affords impor-
     tant means of supporting the terrestrial forces of the U.S. in
     relation to a military threat posed by a hostile power.
         “SECOND, to provide a capability within the space region for
     the purpose of denying to a hostile power the uninhibited military
     exploitation of space, and to provide a system of protection for
      U.S. scientific activities in space . . . .” (Text; A-N-AF
     J o u m l and Regi ster, 3/2/6?, 17,37)
F e b m r y $1: I n testimony before the House Armed Services Commit-
     tee, General Curtis E. LeMay testified: “The Soviets could be
     proceeding actively to develop space systems for military appli-
     cation. We believe that the Soviets will produce and deploy
     those military space systems,khich the find feasible and advnn-
      tageous in comparison with other t y p z o f weapons and military
     equipment . . .
         “US. military achievements in space will be expensive. Our
      objectives will be difficult to accomplish and the risks . . . large.”
         “However, as in all previous military progress, risks will dimin-
      ish with experience and can be minimized in early stages by
      thoroughly planned decision points.
         “We must not risk the danger of waiting for the enemy to
      demonstrate a capability before we undertake the development
      of our own. The visible threat to our National security requires
      a vigorous military space program.” (Text; A-N-AF Journal
      and Register, 3/2/63,16)
  General B. A. Schriever ( AFSC) ,addressing Waco Chamber of Com-
      merce, referred generally to aerospace activities in Texas and
      specifically referred to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Hous-
      ton: “Although the buildings are not yet completed, the Center
      has been operating for some time. Many NASA personnel are
      temporarily working in facilities at Ellington Air Force Base,
      and an air base group has been established to provide support for
      personnel at the Center. This is just one illustration of the fact
      that Air Force and NASA efforts in space are cooperative, not con-
      flicting. They are complementary not competitive . . . .” (Text,
      AFSC Release 32-R-19)
  Washington (D.C.) Academy of Sciences presented its 1962 scien-
      tific achievement awards to: the Rev. Francis J. Heyden, P r o f s -
                                                                      65
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    sor of Astronomy and Director of the S. J. Observatory,
    Georgetown Univ., winner for science teaching because ,‘by cum-
     bining teaching and research, he leads others to join his adven-
     tures in science”; Dr. Marshall Nirenberg, National Institutes of
     Health, winner in biological sciences; Lindell E. Steele, Naval
     Research Laboratory, winner in engineering sciences; Dr. Bruce
     L. Reinhart, Univ. of Maryland and Research Institute for Ad-
     vanced Study, Baltimore, winner in mathematics; and Dr.
     Edward A. Mason, Univ. of Maryland, winner in physical sci-
     ences. (Wash. S m Star, 2/17/63)
                        z.
F e b m r y 91 : USAF OAR announced it would offer summer employment
     to six of the Youth Science Fair participants who are selected
     to receive USAF recognition a t the 14th Youth Science Fair, In-
      ternational, which will take place in early May in Albuquerque,
     N.M. The six selected by OAR will have the opportunity to work
      as laboratory aides to USAF scientists engaged in basic research
     in OAR’S in-house facilities in Ohio, Massachusetts, Colorado, and
     New Mexico. (OAR RREI-P~)
Pebruury 22: Flight of balloon carrying 36-in. telescope to 80,OOO-ft.
     altitude for study of planet Mars was postponed a t Palestine,
     Tex., after balloon developed a leak while being inflated. This
     was 13th time the launching had been postponed. (AP, Wash.
     Post, 2/23/63)
  NASA announced Albert F. Sie rt, Director of Administration since
                                 g.
     formation of NASA in Octo er 1958, had been appointed to new
     post of Deputy Director, NASA Launch Operations Center, effec-
     tive about April 1. He would be succeeded by John D. Young,
     NASA Deputy Director of Administration since 1961. Don D.
     Cadle, Director of Resource Programmin in NASA 0 c of Pro-
                                                           5e
                                                %
     grams since 1961, was appointed Deputy irector of Administra-
     tion to s u d John D. Young. (NASA Release 63-33)
  Rninerd Hnl~es,      XASA Depty A-.i~te     Administrator and Dirw-
     tor of Manned Space Fli ht, said in address before Washington
     Day Banquet of Creve 8mur Club, Peoria, Ill.: “For centuries
     men have gazed a t the moon; have written poems and composed
     songs about it; have proposed to their ladies beneath it; and now
     they wish to stand upon it. T o do this we must hurl men some
     quarter of a million miles through space to rendezvous with the
     moon, and then return these men to earth safely. This surely
     is a clear goal. ,411 men know what it means when we say ‘leave
     the earth and go to the moon and return safely again to earth.’
     A further parameter is also clearly defined and that is time. Our
       oal is to accomplish this mission within this decade . . . .     7,

     $Text)
  Marshal Sergei S. Biryusov, Soviet Commander of the Stmtegic
     Rocket Force, said in article published for Soviet Armed Forces
     Day : “The problem of d&ruotion of hostile rockets in flight was
     successfully solved in the soviet Union . . . . It has now
      [also] become possible a t a command from earth to launch rockets
     from satellites at an desirable time and a t any point of the satel-
     lite’s trajectory.” TAP, Wash. Eve.Star, 2/22/63, A3; Wash.
     Post, 2/22/63, A16)
66                                                    1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

February 92: I n ceremony on the 45th anniversary of the Soviet
    Armed Forces, Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky sald : “I
    maintain emphatically that in retaliation to the 344 missiles with
    which Mr. McNamara is threatening us, we shall deal a simulta-
    neous blow of several times more missiles and such a tremendous
    nuclear yield that it will wipe off the earth all tar ets, industrial
                                                         8
    and administrative-political centers of the United tates, will de-
    stroy completely the countries which have made available their
    territories for American war bases . . . .” Marshal Malinovsky
    said that Soviet rocket crews are required to show 95 per cent
    proficiency and that there are no Soviet planes equipped to drop
    bombs, only those equipped to fire rockets. Premier Khrushchev
    attended the Kremlin ceremony wearing the uniform of a lieuten-
    ant general. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, 1)
            2.3; Unnamed NASA spokesman quoted as saying NASA had
Febrw3
    t r i and failed to employ Col. Charles E. Yeager (USAF) and
    Maj. Robert M. White (USAF) as directors of astronaut training
    for Projects Gemini and Apollo at NASA Manned Spacecraft Cen-
    ter. Colonel Yeager is commandant of USAF Aerospace Research
    Pilot School, Edwards AFB, and Major White is USAF pilot of X-
    15 aircraft, also at Edwards AFB. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
    2/23/63)
  Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems, NASA Office of
    Manned Space Flight, said in address before Alabama Society of
    Professional Engineers in Huntsville: ‘L. . The lunar program
                                                 .
    is but one aspect of the technolo ical surge which is invading
    every element of our society. l respond to the surge is to
                                         %
    prosper, and maintain the U.S. leadership in the world.”
     (Huntsville T i m s , 2/25/63)
  A one-segment solid-propellant rocket engine of the type intended
    as the first-stage booster ower for the Titan 111-C space launch
                              E
    vehicle was stakic-fired y United Technology Center. Under
    Air Force contract, the company is develo ing a single engine
                                                  K
    consisting of five such segments. Two of t ese five-segment en-
       ines would give Titan 111-C a liftoff thrust of more than 9 x lo5
    f g ( 2 x lo6 lb) . They would be the largest and most. powerful
    solid-propellant engines ever developed. ( R I D , 4/15/63)
February 24: Citing recent survey of 100 U.S. scientists who con-
    cluded top-priority scientific goal of U.S. space program should
    be “searching for and finding life on other planets,” Washington
    Post’s Parade magazine said: “It would be interesting to note
    their answers were they asked what should be the nation’s over-
    all scientific goal-not merely the goal of our space program.”
     (Parade, 2/24/63)
February 25: Testifying a t Space Posture Hearings, before House
    Committee on Science and Astronautics, NASA Administrator
    James E. Webb revealed that NASA “did submit to the Director
    of the Budget and discussed with the President, the level of effort
    that might be obtained under four budget figures [$5.2 billion,
    $5.8 billion, $6.2 billion, and $6.6 billion] . . . . the fi re rec-
    ommended by the President, $5,712 million, was b a s e ron two
    policies established directly by the President after thorough dis-
                                                                      67
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3,

     cussion . . . . [l] the areas of space science . . . must fall under
     the same kind of criteria as other scientific areas in his budget
     . . . [2] with respect to the manned s ace flight activity, the
                                               R
     budget level is sek at the lowest level whic will permit us to main-
     tain target dates that give us a margin and still permit us to assure
     manned lunar exploration within this decade, barring some situa-
     tion . . . .
        “. . . i t is not a lavish budget by an manner of means; it is
                                              9
     an austere budget set at this lowest leve which would permit the
     maintenance of target dates that we believe are realistic . . . .
        “When John Glenn was here last week and we presented his
     spacecraft to the Smithsonian Institution and found it there un-
     der Lindbergh’s ‘Spirit of St. Louis’, Dr. Dryden used the phrase,
     ‘An aura of obsolescence is hanging over the Friendship 7.’
        “It is important to recognize that just a year ago this space-
      craft was the most modern thing we had in the United States.
     Today it has an air of obsolescence and is now in the Smithsonian
     Institution.” (Space Posture Hearings, 2/25/63, 3-18 ; Posture
     of the National Space Program, Rpt. of House Comm. on Sci. and
     Astron., 5/7/63,5)
F e b m r y 2 : Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Adminis-
             5
     trator, presented before House Committee on Science and Astro-
     nautics an account of NASA’s of FY 1963 funds. Explaining
                                     use
     $170 million decrease in launch vehicle costs because of lunar-
      orbit-rendezvous decision, he said NASA had deferred develop-
     mental phase of Nova very large launch vehicle and was conduct-
     ing “further studies on the requirements and design concepts of a
     large launch vehicle consistent with o timum post-lunar-landing
     usage . . . . We are continuing [M-17       engine developments [for
     Nova], since it is a long lead time component, but have reduced
     the level of contractor effort to reflect the removal of a f r opera-
                                                                 im
                            ,,
     tiezldtimicg . . . .
        Speaking on space sciences, Dr. Seamans said :“Extensive study
     of the biological science area has demonstrated that specific re-
     coverable satellite flights should be undertaken for the purpose
     of acquiring data on the effects of space environment on living
     matter. We are, therefore, undertaking such a bio-satellite pro-
     gram and have increased our estimated funding requirements in
     this area by $13.0 million in this fiscal year.”
        On communications satellites, Dr. Seamans said :“We re-exam-
     ined our Communication Satellite program quite carefully in
     the Iight of the creation of the Communication Satellite Corpo-
      ration and the reoriented activities of the DOD following the
     cancellation of the Advent project. From this programmatic
     re-examination we have concluded that rincipal NASA effort
                                                   g
     should be focused on the research and erelopment problems
     associated with the synchronous altitude class of communication
     satellite. W e have, therefore, dro ped the low altitude mutliple
     passive satellite project, ReboundP, and advanced intermediate
     active satellite projects from hardware development consideration
     a t this time. As a result of these decisions, we reduced our com-
     munication satellite program by $35.2 million . . . .” (Testi-
     mony)
68                                                   18 6 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

February 25: NASA announced signing of formal contract with Boeing
                                 a
     Co. for development and roduction of Saturn V first stage,
     largest rocket unit under evelopment in U.S. Contract m r t h
     $418,820,967, largest ever signed by NASA, called for design, devel-
   ‘ opment, and manufacture of 10 flight boosters and one ground
     test booster, as well as assistance to NASA Marshall Space Flight
     Center in portions of ground test pro ram. Preliminary devel-
     opment of the vehicle stage, powered (i, five F-1 m k e t engines,
                                                y
     had been in progress under interim contract since December 1961.
     (NASA Release 63-37)
 Publication of U S . Standard Atmosphere, 1962 was announced by
              A detailed description of earth’s atmosphere “intended
     NASA.
     to meet the needs of space age research and operations,” report
     was prepared under joint sponsorship of USAF, NASA, and Weather
     Bureau, with 29 scientific and engineering organizations partici-
     pating in its preparation. (NASA Release 63-35)
 28-nation U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space ap-
     proved Indian progress report on plans to sponsor an interna-
     tional rocket base at Quilon for launchings in space above the
     equatorial regions. Italian delegate reported that the San Marco
     floating launching facility would be completed in time for use
     in the IQSY. ( L . A .Times, 2/26/63)
  AFSC announced installation of 100-in. centrifuge a t Central Inertial
     Guidance Test Facility, Air Force Missile Development Center
       ( AFMDC) , Holloman AFB. Intended primarily for calibration,
      testing, and evaluation of high-precision inertial accelerometer,
     centrifuge was capable of providing acceleration forces up to 25
     g’s, giving USAF LLa  laborator capability for simulating accelera-
                                   f
     tions common to actual missi e flight.” (AFSC Release 31-53-18)
  House Armed Services Committee voted 31-to-5 to authorize $363
     million for RS-70 suporsonic bombers in F Y 1964. No RS-70
     funds had been included in President’s requested DOD budget.
      (UPI, Wash.Post, 2/26/63, A17)
  USAF announced award of formal contract to Martin-Marietta Corp.
     for design, development, fabrication, and delivery of Titan I11
     Standardized Space Booster. Martin-Marietta was serving as
     systems integration contractor, with Aerojet General producing
      liquid propulsion systems and IJnited Technology (:orp. the seg-
     mented, solid-propellant engines. ( DOD Release 256-63)
 An article in Aviation Week, by George Alexander, summarized the
     important advances in the Atlas test program: (1) 0.032-in. air-
     frame, basically a stainleas steel balloon relying on gas pressure for
     rigidity ; (2) contaminant control in liquid oxygen systems; (3)
     early exploration of problems in staging :timing, hardware clear-
     ances, shifting center of gravity, flight control response and adapt-
     ability; and (4) handling of liquid oxygen to reduce geysering
     by using last-moment slug-filling to load the tanks. Of 87 re-
     search and development Atlas vehicles, 10 were classified as fail-
     ures and 18 as partial successes. (SZD, 5/20/63, 9; Aw. Wk.,
     2/25/63)
                                                                   69
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3,

Febmmy 25: Federa.1 Aviation Agency released its fourth annual re-
    port (July 1,1961-June 30,1962), in which was covered progress
    toward development of a commercial supersonic transport air-
    craft and an outline of required research and study to be done.
     (FAA Release 18)
FebruaTy 96': Results of MARINER 11 flight towards and past Venus
    were detailed in NASA press conference. Analysis of microwave
    and infrared radiometer scans revealed Venus is covered by cold,
    dense clouds in upper atmosphere; preliminary estimate of Venu-
    tian surface temperature was around 800" F. Temperatures are
    essentially same on dark and sunlighted sides of Venus, with a
    cold spot in southern hemisphere. Any carbon dioxide in atmos-
    phere above cloud layer was too small to be detmkd by MARINER
    11's instruments. High-density electron ionosphere was not de-
    tected. Radar obsei-vation on Venus from Goldstone Tracking
    Station established Venus' rotation rate a 230, plus or minus
                                                   s
    40-50 days, retrograde, with 225 days as non-rotating status for
    Venus. This observation together with other ground !measure-
    ments and data from MARINER n's magnetometer indicated Venus
    has very low, if any, magnetic field.
        Analysis indicated solar plasma continuously flows out from
    the sun, velocity of observed solar winds varying from 200 to 500
    miles per second (approximate) and having temperature of about
     l,OOO,OOOo F. Density is normally about 10 to 20 protons and
    electrons per cubic inch. Because solar plasma "carries alo
                                                               [sunq
    with it lines of magnetio force which onginate in the
    corona, and the frequent variations in plasma velocity results in
    the deformation of these field lines, . . . it is difficult to deduce
     from the point-by-point measurement of magnetic field what the
    general undisturbed configuration of the solar field would be
     . . . . It- is hoped that further data may reveal the presencethe of
    --1 m __^&Ia v m k ~ p aiid dsi+fyihie iiitera&"iiij h t ~ ~ i i
                                 m
    1 - gllUuG w
    magnetic field and the plasma. . . . 77
        MARINER 11 data on ionized particles in space revealed a flux of
     about 100 million particles per sq. centimeter er sec. in the range
                                                  P
     from few hundred to a thousand electron vo ts. I n range 0.5 to
      10 mev for protons, "very few exist at times, b u t a t other times
     their flux may be a number of times that of cosmic rays. I n the
     range of energies 10 to 800 mev for protons, there is nearly com-
     plete absence of particles normally [with great number possible
     during solar flare]. Above 800 mev, galactic cosmic rays enter
     interplanetary space and these decrease in numbers quits rapidly
     as the energy decreases. . . . 9,
        Data obtained from two-way doppler tracking of khe probe
     during its flight would enable scientists to calculate the mass of
     Venus with probable error of 0.005 per cent (compared to proba-
     ble error of 0.05 per cent calculated by astronomers) ;to determine
      precise locations of tracking stations on earth-specifically, to
     calculate exact location of Goldstone Tracking Station to within
      20 yards, calculated to within 100 yards before MARINER n mis-
      sion; to determine value of Astronomical Unit, established by
     radar observations as 92,956,220 mi.-50,000 mi. longer &an that
70                                                  19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    by classical astronomical observations; and to determine precisely
    the mass of the moon, now known to certainty of 0.1 per cent.
       Dr. Eberhard Rechtin, Director of JPL’S Deep S ace Instru-
                                                             Y
    mentation Facility, reported MARINER 11’sflight “resu ted in accu-
    mulation of some 65 million bits of information with an accuracy
    of at least one per cent and yet with the us8 of only three watts
    of radio frequency power.” (NASA Releases 63-36-1, -2, - 3 , 4 , -5 ;
    NASA Press Conf. Transcript)
February %.- Near-operational Army Pershing missile launched from
    tracked-launcher a t Cape Canaveral and hit target 130 miles down
    AMR, its first complete test flight success. (AP, Wash. Eve. Xtur,
    2/’26/63, A3)
 Completion of M-2 liftin body’s successful wind-tunnel testing and
    analysis was announcd by NASA Ames Research Center. A wing-
    less, maneuverable spacecraft capable of orbiting the earth and
    landing like an airplane, the M-2 lifting body was now ready for
    full-scale flight research. (Ames Release 63-7)
 NASA announced appointment of Ca t. Robert F. Freitag (USN) as
                                       8
    Director of Launch Vehicles in ffice of Manned Space Flight,
    effective about April 1. Capt. Freitag, since 1959 Director of
    Astronautics in Navy’s Bureau of Weapons and a recipient of
    Legion of Merit for work in ballistic missile programs, would
    replace Milton Rosen, who would become senior scientist on staff
    of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Defense Affairs,
    Adm. W. F. Boone (USN, Rat.). (NASA Release 63-38)
  Dr. John Billingham, British aerospace medicine specialist, was
    a pointed assistant to Dr. George Smith of Environmental Physi-
     f
    oogy Branch in Crew Systems Div., NASA Manned Spacecraft
    Center. Appointment of Billingham was first direct foreign
    appointment to MSC. (ma Release 63-35)
February 27: Leonard Jaffe, NASA Director of Communications Sys-
    ternsl testified before House Committee on Science and Astro-
    nautics: “During fiscal year 1963 the feasibility of using active
    communications satellites to relay television, telephone conver-
    sations, teletype, facsimile, and data over transoceanic distances
    has been demonstrated with Telstar and Relay . . . . Aside from
    these demonstrations, which have public appeal, and are necessary
    to show that our satellites perform as we say they do, hundreds
    of engineerin tests have been performed, the results of which
    will enable t f e United States to design beJt!ter Srutellites and
    ground stations for an operational, global communications satel-
    lite system. I n addition, we have accumulated a considerable
    amount of radiation data, and have obtained better information
    on the damage to solid state components, such as solar cells,
    transistors and diodes, from which we will profit in the design
    of all kinds of satellites in the future . . . .” (Testimony)
  Nike-Apache sounding rockee launched at Wallops Station carried
    65-lb. instrumented payload t~ 94-mi. altitude in experiment to
    obtain measurements of electron density profile, electron temper-
    atures, and solar radiation in ionosphere. Test was part of con-
    tinuing NASA program conducted by Goddard Space Flight
    Center to study ionosphere. (Wallops Release 63-20)
                                                                           71
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 t
                                                  3

F e b w y 27: First Block T I fli h t CoIlfiguration of Saturn I space
    vehicle, SA-5, was s t a t i c - f i d for 33 sec. at Marshall S ace Flight
    C n e , developing full 1.5 million lbs. of thrust. Alf objectives
      etr
    of the firing were met. (MarshnlZ Star, 3/6/63,1)
Februa.Py 28: Attempt t launch series of three Hopi-Ihrt wind
                           o
    research vehicles from NASA Wallops Station was canceled when
    first vehicle failed to perform properly. Tests, to gather wind-
    flow data at altitudes approaching 60 mi. for NASA Marshall
    Space Flight Center, would be rescheduled after analysis of cause
    of rocket’s malfunction. (Wallops Release 63-21)
  Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
    in continuin series of upper atmosphere studies, the vehicle
                   f
    carrying pay 0 that ejected and detonated 12 explosive charges
                      4
    at intervals from 22- to 51-mi. altitude. A similar experiment
    was launched from Ft. Chdrchill, Canada, a t about the same time
    to obtain high altitude wind and temperature data. Both shots
    were considered successful. Experiments were bein conducted
                                                                f
    by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Re ease 63-22 ;
    NASA Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching 3/5/63 and 3/11/63)
  FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby announced a news conference
                                                              t
    that Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Dr. Jerome B. Wies-
    ner had joined interagency committee studying supersonic trans-
    fort development. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A2)
  Be 1 Telephone Laboratories announced TELSTAR I communications
    satellite disconnected its storage batteries and stopped communi-
    cating, apparently after misinbrpreting a ground command. As
    in previous communications blackout in November, shutoff oc-
    curred as TELSTAR’S changing orbit brought it into strong sections
    of radiation belt. This pattern led Bell engineers t o “suspect that
    the continued inhibiting effects of radiation on transistors” is to
    blame, according to Bell spokesman Bruce Stasser. (UPI, Wash.
    Post, 3j2ijS3, Ai8 j
  NASA Director of Meteorological Systems Morris Tepper told House
    Committee on Sciedce and Astronautics that TIROB v and TIROS VI
     (launched in June and Sept. 1962 respectively) were still provid-
    ing good data. Tiros data “continue t o be used by the Weather
    Bureau for weather analysis and forecasting, storm tracking,
    hurricane reoonnaissance, &. The Weather Bureau disseminates
    its analyses and warnin widely . . . .
       “The Meteorological goundings project has continued through-
    out the year as planned. The project a t Goddard Space Flight
    Center which utilizes the larger meteorological sounding rockets
    continues as it has in past years with excellent m l t s . I n
    addition, we have initiated at the Langley Research Center a
    project which will develop and utilize the smaller meteorological
    sounding rockets. We expect to have this well underway by the
    end of this Fiscal Year . . . .,’ (Testimony)
  D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and Di-
    rector of Manned Space Flight, said in testimony before House
    Committee on Science and Astronautics : “. . . The past year has
    been an exceedingly actire one for our manned space flight pro-
    gram. It was not only the year for accomplishments both in
72                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    Project Mercury and in the initial Saturn test flights, but it was
    also a year for decisions in the rest of our program.
       “The lunar orbit rendezvous technique was selected for Project
    Apollo, and our preliminary program plaiis were translated into
    firm and decisive schedules. Every major hardware element has
    been placed under contract and construction of the required
    facilities is well under way.
       “In the current year we plan to carry forward all of the activi-
    ties I have just described. By the end of this year much of the
    preliminary testing required in our program should have been
    completed and we should be well under way in the program
    desi e to achieve not only a manned lunar landing in this dec-
             d
        Y
    ade, ut also pre-eminence in manned space flight for this Nation.“
     (Testimony)
February 28: White House announced that Leo D. Welch, retiring
    board chairman of Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, and Joseph
    V. Charyk, Under Secretary of the Air Force, were being nomi-
    nated by the President as incorporators of the Communications
    Satellite Corporation (csc). The csc announced that TVelch had
    been selected to be chairman and chief executive while Charyk
    would become resident and principal operating oficer. Dr.
                    E
    Charyk became hief Scientist of the USAF in 1050, was appointed
    in June 1959 as Ass’t Sec’y of USAF for R ~ D and in January 1960
                                                     ,
    as Under Secretary. (AP, Wash,Post, 3/1/63, A8)
 Testif ing at Space Posture Hearings, before House Committee
    on gcience and Astronautics, Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau, Special
    Assistant for Space, DOD DDRBE, said :
       “It is . . . important to understand that, within the Depart-
    ment of Defense itself, a ‘space program’ does not exist as a sepa-
    rate entity. Space and space-related projects are integrated, on a
    functional basis, throughout our program structure. The basic
    objective in any functional area is to develop and exploit those
    capabilities which will provide the maximum military effective-
    ness for the foreseeable future.” (Space Posture Hearings.
    2/28/63,174)
 Harvard College Observatory reported that astronomers :it Royden
    Observatory at Bloemfontein, South A4frica,had photographed
    SYNCOM I satellite missing since February 14. The Observatory’s
    photographs indicated SYNCOM I probably was in orbit about
    22,000-mi. high. (UPI, Wash.Post, 3/1/63, AS)
 Air Force said that “an improved Thor booster combination of
    liquid and solid propellants,” launched with unnamed satellite
    from Vandenberg AFB, was deliberately destroyed when it veered
    off course. Improved Thor had increased thrust from 170,000-lbs.
    to about 330,000-lbs.-almost double its earlier power and almost
    equal to the early Atlas. (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, 1 ; Wash.
    Eve. Star, 3/1/63)
  USAF announced routine training launch of Atlas missile from
    Vandenberg AFB. (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A6)
  Senator Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) introduced jointly sponsored
    resolution in the Senate to authorize presentation of an Air Force
    medal of recognition to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (ret.).
                                                                     73
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 31

     General Foulois learned to fly from Wilbur Wright in 1909 and
     was Chief of the Army Air C o r p s when he retired in December
     1935. I n 1907, he wrote a thesis on “Tactical and St       ‘c Value
     of Aerodynamic Flying Machines,” using Julee V e m 3 e Bible,
     and Army Field Sereice Rsgulations as sources,one of the
     pioneerin concepts of the military application of aeronautics.
     General #oulois served on the NACA (1929430, 1932-35), and is
     currently President of the Air Force Historical Foundation.
      (OR, 2/28/63,2975)
During February: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center plans for
     second- eneration 0 0 satellite--known as Advanced Orbiting
                            9
     Solar 8bservatory’ or Helios-were outlined at Philadelphia
     h h n i c a l meeting by Goddard’s Aoso Project Manager A. J.
     Cervenka. (Au. Wk.,      3/4/63,48)
  USAF predicted Project We& Ford’s 250 million copper dipoles t        n
     be placed in orbit would have a very short orbiting life, a predic-
     tion based on results of six-needle orbital experiment conducted
     in 1962 and revealed Jan. 22. The six needles were not affectsd
     by space electricity, which had been feared would cause needles
     to shift from their initial orbit and then solar pressure would
     keep the di oles in orbit for years. ( M d R ,2/11/63,21)
  California’s &overnor Pat Brown said in Washington that NASA
     Administrator James E. Webb was planning a “deliberate” ef-
     fort to spread contracts throu hout the nation which would result
     in reduction of contracts to Ealifornia industries. Gov. Brown
     later told L A . T ~ m that Mr. Webb reassured him that NASA
                               ~s
     contracts would continue to be awarded competitively. Mr. Webb
     confirmed NASA policy “to spread the problems which we must
     solve in space work over the greatest number of able minds
     throughout the country, . . .”but that pur ose of policy was not
     t o penalize California but to “obtain the         solvtions for the
     program . . . . ConLracis wiii ’be lei: by comptiiion alone, not
     on the basis of politics or geography.” (L.A. T m s 2/16/63)
                                                          ie,
  Xational Ac‘ademy of Sciences named a panel of scientists to advise
     the Federal Government on astronomy’s role in space exploration
     during the coming decade. Headed by Dr. Albert E. Whitford,
     Director of Lick Observatory, NAS panel was soliciting comment
     from all of U.S. astronomers on astronomy’s manpower and equip-
                               to compile full report this year and offer
     ment needs.
     guidelines forIt .uture of astronomy. (San Francisco Chmn-
                       the
     kb,2/11/63)
  I n addendum to speech delivered last Dec. 30, Dr. James A. Van
     Allen retracted his criticism of President’s Scientific Advisory
     Committee concerning radiation effects of U.S. high-altitude nu-
     clear test in July. Dr. Van Allen said his criticism should have
     been directed toward joint NASA-AEC-DOD committee headed by Dr.
     Jerome B. Wiesner, President’s special assistant for science and
     technology and also chairman of President’s Science Advisory
     Committee. Addendum appeared in published version of speech
     in bulletin of St. Louis Citizen’s Committee for Nuclear Informa-
     tion. (NYTNS, Chattanooga T i m s ,2/14/63)

     141423
74             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

During Februar : Four men spent 14 days in slow-rotation room
                    Y
     simulating s owly-rotatin space station, in NASA-sponsored ex-
                                P
        eriment at Navy’s Schoo of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, Fla.
     ’No serious disturbance of a psychological or physiological nature
     was encountered,” ‘and no change was found in conceptual reason-
     ing, physical performance, perception, and sensory ability. No
     important changes in blood pressure, res iration, or pulse rate
     were observed during the experiment. ( l v . Wk., 3/4/63, 59)
 Dr. Dwain W. Warner, curator of ornithology at Minnesota Mu-
     seum of Natural History, proposed in Natuml History magazine
     that scientific satellites be used in tracking animal migrations.
     Dr. Warner proposed animals be tagged with transistor radios and
     batteries weighing           to 2 oz; satellite in 200-mi. polar orbit
      would pick up signals and transmit them to scientists who could
      plot animals’ locations and correlate them with other data from
      satellites. Transistors had been successfully tested with small
      animals and large birds, but trackin by ground stations was
                                              f
      hindered by horizon line; satellite wit 24 ground receiving sta-
     tions could provide constant contact with migratory creatures.
      (AP, Balt. Xwn, 2/6/63)
  I n March issue of Phyhal Review, John Linsley of MIT’S Labora-
      tory for Nuclear Science reported that an atom of high energy,
      presumably from some galaxy outside our own Milky Way,
      trated our solar system and crashed into the earth’s a op;  t s!
                                                                  m:
      setting off a cosmic-ray shower over New Mexico during Febru-
      ary. Source of the atomic nucleus was reasoned because of its
      enormous power as the resultant cosmic-ray shower covered an
      area of several square miles. (AP, Wash. Eve. Xtar, 3/2/63)
  Recovery parachutes for Agena military payloads were tested with
      U-2 aircraft from 70,000-ft. altitudes. (M&R, 2/11/63, 9)
  Soviet astronomer G. A. Tikhov concluded that Martian vegetation,
      if it exists,. is blue rather than green, because of light and tempera-
      t,ure conditions on Mars. I n translation/abstract of Tikhov’s
      report, issued by Dept. of Commerce, he reported that “plants
      in the F a r North on earth should have entirely different optical
      properties than in temperate latitudes and on mountains. Mar-
      tian plants should be closest to the Arctic and mountain species,
      whose spectra have quite inconspicuous chlorophyll bands.”
       (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/63)
  First issue of Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, publication
      of American Institute of Aeronautks and Astronautics ( AIAA) ,
      featured series of articles on manned orbital operations by NASA
      Manned S acecraft Center personnel. (A&AE,2/63)
                P
  Internationa Academy of Astronautics announced election of
      Honorary Members of the Academy: Prince Louis de Broglie,
      French physicist; Jacqueline Cochran, U.S. aviatrix ; and Harr
      F. Guggenheim, U.S. philanthropist. (Av. Wk., 2/4/63, 1047
  Soviet Prof. A. Martynov, director of State Astronomical Institute
      of Kiev, said Soviet Venus probe launched Feb. 1961 undoubtedly
      had reached its objective and probably landed on Venus. U.S.
       sources had said the probe was launched a t too high a velocity to
      have been orbited around Venus. Martynov also said results of
                                                           75
         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63,




                                      --
Soviet radioastronomy experiments with Venus indicated Venu-
tian surface temperatures range from 212°F on dark side and
about 572°F to 752°F on the sunlighted side, conclusions differ-
                                                u. (Av. Wk.,
ing from those of data provided by
3/4/63,21)
                          MARCH 1963
March 1 ; Delta Day a t Cape Canaveral, the NASA Group Achievement
   Award presented to Delta Project Group of Goddard SpaceFlight
   Center, manager of Delta space vehicle for NASA.
      At Delta Day ceremony, NASA Director of Space Sciences Dr.
   Homer E. Newell remarked that the “Deltra Team has had 16
   times at bat, and a hitting streak of 15 in a row, for a batting
                                  d hitting . . . . We would wish that
   averago of .937. That is
                              E&     of m r d s q u a l to that of Delta.
   all launch vehicles could
   The scientific community would, I am sure, wish me to express its
   appreciation with a hearty ‘Well done !’ ”
      Directing additional remarks to Delta Launch Team at Cape
   Canaveral, Dr. Newell said : “You have turned out the most cost-
   effective launch vehicle in the NASA stable. It has given us the
   highest return on the investment of any vehicle we have, and that
   is of fundamental interest to us.
      “About 26% of all NASA attempts to place a satsllite of any
   kind in orbit have been made with Delta, and 45% of our success-
   ful earth satellites plamd in orbit have been put there by Delta.
   At this point in time, as new as we are in our space effort, that is
   an impressive record . . . .” (NASA Release 63-39; Text)
 At Delta Day ceremony, Gape Oanaveral, NASA Associate Adminis-
   trator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced NASA hiid ordered
   14 more Delta space vehicles from prime contractor Douglas Air-
    craft Co., most of which were expected to be used in launchin
   additional NASA communications satellites and meteorolo ica
                                                                   f7
   satellites as well as new scientific satellites. (NASA Re ease
    63-39)
 MARS I inter lanetary probe was 78,843,000 km.          (48,980,675 mi.)
                K
   from a t , Soviet newspaper Zmestia reported. From Feb. 20
            r
   CO March 1, scheduled radio contacts were made; “a series of con-
   trol commands were transmitied to the station.” Tass said that on
   March 1“a number of corrective guidance commands were trans-
   mitted to the spacecrafi. The strength of radio signals, which are
   being received from the interplanetary startion, decreased some-
   what . . . .” (Zzvestia,  3/3/63, 5, AFSS-T Trans.; Pravdu, 2/2/63,
   EOS Trans.)
 Stratosco e I1 tandem balloon system was launched from National
            B
   Scienti c Balloon Flight Station near Palestine, Tex., carrying
   36-in. telescope to 15-mi. altitude to focus on planet Mars.
    Stratoscope I1 Project Manager, Dr. Martin Schwarzchild.
   called it “a beautiful launch.” First attempt to detect life-related
    substances on Mars from above =Ah’s akmosphere, project was
    conducted jointly by Princeton Univ. and Univ. of Calif. wikh
    Vitro Laboratories in charge of flight operations; it was sponsored
   by NASA, NSF, and ONR. ( AP, Wash. Post, 3/2/63)
      76
                                                                      77
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 631

March I : Patent for Mercury spacecraft arachute recovery system
                                            E
   was awarded to its inventor, Andre J. eyer, Jr., of NASA Manned
   Spacecraft Center. (NPT [West. Ed.], 3/2/63)
 Skylark m k e t launched at Woomem, Australia, reached 123-mi.
   altitude with experiment to measure ele5tron densitiw in up
                                                                     i
                                                                     K
   atmosphere. Secondary experiments were measurement of
   tribution of p i t i v e ions, x-ray spectrum of the sun and distribu-
   tion of atonuc hydrogen in upper atmosphere. (M&R, 3/11/63,
    9)
        announced Ames Research Center had requded industry pro-
  NASA
    posals for six-week study contracts to determine feasibility of
    using earth satellites a orbital, recoverable biological labora-
                              s
    tories. Such a biosatellite project would provide means of study-
    ing animal and plant responses to periods of prolonged wei htlass-
                                                                %
    ness. Studies would consider spacecraft systems that could e used
    in series of six biosatellites with flight durations of from three fo
    30 days. Decision on flight programs would be made after evalua-
    tion of study contracts; NASA already had received, and vas eml;
    uating, suggestions of biological experiments that could be per-
    formed. ( NASA Release 6 3 4 6 ;Ames Release 63-9)
  U.S. Weather Bureau announced it was purchasi 11 ground sta-
                                                      ”f:
    tions c able of receiving cloud pictures directy from Nimbus
           a
             f
    meteon, ogical satsllites, to be launched by NASA beginning lab
    this year. The stations would receive cloud pictures of their local
    a m s taken by automatic picture transmission (APT) subsystem in
    the weather satsllite. BPT device would take and transmit cloud
    picture automatically every 208 m., each photograph showing
    a m of about 1,000-mi.-by-1,000-mi. Meteorologists expected to
    make immediate use of Nimbus cloud pictures. (Dept. of Com-
    merce Release WB 63-3)
  Lt. Gen. James Ferguson ( USAF D C S / ~ D ) told House Committee on
    SciencX sn:! A&EP&EtiS&hiltm indspaEdeE;;tUBAF qxi.?3ility k*
    space is essential to future securit of the Nation and called for
                                        9
    establishment of a “military patro . . . to determine at all times
    what is ha pening in near space,whether there is a threat present,
                 P
    and to dea with it if necessary.” (Wash. Ewe. Star, 3/2/63, A2)
  US. Senate paid tributes to the late Senator Robert S. Kerr (D.-
    Okla.) who had been Chairman of the Committse on Aeronautical
    and Space Sciences. (CR,       3/1/63,3156-79)
  Resignation of Thomas F. Dixon, NASA Deputy Associate Adminis-
    trator since 1961, announced by Associate Administrator D .       r
    Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Mr. Dixon had joined NASA Se t. 1961,
                                                               P
    when he was named Director of Office of Launch Vehic es. Be-
    fore that, he had been Vice President for Research and Engineer-
    ing of North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. He w s re-   a
    signing to return to North American as assistant to the president.
    (NASA Release 63-42 ;NAA SBIS Skywriter, 3/8/63,1)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center proposal to establish manned orbital
    space station which stressed that such a station and associated
    equipment could be established using rockets, equipment, and
    materials under development now for Project Apllo. Plan called
    for (1) orbiting space station with capacity for 18 crewmen; (2)
78            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

   sending six men in adapted Apllo-type spacecraft to board the
   orbiting station ; and (3) sending two more such crews within a
   month of each other to staff the station, docking the shuttle space-
   craft at the station’s three arms. Report said space station would
   be a national laboratory for study of space. (AP, Balt. Swn,
   3/2/63)
March 1: USAF launched Atlas ICBM in 5,000-mi. flight down AMR,
   first of 20 flight-tests in Project Abres (advanced ballistic re-entry
   systems), purpose of which was to develop smaller nuclear war-
   heads capable of eluding enemy radar and .of reaching targets as
   swiftly as possible with largest possible nuclear yield.
      Attached to Atlas airframe w s pickaback pod carrying “space
                                       a
   laboratory” in which were scientific experiments designed to gain
   information on performance of algae in space. ( M & R , 3/11/63,
   10; Space Bus. Daily, 3/5/63, 273)
March 1-2 : The Space Vehicle Panel of the President’s Scientific Ad-
   visory Committee met at MSC for briefings and presentations on
   the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. (Space N e q
   Rowndup, 1/8/64, 2)
March 8 : Inter-Parliamentary Union’s seven-nation space subcommit-
   tee, meeting in Geneva, approved draft treaty on space law.
   Treaty would provide that outer space be subjmt to international
   law, including U.N. Charter, and that astronauts forced to land
    in foreign countries would be granted diplomatic immunity.
   Treaty would be presented to plena meeting of IPU’S 60-member
   nations in Lausanne, Switzerland, y p r i l 15-21. (UPI, St. Lou&
   Post-Dispatch, 3/3/63)
 Stratoscope I1 36-in. telescope, separated from tandem balloons by
    radio signal, landed 10 mi. north of Pulaski, Tenn.; balloons
    landed 14 mi. west of Pulaski. Project Manager Dr. Martin
    Schwarzchild, arriving at landing site, said he was “delighted”
    with condition of the instruments and termed the flight a success.
     (aP, Wash. Sua. Star, 3/3/63)
 FAA Administrator N. E. Halaby announced mmmendation on
    whether U.S. should develop supersonic transport would be ready
    for President Kennedy by May. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/3/63)
 Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in address at
    Patrick AFB : “. . . about our future in space, let me establish two
    bench marks. The first is that the Air Force needs everything it
    can get from NASA. NASA needs us, too, as the record of how NASA
    puts things into space indicates, but if there weren’t a NASA, the
    same facility and capability would have to be created some other
    way.
       “There is reassuring precedent for the principle of having an
    outside-of-defense civilian agency provide the t pe of support we
                                                     &  mmission. Our
    need. The case at point is the Atomic Energy
    own nuclear weapon flexibility as well as the Polaris-carrying
    submarine is su0icient testimony.
       “The clear lasson for us in the space field is that we must put
    requirements on NASA to meet whatever part of our needs can be
   met in this way. We must utilize every possible resource to build
    the necessary military capability and I can assure you that NASA
                                                                      79
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   is ready to respond. Jim Webb, the NASA Administrator, harbors
   no illusions about NASA’s   responsibilities in support of national de-
   fense requirements.
      “The second bench mark is that there is no such khing a peace-
                                                                  s
   ful space or military space. There is just space. The new and
   massive space p          m in a civilian ency was launched nearly
                                           ”a
   five years ago, w r - f o r reasons whic seemed not unreasonable
   at the time-a great hullabaloo about peaceful objectives . . . .
      “We have a lot to learn. The recent agreement with NASA for
   joint participation in the Gemini program is one way. That
   agreement represents an answer from both W D and NASA to critics
   who said there was no place in space for military man. Our own
   activity directed toward manned space vehicles will increase, and
   with NASA’s   back-up, we’ll attain the needed capability earlier
   than we would otherwise.
      “A term you hear around Washington to denote the areas of
   cooperation between government agencies is ‘interface.’ Here at
   Patrick is one of the primary ‘NASA-Air Force interfaces.’ Such
   terms usually leave me pretty cold but this one does have some
   descriptive value.
      “There will be plenty of problems between the Air Force and
   NASA. but not by any means all at the ‘interface’ points such as
   the Cape. We wouldn’t either one be true to trust or tradition if
   there weren’t. Any machine as big as the national space effort is
   bound to have some kind of friction. But just remember, a clutch
   is a friction interface. Its purpose is to join two shafts for the
   transmission of power.
      “The power we can get will provide protection for the free
   world in space. This was my third point-to make sure that no
   aggressor can exploit space, either for expansionism on earth
   or interference in spam with the peaceful pursuits of the free
   world. . . .” (Text)
March 2 : Cosmic-ray shower caused by atomic nucleus so powerful
   that it must hare come from another galaxy was reported in Phys-
   ical Reuiem Letter.9. Cosmic-ray shower was detected at Volcano
   Ranch recording station near Albuquerque by John Linsley of
   MIT Laboratory for Nuclear Science. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
   3/2/63, A2)
 Officials of NASA, NSF, NAS, and other U.S. Government organiza-
   tions denied allegations by Lord Hailsham, Britain’s Minister
   of Science, that US. was conducting a high-pressure campaign
   to recruit British scientists. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63)
 Boyden Observatory near Bloemfontein, South Afnca, had con-
   firmed location of S ~ C O M mmmunications satellite, Harvard
                                   I
   Univ. Observatory Director Donald H. Menzel announced.
   SYNCOM I was tumbling end over end in its orbital path about
   19,000 n. mi. high. Boyden’s unconfirmed photographs of the

                     a
   satellite, missin since Feb. 14, were reported Feb. 28, and NASA
   requested that t e findings be confirmed by further observation.
   “Since then it has been cloudy over the Boyden Observatory until
   last night, when it cleared and we obtained two good plates show-
   ing images in the expected position. With this final confirma-
80            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   tion, we have no doubt whatever of the location of the satellite.
   It behaved approximately as expected.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star,
   3/3/63)
March 3: Whilden P. Breen, Jr., 35-year-old research assistant, spent
   his 106th consecutive day living in specially constructed isolation
   chamber in Univ. of Maryland’s Space Laboratory building, in
   NASA-sponsored experiment to “obtain basic information on how
   man perform under certain conditions of stress, and methods to
   deal with such problems so that astronauts of the future [con-
   fined for prolonged periods within interplanetary spacecraft, or-
   biting space stations, or extraterrestrial bases] will be able to
   perform their duties at highest efficiency.” With no direct view
   of outside world nor of any other person, volunteer Breen was
   under constant surveillance by experimenters outside and did com-
   municate with them by teletype and voice. Subject’s activities
   were programed automatically, with panel of illuminated push-
   buttons identifying each activity for him. Experimenters said
   he had “responded well in the performance of his tasks . . .
    [and had] displayed heightened capabilit and richness in those
                                               E
   creative activities which are available to im (e.g., writing and
   painting). H e appears to be in good phTsical and mental condi-
   tion and is eager to continue the study.’ (NASA Release 6 3 4 5 ;
   NASA Fact Sheet)
March 4: NASA’s   SYNCOM I Project Officer Lt. Col. Robert E. Warren
    (USAF), re orted orbital characteristics of SYNCOM I, located by
    Boyden Ofservatory March 1, were : 19,767-n.m. apogee ; 18,500-
    n.m. perigee ; 1,424.8-min. period ; 33.3O inclination ; and 0.028
    eccentricity. SYNCOM I was drifting eastward at 3.8” per day and
    was expected to disappear over horizon of USNS Kingsport within
    the next week. Attempts by USNS Kingsport to command the
   satellite to turn on its telemetry and communications equipment
    since March 1 had been unsuccessful. (NASA SYNCOM I Prog.
    Rpt. No. 4)
 U.S. plans for International Year of the Quiet Sun, IQSY), 1964-65,
    were announced by n’ationnl Academy of Sciences-National
    Research Council ( N.\S-NRC), charged by President Kennedy
    in 1962 to correlate IQSY contributions of Federal agen-
    cies. A principal objective of IQSY would be to contrast data
    gathered during period of minimum solar activity with that
    gathered during IGY (1957-58), when solar activity was a t highest
    level since beginning of systematic observations 200 years ago.
    Many IGY observations would be repeated and special experiments
    made possible by recent scientific advances would be added. IQSY
    would concentrate more intensively than IGY on the upper atmos-
    phere and space phenomena directly affected by both the lar e
                                                                    3
    periodic bursts of charged particles and associated magnetic fie1 s
    escaping from the sun, and the continuous background activity
    known as “solar wind.” ( NAG-NRC Release)
 Water vapor and carbon dioxide on Mars were detected by Strato-
    scope 1 , project scientists announced at Palestine, Tex., press
            1
    conference. Results of data gathered by balloon-mounted tele-
    scope, which observed Mars from vantage point above 98 per cent
                                                                     81
                               AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS

   of earth’s atmosphere March 1-2, were based on preliminary
   analysis of taped infrared-bolometer data; further analysis was
   expected to provide information on presence of other life-related
   compounds and on amount of the compounds present in Martian
   atmosphere. (AP, Chicago Tn’b., 3/5/63; WdZ Street J m d ,
   3/5/63)
March 4 .-Appointment of Walter L. Lin@e, Jr.,to newly created posi-
   tion of NASA Deput Associate Administrator for Industrial Af-
                        J
   fairs was announce by NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert
   C. Seamans, Jr. Mr. Lingle would continue his resent duties a        s
                                                       lp
   Assistant Administrator for Mana ment Deveopment and, in
   new position, would assume respons!%ity for NASA’s      over-all rela-
   tionships with industry and for development and review of NASA-
   wide procurement policies and p m d u r e s . (NASA Release 63-44)
 Hearings on NASA budget authorization for FY 1964 began before
   House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Administrator
   James E. Webb repeated President Kennedy’s declaration of the
   national goal of making the U.S. “the world‘s leading spacefaring
   nation’’ and achieving for the U.S. “a position of pre-eminence”
   in s ace. Mr. Webb testified:
      L‘fhe mastery of space, and its utilization for the benefit of
   mankind, will not be determined by any single achievement.
   Superiority in the space environment with its great a d v a n t a p
   and benefits will be won and very likely can be held by that nation
   which first fashions into a usable system all of the scientific
   knowledge, all of the technology, all of the experience all of the
   space launch and terminal facilities, and all of the aids to space
   navigation required for safety and regular services.
      “These are the capabilities and resources which the United
   States must have, and this budget is designed to make rapid
   p r o p toward acquiring them.
      “ivioving from our present position to achieve mastery of space
   requires that we add substantially tu our scientific knowledge and
   to our utilization of technology. The NASA program is progressin
                                                                       3
   on both of these fronts. I n a complex effort such ab this, conducte
   in a new medium about which much is yet unknown, the scientists
   and the engineer inevitably must work closely together and grow
   increasingly dependent upon one another. . . .
                       a
      “The NASA pro am, therefore, is designed to expand both
   science and techno ogy. We are moving forward on a broad front.
   We have avoided becoming trapped in a narrow
   limited, for example, to develo ing only the
   reach the moon with state-of-tY le-art hardware.
   well be to find, some years hence, that we had
   lost the war as far as ultimate and enduring superiority in space is
                .
   concerned. . .” (Testimony)
 Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA De uty Administrator, testifying on
                                    ge
           international programs fore House Committee on Science
   NASA’s
   and Astronautics, said that the “first substantial fruits of these
   programs were realized in 1962 and further significant program
   were laid down for future years. Durin 1962,
                                             f
      “-the first two international satelites, Ariel and Alouette,
   w0re successfully placed i orbit,
                              n
82           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

      “-launchings of sounding rockets bearing scientific payloads
   were carried out in cooperation with eight countries,
      “-37 countries engaged in special projects in support of our
   weather and communications satellite programs,
      “-foreign participation continued to grow in the operation of
   our global tracking and data acquisition network overseas,
      “-and, a new NASA international fellowship program was suc-
   cessfully established in our own universities.”
      Discussing studies of follow-on projects to manned lunar
   landing, Dr. Dryden listed as “obvious candidates . . . estab-
   lishment of a station on the moon permitting prolonged occu-
   pancy, a manned laborato orbiting the earth as a satellih, and
                               T
   manned reconnaissance of t e planets . . . .
      “It seems to us that a orbiting laboratmy is a necessary
                                n
   preliminary to manned lanetary expeditions . . . .
                           Y
      “Obviously the capsu es presently in the progmm do not have
   sufficient space available for experimentation and h w e only a
   limited lifetime in orbit. Something larger, of longer duration
   in orbik, and with resupply capability is required. Many ex-
   ploratory design studies have been made of the technolo ical
                                                                P
   feasibility of assembling a large space laboratory in space rom
   multiple launches with one or another of the available launch
   vehicles. We believe however that technical feasibility alone does
   not justify a project of this magnitude and cost. We are
   attempting to grasp the problem from the other end, that is to
   ask what one can and would do in a space laboratory in specific
   fields of science and technology with a view to establishing a
   realistic and useful concept. We hope that such studies will
   provide the information necessary to justify and support a deci-
   sion to be made in time for the fiscal year 1965 bud et. The
                                                           f
   program must be designed t fulfill national nee s . . . .”
                                      o
    (Testimony)
March 4.: Republican study group of House Appropriations Commit-
   tee said projects costing $10-$15 billion should be cut from BY
   1964 budget appro riations request of $107.9 billion. Although
                      P
   they did not speci y where the cuts should be made, Rep. Frank
   T. Bow (Ohio) suggested in press conference that cuts could be
   made in the space program and in foreign aid. (Wash. Post,
   3/5/63. W a l l Street Journul, 3/5/63)
 Seventh Aemiannual Report of NASA (July 1-December 31, 1962)
   submitted by President Kennedy to the Congress. (CR,        3/4/63,
   3192)
March 5: NASA announced agreement with Australian Government
   for establishment of deep space tracking facility about 11 mi.
    southwest of Canberra; a manned space flight and scientific
    satellite tracking stahion at Carnarvon ; and a smaller station at
   Darwin. (NASA Release 6 3 4 7 )
 Dr. Robert C . Seamans, Jr.,-NASA Associate Administrator, testi-
    fying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics,
   outlined status of current NASA aotivities, described proposed
    NASA program for FY 1964, and presented NASA budget estimates
    for FY 1964. (Testimony)
                                                                                        83
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,                    19 6 1
                                                                      3

March 5: Construction was begun on Polaris Missile Facility-Pacific
                                             (Polaria Chronology, 1955-
                 a t Bangor, washmgt.cn.
   (-PAC)
   63)
 NASA $600,000 grant for “-kh            in aerospace physical sciences”
   at Univ. of Alabama Remarch Institute, Huntsville, was an-
   nounced by Univ. president, Dr. Frank A. Rose. (Huntsville
   T - 3/5/63)
     i,
 Insignia for cusmonauts was announced by Soviek Defense Ministry
   in X r w y a Zvez&a. Insignia represented golden ”ff;) in cen-
   ter of whch was world globe girdled by golden sate lite orbit
   extending across background of unfurled Soviet flag. Below
   globe was m o f a b l e shield with number 1 , 2 , or 3, accord’
   class of cosmonautthird class, for one space flight; SBCon or
   first class, for two or three space flighte mpeetively. ( K r w y a
   Zvezda, 3/5/63, 1 m r T a s )
                           w rn.
 Radio Budapest broadcast Hungarian news agency dispatch from
   Moscow which said U.S.S.R. was pre ring “new and sensational
   steps i space this year, including Eight of] the first woman
           n
   cosmonaut” (UPI, Wmh.Post, 3/6/63)
March 6: Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Dimator of Spm Sciences,
   testified before House Commithe on Science and Astronautics’
   Subcommittee on Space Sciences &hat‘‘Project Surveyor is de-
   signed to make a giant stride in lunar exploration technolo
                                                                                        %
   beyond that of the Ranger. Surveyor will demonstrata so
                                            x
   landing technolo will surve various landing areas on the lunar
                           i
                           F
   surface, and wi m a u e p ysicalchemical properties of the
                          esr
   lunar surface in the immediate vicinity of the spacecraft . . . .
      “Developments of the Surveyor orbiter were restricted d u r y
   F Y 1963 to permit reprogramming of funds into more cnhca
   areas in the Ranger and Surveyor landing mpms. h i g n
   work has proceeded, however, and has r e s u l d i n . . . [ a ~ s t e i n
                                                    ItLllUtX ------ - - - 1 -           FT
    -“1&.-1                    _.”^ V I U U I veyu1 l - - - l - - w111pu11e11u.
                                    -4? c?
                 ,- . .. - .
                  . L-.: T.
    Il*urullg,            urn             __--^-^-
                                                                                  111
                 ~*~LLOLVU

    1964 we will be     work on the flight hardware. The lunar or-
                          Y
    biter will provi e complete photo-reconnaissance coverage which
    will permit us to erttraplate to other areas our knowledge about
    local spots in which we have landed with Ranger and Surveyor.
    We m l l then be able t make selections of pOtential manned
                             o
    lunar landing sites In addition, the ort>iter will enable use to
    determine the gravity field of the moon which will affect the
                        . . . .”
    Apllo orbits         (Testimony)
  By this data,         xv had transmitted 2,067 hours of data,
                     EXPLORER
    of which 1,266 hours had been digitized and sant to the five
   experimenters. The radiation-investigation satellite had not
   been o rating satisfactorily since Jan. 27 and had completely
   stoppefletransmitting Jan. 31, 1 .NASA scientists believed the
                                      W
   satellite’s attitude with relation to the sun was such that the sun
   w s illuminating only the edge of the solar paddles; in such a
     a
   case, the satellite should resume transmittin around April 1,
                                                                  %
    when the solar paddles come into more favora le attitude to the
   sun. (NABA Proj. Explo. XV, Prog. R t. No. 2)
                                                         f
  House Armed Services Committee reporte on its vote to add $363.7
    million to WD budget for development of two additional RS-70
84            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

   supersonic aircraft with supporting weapon systems. Com-
   mittee’s report said the four chiefs of staff of the armed forces
   favored development of RS-70 at a “substantially higher” rate
   than General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chairman of Joint Chiefs, and
   Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of Defense. I n his F Y 1964
   budget request, Secretary McNamara had included no funds for
   RS-70 beyond authority to complete three experimental models.
    (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/7/63)
Marck 6: The ships Rose Knot and Coastal Sentry, two mainstays of
   the world-wide Mercury tracking network operated by Goddard
   Space Flight Center, have undergone modifications for the MA-
   9 mission and are ready for sea duty again. (Space News Round-
   up, 1/8/64, 2)
 NASA announced Third National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of
   Space would be held May 1-9 in Chicago, sponsored by NASA and
   Committee for Economic and Cultural Development of Chicago
    (NASA Note to Editors)
 USAF OAR announced AFCRL was conducting survey of potential emer-
   gency landing areas for aircraft, using one-lb. device called “pene-
   trometer” to measure weight the soil can bear. Penetrometer is
   carried in wing-tip tanks of an aircraft, fired at predetermined
   intervals over test areas, and photographed aerial1 after impact.
                                                        g
   I f impact is greater than pre-set level, infrared ulb in tail of
   penetrometer lights up and is photographed. (USAF OAR Release
   1-63-5)
 NASA was reported by Space Business Daily to be negotiating con-
   tract with Standard Oil Co. of Ohio for “a research investigation
   of a technique for abstracting information from non-cooperating
   objects in Earth-orbit.” (Space Bus. DaiJy, 3/6/63, 280)
March 6-7: D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Deputy Associate Adminis-
   trator and Director of Manned Space Flight, testified before
   House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on
   Manned Space Fli ht :
                       f
       “The major pro lem remaining in the F-1 engine program is
   the existence of the phenomenon known as combustion instability,
    which is characterized by pressure oscillations in the combustion
   gas inside the engine. Although combustion instability has de-
    veloped in only seven of the 250 F-l firings in the last two years,
    even this small incidence cannot be tolerated. Consequently, we
    are placing major emphasis on solving this problem. The source
    of instability in liquid propellant engines has been the subject of
    considerable research, since most engines exhibit instability in the
   early stages of their development. . . .
      “We are confident that we will solve the instability problem on
    the F-1 engine, just as it has been solved for all other liquid pro-
    pellant engines m use, and we are confident that we can achieve
    the flight rating and delivery schedules. We are, however, giving
   this matter our closest attention and bringing to bear the knowl-
   edge and judgment of the most qualified experts in the United
   States. . . .
       I n response to questions by Congressmen Emilio Q. Daddario
     (D.-Conn.) and James G. Fulton (R.-Pa.), Mr. Holmes said that
                                                                       85
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAU’MCS,          1 9 631

   both Projects Gemini and Apollo slipped about five months be-
   cause of the Administration’s refusal to request FY 1963 supple-
   mental appropriations last fall. (Testimony ;M d R , 3/18/63,10
Murch 7: NASA Director of Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newel],
   testifying before Space Sciences subcommittee of House Commit-
   tee on Science and Astronautics, described one laboratory-tested
   theory picturing the lunar surfaca as made of finely powdered
   sand forming “fairy castles” full of caverns and empty spaces,
   unable to support a wei ht. Dr. Newell said an equally plausible
   theory directly op osecfthis theory. “. . . This means we have
   to go there and finfout.” (AP, Wmh.Post, 3/8/63)
 060 I solar observatory satellite com leted its first year in orbit, ex-
                                        P
   d i n g its estimated operating li e by six months. Eleven of its
   13 scientific experiments were still operating, having provided
   more data on behavior and composition of the sun than any single
   ground-based observatory and all previous rocket, balloon, and
   satellite flights combined. Preliminary results from 060 I would
   be presented a t a symposium March 1 . (Goddard Release)
                                            4
 NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in address at Topeka,
   Kansas, traced the historic role of the Federal Government in
   animating science and pointed to the quickening ace of science
   and technology today. Major considerations, wkch “make it
   clear that an understanding of the space environment, and the
                                  r
   development of the technolo which will enable us to operate in
   space, are imperative,” Web said.
      “First, the modern rocket engine, which can operate in the
   vacuum of space . . . has given us and other nations for the first
   time the means to explore and utilize the space medium. Given
   this ability, and the spectacular achievements already made,
   Americans and citizens of other nations assuredly will not remain
   confined to this small planet. We and they will explore space,
                                                 czn se!k!e fGr n&h&g
   aiid             to c s 2. &iii&g this,
   less than a position at the forefront of that pioneering effort.
      “Second, it is generally recognized, I believe, that our national
   security itself is heavily involved in the space competition. Not
   only our prestige but our capacity for constructive international
   leadership depend upon a superiority in science and technology-
   for economic development of national d e f e n s e t h a t is understood
   and accepted. The nations of the world,.seeking a basis for their
   own future progress and security, continuously pass judgment
   upon our ability a s a nation to make decisions, to concentrate ef-
   fort, to manage vast and complex technological programs in our
   own interest. It is not too much to say that in many ways the
   viability of representative government and of the free enterprise
   system, in a period of rerolutionary changes based on science and
                 is being tested in space.
    technoloF,
      “Thir , our national defense-perhaps even our national sur-
   \-ival-demand that we act to insure that no hostile force will be
   permitted to use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression
   against us.
      “The fourth and most important of the major reasons for un-
   dertaking a broad national program of space research and devel-
86            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   opment-the one which promises the eatest rewards for man-
                                            F
   kind-the technological applications w 1ch will flow from it, will
   offer vast returns 011 our space investment here on earth over
   many years ahead.” (Text)
March 7: NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed Kansas
   State Univ. in Manhattan, and said: “It might‘ surprise you if I
   were to suggest that, in an important sense, Kansas had a part in
   the beginnings of the scientific age in America, almost 160 years
   ago. It was in 1804 that Lewis and Clark camped for three days
   at the junction of the Kansas and Missouri Rivers while en
   route to the Pacific Northwest on the United States’ first impor-
   tant scientific exploration.
      “Although the Congress authorized the investment of only
   $2,500 in that expedition, it established the precedent for a . p w -
   ing federal partlcipation over the next 150 years in scient1 c re-
   search and exploration . . . .
     “And what of today ‘1 I n Fiscal Year 1964, Congress is consider-
   ing the investment of almost $15 billion for scientific research
   and development and the tools and facilities with which to do it.
   More than $5 billion 700 million is being requested for the civilian
   space program a l o n e a n activity so vast and so demanding of re-
   sources that it is something which only an entire nation could un-
   dertake . . . .“ (Text)
 At Senate Small Business Committee hearings on NASA proposed
   patent policies, Univ. of Illinois economist Horace M. Gray
   charged N.IS.I was fostering monopoly in the aerospace industry
   and called public safeguards in the proposed policies “mere
   propaganda designed to obfuscate the issue and conceal the real
   intent, which is to give away the public domain to private monop-
   olists.” (Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
 Discovery of radiation belt around planet Saturn, first reported in
   Physical Review Letters, was described by two physicists of the
   NRL research team, Joseph M. Bologna and Russell M. Sloanak-
   er. From 170 mdioastronomy measurements of Saturn’s radia-
   tion made between July and October 1962, the researchers dis-
   covered that radiation from the planet was too intense to be heat
   emission, and “the only theoretical explanation is radiation from
   electrons spiraling in a magnetic field.” Their research indicated
   Saturn’s radiation belt circles the planet from north to south,
   theoretically not so likely as equatorial belts such as those of
   Earth and Jupiter, but Sloanaker said further studies were
   planned with 300-ft. radiotelescope at Green Bank, W. Va., to
   clarify uncertainties. (Wash. Eve.Star, 8/8/63)
 NASA-USAF Gemini Program Planning Board held its second
   meeting. ( M d R ,3/18/63,14)
 Mrs. Sara Bartholomae disclosed lans for $1 million Mercury
   Space Capsule Chapel near Los ifngeles in tribute to Astronaut
   John H. Glenn, Jr. (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
March 8: Photograpfi was sent from New York to London, Paris, and
   Rome via RELAY I communications satellite, and back to New York
   via transatlantic cable-in total of 11 minutes. This was first
   demonstration in which the three European capitals simultane-
                                                                        87
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 t

   ously received a picture and the first in which RELAY I sent a pic-
   ture to Italy. Experiment was made by Associated Press in coop-
   eration with NASA and the IT&T Federal Laboratories, Nutley, N.J.
   (AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 3/8/63)
March 8 : Senate passed bill (S. 816) to establish a Commission on
   Science and Technolcgy to conduct a two-year study of methods
   of eliminating du lication of research effort, to make results of
   research more d i l y availablg and to determine whether a Cabi-
   net &ce should be created to coordinate the Federal scientific
   effort. Commission would be composed of 12 members appointed
   by the President, Vice President, and Speaker of the House. Bill
   went to the House. (CR,         3/8/63, 1962-64; Wash. Eve. Star,
   3/9/63, A5)
 Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station with
   95-lb. instrumented payload to measure “ion and electron densit
   and conductivity in the ionos here under undisturbed conditions,9,
                                  ’i
   and to measure solar ultravio et and x-ray fluxes. Rocket reached
   96.7 mi. altitude and for the first time “both ionization in ‘D’region
   and solar rays causing it” were observed. This was the very proc-
   ess that formed the ionosphere. (NASA Rpt. of Sounding Rkt.
   Launching; Aetro. and Aero. Eng., July 1963,9)
 NASA announced selection of Northrop Co . for negotiation of con-

                                                                        x
   tract to support JPL in Project RanprTesign review, reliabilit
   studies, documentation, systems testing, checkout, and spacecra
   launch o erations sup rt. Contract mould cover Ranger lunar
                           K“
   spacecrag to be launc ed through 1964. Decision to select such
   an industrial contractor was among those measures ado ted to
                                                                P
   strengthen the project as result of evaluations b specia board
                                                       K
   of inquiry and JPL. NASA said it was “contemplat that Northrop
   later may be assigned complete spacecraft system responsibility
   for the Ranger program” beginning with Rangers to be launched
   in 1965; JPL would retain Ranger project management. (NASA
   Release 63-50)
 Three-stage Nike rocket launched from Eglin AB Fla., fourth in
                                                     F,
   series of ten high-altitude probes t o test methods of slowing re-
   entry vehicles. Parachute was deployed when 500-lb. C e pay-  re
   load reached peak altitude, and camem in payload photogra hed
                                                                    P
   action of parachute as it deployed and descended with pay oad.
   (AP, Balt. Sun,3/9/63)
 NASA and DOD announced signing of agreement establishing areas of
   responsibility in nonmilitary applications of Navy’s Transit navi-
   gational satellite system. Under agreement, NASA would determine
   suitability of Transit equipment for nonmilitary use and necessity
   for additional equipment. Navy would continue to be responsible
   for technical direction of Transit system and for R&D in su
                                                               T*
   military applications of the system, but would also provi e NASA    Of
   with necessary information, specifications, and equipment for
   meeting nonmlitary requirements. NASA and Navy would coordi-
   nate R ~ . D“for mutual benefit and to avoid unn-ry        duplication
   of effort.” (DOD Release 315-63)
 DOD announced SOLAR RADIATION I satellite, orbited June 22,1960, with
   TRANSIT 11-A, w s turned on again on Feb. 25, after 22 months of
                    a
   silence. (DOD Rslease 321-63)
88            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,           19 6 3

March 8: U.S. Army announced Nike-Ajax missile accidentally ig-
     nited near Baumholder, Germany, and was propelled about 65 ft.
    before falling into safety embankment surrounding the site.
     (Wash. Post, 3/9/63)
 In address at Univ. of Wichita, Kans., NASA Administrator James E.
     Webb said: “Today, it is accepted that growing industries tmd
     to concentrate in regions where research facilities are best. No
     part of the country can afford to neglect investments in advanced
     scientific and engineering education and in first class research
     facilities.
         “Modern industry, too,has much to gain from regional cooper-
     ation in support of the universities and associated reseamh efforts.
     Industrial leaders are beginnin more and more, to look to the
                                     81
     universities of their re ion for t e most im rtant resource of the
                                                t;”
     age-ideas, scientific trainpower, and a vanced technological
     skill, experience, and judgment.
         “Itis not a question today o whether a region can already qual-
                                     f
     i f y - c a n now offer the human and natural resources required-
     for a particular industrial plant or government facility.
         “The question is whether the region is creatively doing what it
      can to equip its citizens to serve their area and their nation in a
     period when our prosperity and our very existence a s a free people
     depend on scientific and technological leadership . . . .’, (Text)
 Report that moon has porous surface consisting basically of silicon
     and aluminum oxides and that its core is very hot was made by
     team of Soviet radioastronomers at All Union Symposium of
     Radioastronomers in Gorki, U.S.S.R. ( K m o m o l s k y a Pravda,
     3/8/63, ms Trans.)
 Soviet embassy in Rio de Janeiro reported that Cosmonauts Pave1
      Popovich and Andrian Nikolayev were to arrive in Rio to rep-
      resent Russia at the Brazilian air and space show on March 15.
      (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63,1)
March 9: JPL released radioastronomy sky survey by Per Maltby,
     T. A. Mathews, and Alan T. Moffet, which mapped location and
      outlines of gas clouds 13 million to 5 billion light years from
      earth. Strongest of 24 radio sources having energy output equal
     to 20 billion suns (40 billion billion billion billion watts), were
      usually twin stars with immense but invisible as clouds between
                                                      t
      them. “It seems likely,” JPL said, “that the ra io clouds are com-
     posed of material ejected from the parent galaxy.” ( Wmh. Post,
      3/10/63,1)
 Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with grenade experiments
      to measure winds and temperatures and derive density and res-
                                                                   P
      sures at altitude were launched almost simultaneous1 ,one rom
     Wallops Island and the other from Ft. Churchill. [NASA Rpts.
      of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
  I n article on lasers in Pravda, V. Vyenikov wrote that “an auxiliary
      optical system can focus the laser beam in such a way that the
      diameter of its cross-section reaches values of 1 micron. This is
      approximately 60 times smaller than the thickness of a human
      hair. A similar beam, directed toward the Moon, illuminated on
      its surface a region less than 4 kilometers. This experiment
                                                                     89
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 31


                                                             (&E:
   proves that theoretically it is possible to transmit ener
   Earth to future participants of lunar expeditions."
   Zvesda, 3/9/63, AFSS-T Trans.)
Nurch 9 : USAF Atlas ICBM exploded shortly after launch from Van-
   denberg AFB. Cause of explosion was not announced. (WD Re-
   h s e 341-63 ;UPI, WVash.p&,3/10/63)
Nurch 10: Opinions of leading U.S. meteorologists on possible rela-
   tionships of high-altitude thermonuclear explosions and the
   world's weather were quoted in T h b Week magazine. (This
   Week, 3/10/63,7-9)
Nurch 11: U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations began in Rome on technical
   details of a three-year agreement signed at Geneva in June 1962,
   for exchange of data to be gained from separate satellite launch-
    ings. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA,
   headed U.S. scientific delegation, and Prof. Anatoli A. Blagon-
   ravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences headed the Russian dele-
   gation. Joint space research program would include coordina-
   tion on meteorolog and communications studies, and charting of
   the earth's magnetic field. (AP, Wash. Ewe.Xtm, 3/11/63, A3)
 RELAY I communications satellite was turned off because of severe
   drain on the onboard power supply, a difficult similar to that
                                                     6
   encountered during first week after launch.         ower drain was
   encountered March 9 after RELAY 1's orbit had been in earth's
   shadow for five weeks and spacecraft temperatures were low.
   m e n satellite was exposed again to constant sunli ht, a voltage
                                                         P
   regulator switch became too hot to operate proper y and power
   drain occurred. NASA and RCA engineers were hopeful that on-
   board batteries could be recharged by power from solar cells
   during period of rest. Between January 3 and March 9, RELAYI
   had operated successfully in about 500 communications experi-
   ments, includin first voice, facsimile, and teletype links via satel-
                     4
   lite between U., .and South America. (NASA R~lenw         6.2-54)
 14-16 months' additional slippage of Rover nuclear rocket program
    due to engineering and materials problems in Kiwi nuclear reactor
    reported by Missiles and Rockets. Dr. Harold B. Finger, Man-
   ager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO) , was
   quoted as saying procurement difficulties were encountered be-
   cause Rover lacked D X priority. No decision would be made to
   request a D X priority, he said, until results were obtained from
   the component t s and evaluation program. (hfd*R,             3/11/63,
                     et
    14-15; R-2, Stein and Morgan)
 NASA and French National Center for Space Studies (CNES) jointly
    announced si ing of Memorandum of Understanding for a co-
    o rative U.FFrance p r o p a m to investigate propagation of vLF
                    waves. First phase of the program would consist
    e",t-,ap"ic
    of two e edromagnetic-field experiments with French-instru-
    mented payloads to be launched from NASA Wallops Station.
    Second phase, to be implemented upon mutual consent that Phase
    I had proved the experiments to be scientifically and technically
    feasible, would consist of orbiting of scientific satellite, designed
    and built by France, with a Scout vehicle. (Memo of Under-
    standing; NASA Release 63-49)
     11
      4-    -1
90            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

March 11 : IJnnamed Administration official confirmed cutback of
   USAF’S X-20 program to R&D level of effort, Missiles and Rockets
   reported, and USAF proposed to NASA that X-20 be covered by
   same joint-management agreement as Project Gemini. ( M & R ,
   3/11/63,14)
 NASA announced signing of $387,900,000 contract with Grumman Air-
   craft Engineering Corp. for development of lunar excursion
   module ( LEM) of the Apollo spacecraft. Contract provided that
   Grumman, on cost-plus-fixed-fee basis, would design, fabricate, and
   deliver nine LEM ground test vehicles and 11 LEM fli lit models,
                                                            8
   and also would provide certain operational support.        election of
   Grumman for LEM contract negotiations was announced Nov. 7,
    1962. (NASA Release 63-51 ;MSC Release 6349)
 FAA announced award of $24,132 study contract to General Electric
   Co. Valley Forge Space Technology Center to “(1) analyze all
   data . . . on natural conditions at high altitudes that could be
   hazardous to aircraft, (2) consider SST [supersonic transport] de-
   sign and operational factors, procedures, and equipment in the
   light of this data, and (3) recommend further paths of inquiry in
   this area.” Study was part of broad SST research program being
   conducted by FAA, DOD, and NASA. (FAA Release #26)
 Bidders’ conference for Voyager design-study contracts held at
    NASA Headquarters. Unmanned Venus and Mars probe, Voyager
    “is predicated on the fact that this country is serious in exploring
   planets in detail for a manned flight to the planets,” NASA Deputy
    Director of Space Sciences Edgar Cortright was reported to have
   said. (Xpnce Bus. Daily, 3/13/63,309)
 Senator Clinton Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Senate
    Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences, questioned NASA
    FY 1964 request of $55 million for space communications research.
    H e indicated he would oppose spending Federal funds to support
    research that would ultimately benefit Communications Satellite
    Corp. and would question the incorporators about possible over-
    lapping of spending. (Spnce Bus. Daily, 3/12/63,305)
 Senator Warren Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Com-
    mittee, in nomination hearings on incorporators of Space Com-
    munications Corp., said that the corporation would have no
    bearing on decisions regarding NASA research in communications
    satellites, but that NASA would have responsibility to justify con-
    tinued communications research as being in the National interest.
    (Space Bus. Daily, 3/12/63,305)
 Winners of NASA Certificates of Outstanding -4chievement at 12th
    annual Tidewater Science Congress, Norfolk, Va., were announced
    by Floyd I Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research Cen-
                ,.
    ter. Awards were made to high school students for their exhibits
    in six fields of science and were in addition to regular Tidewater
    Science Congress prizes. Mr. Thompson said this marked be-
    ginning of annual NASA awards program in conjunction with
    Tidewater Science Congress and at regiohal fairs in four states.
     (Langley Release)
 At 17-nation disarmament conference stymied in Geneva, Soviet
    Ambassador Semyon K. Tsarapkin said: “The U.S. knows very
                                                                     91
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     well that the Soviet Union can car out nuclear explosions on
     the otlier side of tlie moon. The U%. therefore proposed a ban
     on tests in outer space, but without any controls or inspections of
     rocket launchings or any other inspections whatsoever.” This
     showed, Tsarapkin explained, that the U.S. demands for on-site
    inspections of earth tremors were made for purely political rea-
    sons. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A4)
March 11: OAR issued Basic Research Resumes for 1961 and 1.96’9
    which classified and indexed 2,500 USAF research projects. (OAR
    Release 3-63-5)
;March 12: Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, president of Cal Tech, said in speech
    before Spring Recognition Dinner of Miracle Mile Association,
     Los Angeles : “The United States had put 118 space vehicles into
     orbit, whereas Russia has only placed 34. We are ahead of Russia
     on scientific data because of these space probes.
       “Proof of this is in the papers published by the Soviet Unioii.
     There has been very little scientific knowledge gleaned from their
    reports in the past few years, whereas the United States has given
    a wealth of information on space problems.
       “Through these probes we have been able to evaluate tlie temper-
    ature on the planet Venus. Of more important issue to us on
    Earth is the invaluable aid in predicting our o m weather. . . .”
     (L.A. Herald-Exmniner, 3/13/63)
  The Senate Committee on Commerce confirmed the nominated in-
    corporators of the Communications Satellite Corp. : Edward P.
    Kaiser, David M. Kennedy, Sidney J. Weinberg, Bruce G. Sund-
    lun, A. Byrne Litschgi, Beardsley Graham, Leonard T1700dcock,
    Sam Harris, George Feldman, Leonard Marks, John T. Comer,
    George L. Killion, Leo D. Welch, and Joseph V. Charyk. (UPI,
     Wash. Post, 3/13/63)
  Reported that State Dept. officials were “dismayed” and surprised
                                                                  ---
    hy rep0rt.s f r o m Lendon t h t U.K. Goverllrnent !?2d ao-n-Pcl tn
                                                              -e-
    establish independent space communications system with 12 Brit-
    ish companies. U.S. n-as hoping its Comrnuiiications Satellite
    Corp. could become the US. participant in a global communica-
    tions system, a noncompetitive, nonduplicative, and cooperative
    system. State Dept. cabled London to request clarification as to
    whether U.K. was actually moving to establish a competitive-
   and potentially duplicating-space            communications system.
     (Finney, NYT [West. Ed.], 3/13/63)
March 13: First stage of Saturn SA-5 vehicle was static-fired in
   142.-sec. test at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Eight-engine
    cluster was fired at full thrust of 1.5 million lbs. (Huntsville
    Times, 3/14/63)
 USAF announced launch of space probe using Blue Scout, Jr., booster
    from Pt. Arguello, Calif. (M&R,3/18/63,11)
 REL.~Y I communications satellite, its power supply voltage and
    temperature returned to normal, responded to command sig-
    nals turning on its telemetry transmitter and encoder. NASA
    planned to resume normal experimental operations with the satel-
    lite March 14. RELAY I had been turned off because of severe
   power drain encountered March 9. (NASA ReIease 63-56)
92                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

March 13: Results from ALOUEITE I topside sounder satellite were dis-
   cussed at Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, held by NASA in
   Washington, D.C., Data from ALOUEITE showed that ionos here is
                                                              fl
   usual1 rough in high latitudes and smooth in lower l a t h es, and
          9
   that e ectron temperature of ionosphere increases with latitude.
   This evidence indicated Van Allen radiation belts, which extend
   to lower altitudes at higher latitudes, possibly are secondary heat
   source for ionosphere. Where ionospheric and radiation particles
   collide, ionospheric temperatures rise and F layers of ionosphere
   become more spread apart-causing radio waves to scatter. (AP,
   Balt. Sun, 3/14/63 ; Av. Wk., 3/25/63, 26)
 At Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, results from ARIEL I
   scientific satellite were presented. Data from ARIEL confirmed
   ionospheric temperature relationship with latitude as detected by
   ALOUE~TE I. Solar x-ray detectors found solar flares are made up
   of two phases-(1) heating of sun’s corona, above sunspot, in-
   creasing x-ray flux by factor of 10; and (2) quiet period marked
   by flux leveling off at accelerated level, followed by streams oi
   electrons pushed into chromosphere, causing x-ray eniissions at
   500 times greater than normal. (Av.      Wk., 3/25/63,26)
 Dr. George L. Simpson, NASA Assistant Administrator for Technol-
         Utilization and Policy Planning, addressed the National
   E u r i t y Industrial Association Research and Development Sym-
    posium, March 13,1963, Washington, D.C.
       “In speaking of spin-off and in looking for applications of
             research and development effort to the economy, we are
    NASA’s
    becoming increasingly aware that we are talking about processes
   as well as products. Many of the useful advances will be made in
    extending present processes to new and more demanding uses, as
    well as in the establishment of higher levels of reliability and in
   the organization of systems.” (Space Quotes, 9/15/63)
 Use of helium-neon gas laser for transmitting television pictures
   was demonstrated by scientists of North American Aviation’s
    Space and Information Systems Div. Terming the development
    a “breakthrough,” scientists said new system usmg one-inch-cube,
   four-pound modulator could send T V ictures from deep in space
                                          E
    and its pictures could not be tapped y outsiders. (UPI, Wash.
   Post, 3/13/63)
 Reported that Commerce Dept. was seeking initial $8.7 million
    appropriation for Civilian Industrial Technology Program to aid
   lagging U.S. business. (Wall Street Journal, 3/13/63)
March 14.: At hearings on NASA proposed patent policy before Senate
    Subcommittee on Mono oly, Committee on Small Business, Sena-
                           8
   tor Wayne Morse (D.- re.) charged NASA Administrator James
    E. Webb with trying to give awa “basic, substantive rights” of
   the public in Government finance4l research.
      Mr. Webb cited Section 305 of the S ace Act of 1958 authoriz-
    ing the NASA Administrator to waive Bovernment patent rights,
    then outlined present NASA patent policy, and explained how pro-
    posed policy would extend patent waiver. “A careful compari-
    son of the proposed revision with the terms of the present r e p -
    lations . . . will show, I believe, that the public interest in m-
                                                                        93
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    ventions which come out of NASA's     research and development con-
    tracts is more clearly stated and would, in practice, be fully
    protected . . . .
       "It is evident from NASA's    present waiver re lations and the
                                                        8"
               revision that we are convinced that t e public interest
   p~-~posed
   is often best served by permitting a contractor or subcontractor
   to retain commercial rights to inventions made in the course of
   doing research and development work funded by NASA-pro-
   vided, of course, the Government acquires a royalty-free license
    for use of the invention for governmental purposes, and pro-
   vided, also, that the invention is actually worked. NASA's      policy
    is intended to encourage use of inventions in two ways: first,
   by bringin the stimuli of the patent system into play and, sec-
                t
   ond, by wit holding the full benefits of waiver until public reali-
   zation of the fruits of the invention have been achieved. Such
   a policy offers many advantages over a restrictive policy which
   would permit contmctnrs to retain atent rights only in the
   exceptional case. The economy shollf not be deprived of the
                                               d
   substantial benefits of the patent system. Incentives for con-
   tractors to conceal and protect new technological develo ments
                                                                  !
   as trade secrets rather than to disclose them as patsnta le in-
   ventions are not desirable in government contracting for re-
   search and development. Historically, patent protection has been
   one of the rewards for full disclosure and publication . . . .        99

    (Testimony ; Wash. Post, 3/15/63)
March 14; Preliminary results from 080 I solar-observato satellite
                                                              %
   were presented at symposium by NASA in Washington, .C. Dr.
   John Lindsay and William White, of NASA Goddard Space Flight
   Center, reported that the satellite had found tentative evidence
   that solar flares may be p r e d e d by series of microflares whose se-
   quence and pattern may be predictable. 080 I recorded a t least
                                    3 vmr i~ hit. (-AP, Belt. &"j'.n-
          ~f the%         &&nrr
                                -a     .- -
                                        I-
   3/15/63)
 Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Scientific Advisor to the President,
   testified before Monopoly Subcommittee oYSenate Small Busi-
   ness Committee on the need for flexibility in Government
   patent olicy. "The Department of Defense feels strongly among
            K
   other t ings that the performance of its mission requires the
   ability to assure the contractor a t the time of contracting that
   he will retain commercial rights to his ideas, in order to assure
   the unrestrained participation by the most competent elements
   of American industry in the defense programs . . . . The central
     uestion . . . is whether the terms of the contract mill encourage
   %e contractor to apply his full technical background and experi-
   ence to the Government. These considerations also apply to con-
   tracts of the National Aeronautics and Space Admmistration.
   The national interest requires greater uniformity between DOD
   and NASA patsnt practices since they are drawing on the services
   of the same sector of industrial research and development
   competence.
      ". . . I feel that a reasonable basis for framing a govern-
   ment-wide patent policy can be found. It Seems important for the
94                                                 196 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   Government to move in the direction of a more consistent policy
   that will eliminate the unhealthy confusion and instabilities that
   attend the present situation. Such a policy should provide for
   the Government to retain title in the range of circumstances that
   I listed earlier; but it is necessary to recognize that, because
   of the problems of the type that concern the Department of
   Defense and NASA, any policy, to be realistic, should enable in-
   dustry to retain exclusive rights in certain circumstances . . . .
   The nature of the work involved, the commercial background of
   the contractor, and the extent to n-hich the contractor would be
   expected to work the invention in the public interest would be
   significant factors in permitting contractors to retain exclusive
   commercial rights . . . .” (CR,     3/21/63, 4378)
March 14: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara visited Boeing
   Co. in Seattle, Wash., and NASA Manned Spacecraft Center in
   Houston, Tex., for briefings on X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini
   projects. I n Houston, McNamara said to press: “In the last six
   months the Department of Defense has completed with NASA an
   agreement on joint planning for the NASA Gemini program. We
   want to see how Gemini and the X-20 can be fitted together to
   make the best program for both military and civilian purposes.
      “The Gemini program provides for two men to be placed in
   orbit in 1964. The X-20 program proposes to place one man in
   orbit at a later date. While the X-20 would be in orbit less time
   than proposed in the Gemini program it would provide more
   recoverable payload because it would use a larger booster. The
   two pro rams are therefore not entirely comparable.
      “But fecause they do have similarities and are both very costly,
   I believe this trip to Seattle and to Houston, Texas, to visit the
   Manned Spacecraft Center where the Gemini program of NASA is
   underway IS extremely important.
      “We will have spent about $350 million on the X-20 by the end
   of this fiscal year. We are requesting Congress to authorize :in
   additional $125 million in the next fiscal year (1964) . . . .3,
    (DOD Release 334-63; MSC Space N e w s Eoundup, 3/20/63, 1, 7 ;
   AP, Balt. Sun, 3/15/63)
 NASA and FAA announced they were completing plans for joint study
   of supersonic transport operation, the study providing data for
   both (1) design and operation of a supersonic transport com-
   patible with an evolving air traffic control system; and (2) defini-
   tion of requirements for air traffic control system to handle su er-
    sonic commercial air trans orts. Study would be based on k u r
                               P
   different SST concepts evo ved by NASA Ames and Langley Re;
   search Centers and on simulation of air traffic environments of
   today and of the 1970’s. The research would use flight simula-
   tion facilities of Langley Resxrch Center and air traffic simula-
   tion facilities of FAA National Aviation Facilities Experimental
   Center; it was scheduled to run through 1964. ( N A SA Release
    63-53 : FAA Release #28)
March 15: Dr. James A. Van Allen said that artificial radiation belt
   caused by U.S. high altitude nuclear test last July may last for
   ten years. At NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Scientific
                                                                   95
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,        1963,

   Satellite Symposium, held by NASA in Washington, D.C., Dr.
   Van Allen said data from INJCN 111 and EXPLORER XIV satellites
   showed intensity at center of artificial belt had decreased only by
   a factor of two. As recently as last December, Dr. Van Allen had
   reiterated his view that the bulk of artificial radiation would
   disappear by summer 1963. However, based on newly available
   data, Dr. Van Allen said artificial radiation would decrease in
   intensity by factor of three or four until period of increased solar
   activity (around 1967) when decay rats should increase. He also
   said electrons in artificial belt have higher energies (up to a few
   mev) than natural space electrons, making them easier for scien-
   tists to study. (Aw.Wk. 3/25/63,27; Wash. Post, 3/16/63; AP,
   Balt. Sun, 3/16/63)
March 15 .- Aerobee soundin rocket launched 248-1b. instrumented
                             f
   payload to 123-mi. altitu e in experiment to map night sky sources
   which emit photons (radiant ,energy) in specific wavelength
   interval. Impact occurred 62-mi. downrange from launch site at
   Wallops Station. Flight was joint project of NASA Goddard
   Space Flight Center and Lockheed Missile and Space Co.
    (Wallops Release 63-28)
 Researchers at the NASA Lewis Research Center ran a giant cryo-
   magnet producing a field of 50,000 gauss over a one-foot-diameter
   test section. Although this was probably the largest magnetic
   field ever roducecl over such a volume, the cryoma et would be
              P
   enlarged rom two to twelve coils with an ultimate i esign goal of
                                                      ?!
   200,000 gauss. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
 Data from EXPLORER XII confirmed existence of low-energy proton
   current ringing earth in east-to-west direction, perpendicular to
   perpetual north-south spiraling motion along geomagnetic field
   lines. (Av.   Wk.,3/25/63,26)
 Final parcel of giant 6,000-acre Plum Brook site near Sandusky,
   Ohio, was transferred from Army io ~ u - juridiciiuii. NASA
                                                    4
   Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, operates the Plum Brook
   Station. (Lewis Chronology, 2)
 Gov. Frank Clement of Tennessee signed bill authorizing construc-
   tion of $2 million Tennessee Space Research Institute on site
   donated by USAF near Arnold Engineerin Development Center,
                                               %
   Tullahoma. Institute would be operated y Univ. of Tennessee.
   Mission of institute would be “to offer graduate level courses in
   aerospace science and engineering while carrying on research i     n
   these fields for both Government and industiy.” (Nashville
   Tennessean, 3/16/63 ; Nashville Banner, in OR,3/18/63, A1479)
 International aerospace fair opened in Siio PauIo, Brazil, with U.S.
   exhibition of full-scale X-15 mocku ,SIGMA 7 Mercury spacecraft,
                                       8
   and other displays. (Wash. Sun. tar, 3/17/63)
March 16: Astronomers a t Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories
   reported they had observed what they believed were five brightest
   ob~ects the universe. Joint research by astronomer p u p s at
            in
   Mt. Wilson and Palomar, as well as Cal Tech’s Radio Observatory
   in Owens Valley, Calif.; Jodrell Bank Observatory in England;
   and astronomers in Australia, was presented in Cal Tech report,
96            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   which said knowledge gained about, the five objects may make
   possible optical study of objects nearly 10 or 12 billion light years
                 edge of the visible universe. (UPI, Wash. Post,
   away-the
   3/17/63)
March 16: General B. A. Schriever (USAF) told Central Florida
   Medical Meeting, Orlando : “The successful development of
   space technology required major contributions from aerospace
   medicine. These contributions are twofold : first, an increased
   knowledge of the biological problems that will be encountered
   in space flight; and second, the development of equipment and
   techniques that will enable man not only to survive, but also to
   operate effectively in space. We have already made great progress
   through the Air Force high altitude research, through simula-
   tion of the space environment, and through the Mercury program.
   But additional knowledge and experience will be required to
   conduct extensive manned operations in space. . . .
      “One of the major problems to be encountered in manned space
   flight is radiation, which may actually become a limiting factor
   on the duration of flights in a given orbit. This may come from
   several sources-f rom solar flares, from space-ambient radiation
   such as found in the Van Allen belts, or from nuclear devices
   that may be exploded in the earth’s atmosphere. There are two
   approaches which are being taken to the solution of this problem,
   and they may be used in conjunction. The first is shielding,
   which is the current means of protection against radiation. But
   in space systems, where weight is of critical importance, con-
   ventional shielding methods are likely to be out of the question.
      “The second method seeks to make use of a drug with anti-
   radiation properties. Some 1,800 potential antiradiation drugs
   are currently being evaluated, and a number of them appear to
   hold great promise. Several interesting facts have already
   emerged from these studies. For example, cells with less than
   the normal supply of oxygen are protected from radiation damage.
   Stimulating the production of white blood cells and slowing the
   metabolism also protect the cells to some degree against radiation
   damage. Ideally, we would like to discover an antiradiation
   drug that can be administered orally without toxic side
   effects . . . .” (Text)
 Routine radio contact with MARS I interplanetar probe was made
   over distance of 98,863,000 km. (61,430,502 mi.f, about 12,000,000
   km. (7,364,400 mi.) farther than last U.S. radio contact with
   MARINER 1 Venus probe, according to Tass.         (M.\RINER 11’s last
               1
   contact was at 54.3 million mi.) (Pravda, 3/17/63, 1, AFSS-T
   Trans.)
 Howard M. Weiss, NASA Director of Quality Assurance and Re-
   liability, said total cost of the two Mariner shots, the second
    of which brought US. several firsts in knowledge of planet Venus,
   was $47 million. Weiss was addressing American Society of
   Quality Control, Southern Connecticut Section, in Bridgeport.
    (Bridgeport Post, 3/18/63)
Marclh 17: Fifth anniversary of orbiting of VANGUARD I, still orbiting
    the earth and still transmitting data. The satellite had made
                                                                   97
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3

   more than 19,700 orbits and had slowed about l/a sec. from original
   134 min., 27 sec. period. Present apogee: 2,447 mi.; perigee:
   403 mi. Scientists estimated VANGUARD I might have a llfetlme
   of 2,000 years. (W D Release 365-63)
March 17: NASA announced it would sponsor study to determine in-
   terest in system of “practical” satellites to collect data from re-
   mote areas of the earth. If warranted, study would be followed
   by a feasibility and design study. A possible use of data collec-
   tion satellite was in oceanograph , using instrumented floating
                                      9
   buoys distributed over ocean sur ace to measure characteristics
   of the sea. Satellite would interrogate each buoy, store infor-
   mation, then transmit it upon command. Similar application
   was tracking of icebergs, using transponders planted on ice
   formations. Study would be under cognizance of NASA Future
   Applications Satellites unit, which was also investigating non-
                                                        Release 63-55)
   milita uses of navigational satellites. (NASA
 Senator zlifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) questioned whether a planned
   space electronics research center should be located in Boston or
   in fact, whether one was needed a t all. He said New Jersey has
   outstanding ualifications for such a center and it and other
                 Be
   states should      considered a possible location-if the center is
   actually needed. NASA has already selected the Boston area as the
   site of the center. (Boston Eerald, 3/18/63)
Murch 18: Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space
   Flight Center testified before House Committee on Science and
   Astronautics’ bubcommittee on Manned Space Flight : “The F-1
   e n p e development program has an impressive list of accom-
   plishments. A year after the contract was signed full-scale com-
   ponents were undergoing tests, and in 27 months complete engine
   systems testing had begun. Full thrust and full duration tests
   have become routine. The engine has been gimbaled during hot
   firing. We expect successful completion of the Preliminary
   Fli htRatingTeststhisyear . . . .
      ‘%hen design of the F-1 was begun in 1959, combustion in-
   stability was known to be a potential problem. Accordingly,
   early in the program tests of various injectors for the thrust cham-
   ber were conducted, and a design was selected which had not
   experienced unstable combustion. For about a year, from mid-
   1961 to mid-1962, engine tests were conducted without this
    phenomenon occurring. Then, on June 28 last year we mere test-
    ing development engine #008 on the test stands in California. A
   test run which was scheduled for the full 21/, minutes running
   time was interrupted after 106 seconds of satisfactory per-
   formance by a rupture of a valve casting. The rupture was
   traced to combustion instability. Since this occurrence, several
   cases of combustion instability have taken place.
      “This phenomenon is not unique to the F-1, but has occurred in
   the development of most liquid rocket engines . . . .
      ‘We are presently concentrating on combustion instability and
   are making progress. With the contractor at Rocketdyne, we
    have made an exhaustive survey of all test data having a bearing
    ontheproblem . . . .
98            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

      “To summarize, khe F-1 engine development over the last
   four years has made satisfactory progress . . . .” (Testimony
                                                                        h
March 18: Frederick R. Kappel, AT&T board chairman, said in spew
   before New York Chamber of Commerce that TELSTAR 11 commu-
   nications satellite would be equipped with instruments “far more
   resistant to radiation” than TELSTAR I. Like its predecessor, TEL-
                                                                    (NYT
   STAR 1 would be launched by NASA at A T ~ Texpense.
             1
   [West. Ed.], 3/19/63)
 USAF announced launch of unidentified satellite into polar orbit from
   Vandenberg AIW using improved Thor-Agena booster (TAT).
   This was secund attempt and first successful launching of the im-
   proved Thor, thrust of which was uprated from 170,000 lbs. to
   about 330,000 lbs. by addition of three solid-propellant rocket
   motors to the liquid-fueled wer plant. (DOD Release 37k63)
                                   ?I
 NASA was faced with “a sizabe budget cut-up              to half a billion
   d o l l a p u n l e s s a new Soviet s ace spectacular changes the atti-
   tude of an economy-minded 8ongress,” according to Aviation
   Week a d Space Technology. (Av. Wk., 3/18/63, 30)
 U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, in last meeting of
   current session, agreed to have its legal subcommittee meet at
   U.N. Headquarters, New York, and scientific and technical sub-
   committee in Geneva. Agreement ended three-week deadlock
   between U.S. and Soviet delegations on a meeting place. ( L A .
    Times, Wmh. Post, 3/19/63)
 DOD announced Army Corps of Engineers, New England Div., would
   provide design and construction assistance to NASA on proposed
    Electronics Research Center in Boston area. (DOD Release
   366-63)
 Four-man space laboratory described in unsolicited proposal to
   NABA by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div.
   was reported in MGsiZes and Rockets. Space laboratory, which
    Dou las said could be operational in two years, could be fabri-
         3
    cate mostly with existing hardware and proven equipment, would
    use only one new structure-the command-control module.
    (M&R,3/18/63,10)
March 18-20: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
    (AIAA) Space Flight Testing Conference held in Cocoa Beach,
    Fla. Rocco A. Petrone, Chief of Heavy Space Vehicle Systems
    Ofc,NASA Launch Operations Center, presented paper on facil-
     fie
    ities required in launching Saturn V space vehicles in Project
    Apollo. (Saturn V / ApoZZo Launch Operations Plan.)
March 18-21: 200 scientists from 60 countries met in Rome to lan
    International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY) studies in 1964-65. eon-
    gress was under auspices of International Geophysical Commit-
    tee of the International Council of Scientific Unions. (NYT
    [West. Ed.], 3/19/63)
March 19: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, in cooperation with
    NBC and RCA, accomplished ‘first known transmission of television
    in color via RELAY I communications sablhte. 15-min. sequence
    of movie Kidnapped was relayed by RELAY from 4,000-mi. high
    orbit, and was scheduled to be shown on Walt Disney‘s program
    on March 24. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A5)
                                                                        99
                                                      19 63
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

March 19: Ernest W. Bmkett, Director of NASA Procurement and
   Su ply said in testimony before Subcommittee on S         Sciences
   an$ Advanced Research and Technology, House a t t e e on
   Science and Astronautics: “ . . . NASA is trying a new contract
   system which we hope will accomplish the incentive objectives.
   The base fee in the amtract will be lower than the usual fee.
   Criteria will be set up in the contract for evaluation of the oon-
   tractor’s performance. These criteria may include reduction and
   control of costs, excellence of performance, delivery on schedule,
   and other points. Periodically a NASA board, also specified in the
   contract, will evaluate the contractor’s performance and may
   award some higher fee, up to a set maximum, if the facts justify
   an increase . . . .” (Testimony)
 Dr. Robert C. Seamans, testifying before House Committee on Sci-
   enca and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Track-
   ing and Data Acquisition, outlined NASA personnel requirements
   for F Y 1964. Dr. Seamans said some 73,000 scientists and engi-
   neers would be required to carry out the U.S. space program, and
    11,300 of t h w would be employed by NASA. (UPI, NPT [West.
    Ed.;l,3/20/63)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Council of New York City

                                                        T
    President Paul R. Screvane conferred in Was               n on plans
    for NASA exhibit a t 1964 World’s Fair, possibly to a proposed
    361-ft. inflatable Saturn V rocket rephca to house l0,OOO sq. ft.
    of exhibits. (NASA Release 63-58)
  Ivan A. Getting of Aerospace Gorp., in address to space flight test-
    ing conference a t Cocoa Beach, Fla., tstimated that 90 percent
    of all current in-flight rocket failures could be detected and cor-
    rected by better preflight checking, including “preliminary
    designs, design reviews, r e - d e s i p .*tinp   additional redesign
    and additional testing. The pro bility o a successful perform-
    p e e nf y c h % py$g& is &..p+!y -1gtp.l t.2 the_ t h ~ ~ g w h n e c c
                                                                         fif
                                                                         ”-
                                                                b----”
    this evolutionary process . . .
       “There is an unfortunate tendency in our rush to meet end
    objectives and time schedules, and in our desire to save money
    within the program, to cut out important steps in developmental
    tests and ground systems tests. Not only are such economies
    false, but they impinge on our reputation as a nation for excel-
    lence in scientific achievement and engineering design.” (AP,
    Wash. Post. 3/20/63. A2)
  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Spaca Sciences ordered
    favorably reported the 14 nominations of incorporators of Space
    Communications Corp. On the Senate floor, Senator Albert
    Gore (D.-Tern.) requested the Senate withhold action on con-
    firmation of the nominations “for a reasonable time,” until he
    could prepare “the case, which I think is a very substantial one,
    against the propriety, advisability, and constitutionality of the
    Senate allowing itself to be entrapped into the operations of a
                                                           ... . ” (NASA
    purely private corporation organized for profit
  . Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/43;. CR,3/19/63, 4307; Wash. Post, 3/20/63)
  Dr. Abe Silverstein, nrector, NASA Lewis Research Center, ex-
    pressed appreciation to John W. -cy,            Jr., Chairman of the
100                                              19 6 3
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   U.S. Civil Service Commission, for commission’s contributions
   to the Lewis recruiting propam. During Fiscal Years 1962 and
   1963, Lewis hired 1,280 engineers and scientists from all over the
   U.S. (LRC Release 63-9; Lewis Chronology, 2)
March 19: Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., a vice president of Grumman Air-
   craft, replying to question during testimony before Manned Space
   Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astro-
   nautics, said first U.S. astronauts returning from the moon would
   bring back about 100-(earth) -pound sample of lunar terrain.
   ( L A . Times, 3/20/63)
 Atlas booster for Project Mercury manned flight MA-9, scheduled
   for mid-May, arrived at Cape Canaveral from General Dynamics/
   Astronautics, San Diego. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/20/63)
 Astroscience Center, facility devoted to current and long-range
   space programs, opened in Chicago by Armour Research Foun-
   dation of Illinois Institute of Technology. Headed by Dr. Leon-
   ard Reiffel, Director of Physics Research at the Foundation, new
   center would coordinate research projects for NASA and enlar e
   space research activities of the Foundation. (h7YT [West. Ed?,
   3/21/63)
March 20: Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. press conference in Rome, Dr. Hugh
   L. Dryden, chief U.S. negotiator, and Anatoli A. Blagonravov
   of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced signing of an ac-
   cord for a joint weather satellite program and called for broader
   American-Russian cooperation in space activities. Agreements
   were reached under space cooperation accord signed by the U.S.
   and the U.S.S.R. last June, and after ten days of closed-door
   negotiations by teams of specialists. Agreement would become
   effective after a 60-day waiting period pending possible changes
   by either Government.
      Under the joint. weather satellite program, each nation would
   launch a satellite on a different orbit to collect meteorological
   data, while a 24-hr. cable and radio communications network
   would be established for exchange of information and cloud-cover
   pictures, such data to be made public throughout the world.
   Launching of Echo I1 later in 1963 would provide basis for com-
   munications experiments which could lead to a global communica-
   tions network, including the exchange of radio and T V programs.
      Both NASA Deputy Administrator Dryden and Blagonravov
   expressed hope that the accord just negotiated would lead to
   broader apeements. Blagonravov was quoted as saying that “the
   first step is always the hardest.” Dryden was quoted regnrding
   the Warsaw meetings later this year on probes of Mars and
   Venus as saying: “I hope there will be future coordination to
   avoid du lication.” (Text ;AP, Wash.Po8t, 3/21/63,1)
 Dr. Abe 8lverstein Director of 1,ewis Research Center, said in
   testimony before &ubcommittee on Sp~ce      Sciences and Advanced
   Research and Technology of the House Committee on Science
   and Astronautics that Centaur liquid-hydrogen vehicle could lift
   250 additional pounds of payload because of design improve-
   ments in the vehicle. Dr. Silverstein described design changes
   and testing program undertaken by Lewis, and said that the sec-
                                                                    101
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     ond and third of the planned 15 Centaur vehicles were scheduled
     to be launched in last half of 1963. ( M & R , 3/25/63,17)
‘$larch2U: John A. Hornbeck, president of Bellcomm, Inc., testified
     before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcom-
     mittee on Manned Space Flight that safety was paramount factor
     in deciding on lunar landing site for Project Apollo. “Prelimi-
     nary studies of this kind suggest that the characteristics of a good
     site for early exploration might be on a lunar sea, 10 miles from a
     continent and 10 miles from a post-maria1 crater.” (EPI, Wash.
     Post, 3/21/63, A2)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced it had initiated a com-
       arison study with Hughes Aircraft Company to determine feasi-
     klity of optical laser communications system in dee space, com-
                                                          B
     paring the laser to microwave. Study, which woul “outline the
     design of an ultimate deep space communication system, will
     investigate three cases : beaming the laser between the spacecraft
     and the earth; between the spacecraft and an earth-orbiting
     satellite, then relaying to earth by microwave; and beaming the
     laser between a spacecraft and a lunar-based laser station, then
     relaying the signal to earth by microware.” Study project was
       art of broad investigation by MSC of laser applications. (MSC
     g ae 63-52)
       ls
       e
  Reported that Leaf Siegler, Inc., delivered to NASA the slo\r-scan
     television camera systems and receiving equipment intended for
     use on the forthcoming flight of L4stronaut Gordon Cooper.
      (Spme News R a n d u p , 1/8/64,2)
  Komomolskaya Pravda reported sport aircraft Yak-18P piloted
     by Boris Porfirov was flown to record altitude of 7,358 meters,
     new All-Union record for aircraft of third weight cate ory. For-
                                                           #
     mer All-Union record, set 1954, was 6,311 meters. ( omsomols-
     kaya Prauda, 3/20/63,3, AFSS--T Trans.)
March 91; Soviet news apencp Tass announced launching of COSMW
     x~n   (apogee: 209 m pfrigee: 127 mi.; inclination to equator:
                           i
                           :
                           ;
     64” 58’; period: 89.77 min.). Tass stated that all systems m-ere
     functioning and that onboard equipment was “intended for con-
     tinuing outer space research in conformity Kith the program
     announced . . . March 16, 1962,” but gave no payload weight or
     specific mission details. I n an interview in Guinea, Cosmonauts
     Andrian Nikolayev and Pave1 Poporich said that the Soviets plan
     more tandem manned orbital flights. I n response to questions,
     they said that women sometimes have “physical superiority over
     men.’? COSMOS XIII was launched after 89 days of no announced
     Soviet space flight activity, longest period of space inactivity to
     date. ( EPI, Wash. Post, 3/23/63, A8; Av. W k ,3/25/63,26; Tass,
     Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/22/63,1, AFSS-T Trans.)
  USAF announced successful flight-test of Titan I1 from Cape (‘ana\--
     eral, the missile propelling a payload “twice as heavy as any other
     in this country‘s arsenal more than 6,500 miles do\.;n the Atlantic
     Missile Range.’’ This was eighth successful flight test in 12 at-
     tempts. (DOD Release 390-63)
  I n regular press conference, President Kennedy responded to a ques-
     tion about the pace of the U.S. space program relative to the Soviet
102                                                19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   Union’s: “The U.S. is making, as you know, a major effort in space
   and will continue to do so. We are expending an enormous sum of
   money to make sure that the Soviet Union does not dominate space.
   We will continue to do it. And we will continue to take whatever
   steps are necessary to prevent any action against the United States.
       “The fact of the matter is the Soviet today with a nuclear
   weapon can reach the United States with a missile. So I would
   have to know in more precise detail than you [the questioner]
   have described the exact nature of our threat before I su gested
   what our counteraction would be.” (Transcript in Wasf Post,
   3/22/63, A16)
March 21 : Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator,
   testified on the NASA-DOD Gemini Pro ram Planning Board before
                                         5
   Subcommittee on Manned Space Flig t, House Committee on Sci-
   ence and Astronautics. “The NASA-DOD Agreement on Gemini
           ut into effect by Secretary McNamara and Administrator
   F:bg on January 21, 1963. This agreement represents another
   important example of the manner in which both the Department
   of Defense and the Kational Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
   tration are striving to maximize the technological productivity of
   national space flight programs such as the Gemini. I think it
   is si ificant that in announcing the agreement, Mr. McNamara
   and %r. Webb emphasized the national character and importance
    of the Gemini project and reiterated their intentions to insure
   that Gemini is utilized in the national interest and to avoid unnec-
   essa.ry duplication of effort in this area as in all others . . . .
       “I think it is important to point out here that increased DOD
    participation in the Gemini does not alter the peaceful and experi-
   mental character of the rogram. We are driving forward to
                              P
    advance the technology o manned space flight, including rendez-
    vous and designated docking and to study and understand man’s
    effectiveness under prolonged conditions of weightlessness. I n
    carrying out this program, NASA continues to be solely responsible
                                                                  z
    for the management of the Gemini project. . . .” (Testimon )
 Soviet scientists lost contact with MARS I interplanetary probe w en
   it was about 66,000,000 mi. from earth; however, no mention was
   made of this fact by the Russians until May 16 (see May 16).
    (Balt. Sun, 5/17/63 j Av. Wk.,5/27/63,24)
 NASA announced establishment of Office of Assistant Administrator
    for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, with Dr. George
    L. Simpson, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs,
    filling the post. I n new position, Dr. Simpson would continue
    to be responsible for NASA ublic affairs duties and would further
                               H
    be responsible for Office o Technology Utilization, formerly In-
    dustrial Applications Division, Office of Applications. Realign-
    ment was expected to “result in closer coordination of . . .
    industrial a plications with [information] dissemination activi-
    ties. . . .” %r. Simpson’s deputy, Julian Scheer, would become
    De uty Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and
       f
    Po icy Planning. Louis B. Fong, head of Industrial Applica-
    tions Div., would become Director of Technology Utilization.
     (NASA Release 63-60)
                                                                    103
                                                    1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

March 21: D .Leland J. Haworth of the Atomic Energy Commission
           r
   was named Director of the National Science Foundation by
   President Kennedy. (AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 3/22/63, A15)
 DOD announced “clearest data yet obtained of the ionosphere and the
   dynamics of its formation and dissipation” had been obtained by
   AFCRL scientists, who matched experimental data from positive ion
   detector aboard a Thor rocket with theoretical data based on
   laboratory studies, within error of only two per cent. (MID Re-
   lease 388-63)
 Article on “The Test Ban” by Stefan T. Possony of the Hoover In-
   stitute, Stanford University, printed in the Oongre~~ionaZ    Record,
   said :
       “. . . Currently there is no feasible method of verifying
    [nuclear] explosions in space. I f the Soviets were to launch a
   space vehicle and explode a nuclear device, a t not too great a
   distance, the United States might gain a good notion of what
   was going on. But we would not possess the type of evidence
   which ‘would stand up in court,’ assuming that we could make
   public us8 of the evidence we have. Hence, we would be reluc-
   tant to move, just as during the Cuban crisis, Washington did
   not move before there was clear photographic evidence of the
   presenceof Soviet missiles . . . .
       “Few people realize that though we art3 entrusting our security
   to ICBM’s, never have tested a full assembly of such a missile,
                  we
   Le., we have not launched an ICBM together with its warhead, nor
   destroyed a target with an ImM-launched warhead . . . .
       “Testing also has a bearing on space propulsion. It is generally
   agreed that the Orion roject-which is designed to use small
                             f
   nuclear ‘bombs’ to p r o p a space vehiclewould allow the lifting
   of maximal payloads into orbit and permit the deepest penetra-
   tion into the solar system. Of all propulsion systems it would
                                    ~ . t i ! i ~ nf tcnare Hornevpr,
                                                  ~ -r -.- --
                                                       i~~
                fer &e
   nr&&                      &&,ire
   f a r it seems impractical, because of radioactivlty, to launch an
   Orion assembly from the ground ; unfortunatel?, by using Orion
   propulsion only from orbit, much of the system s utility would be
   lost. An all-fusion technology would eliminate the radioactivity
   and thereby open the road to getting really important payloads
   into space.
       “Should the Soviets decide to move into space as a decisive
   military medium, they may em loy Orion techniques even before
   they are able to eliminate d o a c t i v i t y . . . . The brutal twin
   facts which we cannot circumvent are that space utilization re-
   quires maximum energy releases and that nuclear explosions are
   the method through which maximum energy releases can be pro-
   duced-pproducedmostcheaply . . . .
       “Plowshare explosions may be required for the building of sta-
   tions on the moon . . . .” (OR,     3/21/63,4365,4367,4368)
March %t?: NASA announced RELAY I communciations satellite had
   achieved all of its experiments and missions. Performance of
   RELAYI, launched by NASA December 13?“has been uniformly ex-
   cellent” throughout a b u t 500 communications tests and demon-
                 in
   s t r a t i a ~ ~ 660 orbits December 13-March 1 . Although all
                                                         1
104                                               196 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   planned demonstrations were completed, they would be con-
   tinued while the satellite remained in operation. ( NASA Release
   63-57)
March 22: At GSFC Colloquium, John A. O’Keefe discussed the origin
   and evolution of the moon, submitting his theory that billions of
   years ago the moon separated from the still “undifferentiated
   earth,” thereafter was subjected to volcanic eruptions, meteorite
   bombardment, and ultimate cooling and transformed into a hard
   cinder-like material. The volcanic dust produced the compam-
   tively smooth lunar maria. I f theory is correct, O’Keefe said, the
   original dust has long since become firm and constitutes “no haz-
   ard” for landings of space vehicles. O’Keefe supported his theory
    with available evidence on tektites. (Text ; Wash. Post,
    3/23/63,1)
 Sixth Annual Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, sponsored by
    tlie National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. I n address, Vice
    President Lyndon n. Johnson paid tribute to the “father of
   modern rocketry,” and said that those today who “understand
    the stakes of space” must help “the public to understand these
   stakes.” H e urged that communications barriers among scieii-
   tists, engineers, and po1itici:ins be abolished so that public sup-
   port for public policy CHI^ be obtained. “Unless and until this
    is done,” said the Chairm:~nof the National Aeronautics and
    Space Council, “the teclinological community cannot justifiably
   be impatient with those who are chosen to represent and express
   the public’s owi will.”
       I n addition to honoring Mrs. Goddard, tlie National Rocket
   Club presented its annual awards: the Robert H. Goddard Me-
   morial Trophy, its premiere award, to John H. Glenn, Jr., in rec-
   ognition of the first U.S. manned orbital space flight ; the Nelson
   P. Jackson Aerospace Award to the American Telephone and
   Telegraph Company for development and operation of TELSTAR
   I; the National Rocket, Club Award to tlie Radio-Television In-
   dustry (ABC, CBS, ms, and NBC) for “pioneering private enterprise
   efforts” under the U.S. open information coverage of the space
   program ; the Astronautics Engineer Award to Jack Norval
                                             , Technical Director of
   James of J e t Propulsion L b
   MARINER 11. The First RobertO H. o Z oddard Historical Essay
                                   a rnt
   Award was given to R. Cargill Hall of San Jose, Calif., for his
   prize essa on “World-Circling Spaceships-Satellite Studies in
   the U.S. &ring the 1940’s”; Honorable Mentions goin to Wil-
                                                           t
   frid J. Mayo-Wells of Washington, D.C. (“Origins of         ace Te-
   lemetry”) and Robert D. Roach of Buffalo, N.Y. (“T e First
   Man-Rocket Belt”). The Robert H. Goddard Scholarship w a s
   awarded to Miss Marcia S. Miner, physics major at the American
   University. (Program)
 DOD announced US.\F was developing space structures of honeycomb
   material that could be compactly packaged, then expanded in
   space. Shelter of such maternal could be packaged approximately
   a foot square, then expanded in space to airtight structure seven
   ft. high and seven ft. in diameter. Geophysics Co. of America
   was working under contract to build the structure, developing
                                                                   105
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 31

    methods of fabricating and expanding it and making the struc-
    ture rigid. Other redicted uses of the honeycomb material were
                        P
    in solar energy co lectors and re-entry vehicles. (DOD Release
    405-63)
March 22.- Department of Defense announced the a pointment of
                                                       8
    Maj. General Leighton I. Davis (USAF), A ~ T C ommander, as
    the DOD representative for Project Gemini support operations.
    (AFSG Operational Highlights, 11)
 USAF announced Atlas F ICBM: launched from Vandenberg AFB, its
    re-entry vehicle impacting on redetermined area more than
                                      P
    4,000 miles down the Pacific Missi e Range. (DOD Release 399-63)
 West German Government announced that it disapproved of its
    citizens assisting the United Arab Republic on mlitary rocket
    projects, and said that there was no proof that any West Ger-
    mans were so engaged. The Israeli Parliament had appealed to
    Cliancellor Adenauer on March 20 to take action against German
    scientists assisting the 1T.A.R. in developing military potential.
     (AP, Wash. Eee. Star, 3/22/63, A2)
Ncrrch 2.3: I n address dedicating O’Hare International Airport, in
    Chicago, President Kennedy said that the U.S. “intends to be n
    leader in the supersonic age.” Foreseeing a snialler world when
    the macli three airliners are developed, the President said: “Let
    us also see to it that it is a better world. A more just and peace-
    ful world for our children and for their children after them.?‘
       I n don-ntomn civic address, President Kennedy spoke about
    automation in his remarks on labor and unemployment : ‘ b . . . un-
    derlying all of these trends is a third phenomenon, both cursed
    and praised ; and that is technological advance, known loosely
    by the name of ‘automation.’ During the last six years, this
    Nation increased its manufacturing output by nearly 20 percent-
    but it did so with 800,000 fewer roduction workers; and the gain
    iz Ivhite c’o!!,zr jobs did riot o&et this loss. siilce iiie second
    world war, the real output of the private economy has risen 67
    per cent, with only a 3 per cent raise in man-hours . . . . Increas-
    ing productivity and advancing technology are essential to our
    ability to compete and to progress-but we also have an obligation
    to create an additional 2 million jobs each year for those displaced
    by thew gains. . . .” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/63, 1, A5)
 X.WA and Public Health Service announced award of contract to
    Jfassxhusetts Institute of Technology for study i n area of com-
    puter tschnology as related to biomedical sciences. Under the
    contract, MIT established a Center Development Ofc t o (1) co-
                                                        fie
    ordinate planning activities for a Regional Resource Center and
    (2) evaluate the potential of specialIy designed computer for
    health-related sciences. (HEW Releme W93)
 “GAF announced Atlas ICBX launched from Vandenberg AFB ex-
    ploded shortly after liftoff. Cause of explosion was not deter-
    mined. (DOD Release 414-63)
 More than 400 German scientists and technicians were reported to be
    working for Egyptian government on first Egyptian-made rocket
    and nuclear warhead. First group of German atomic scientists
    arrived in Egypt in 1954, Israeli sources said. (London Sunday
     741423 0--64--8
106                                                1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    Times, in Wash. Post, 3/24/63, A17; London Observer News
    Service, in Wash. Post, 3/24/63, A17)
Marc% 25: Three major U.S. television networks each broadcast
    seven-minute promrams from Paris to New York via RELAY I com-
    munications satelhe. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/63)
 Large flaming meteor visible over eastern U.S. from New York to
    North Carolina about 10 p.m. EST. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/26/63)
 NASA Administrator        Webb wrote letters to the respective
    chairmen of the House and Senate space committees indicating
    that a mid-city location in Boston on land now owned by the
    Massachusetts Turnpike Authority might provide an alternate
    location for the proposed NASA Electronics Research Center. H e
    pointed out that if authorization for the Center and its location
    in the Boston area were approved, NASA was going to not only
    carefully consider the original possibility of obtainin 1,000 acres
                                                          P
    of land as near as possible to Harvard and MIT, but a so the alter-
    nate location, utilizing air-rights with multi-story structures on
    a smaller area. (Texts, NASA Release 62-63)
 Dr. L man J. Rriggs (1874-1963), Director Emeritus of the Bureau
       8
    of tandards and a former member of the NACA (193345), died
    in Washington, D.C. He began his government career in 1896
    as a physicist in the Department of Agriculture, originating the
    centrifuge method of classifying soils, organizing the biophysical
    lab in 1906. H e joined the Bureau of Standards in 1917 and be-
    came its Director in 1933; his early research resulted in improve-
                                  a
    ment in the accuracy of lar e naval guns, the invention with
    Dr. Paul R. Hey1 of the eart inductor compass (used by Lind-
    bergh) ,and air viscosity experiments leading to improved propel-
    ler designs. NACA Report No. 207 by Briggs, G. F. Hall, and
    Hugh L. Dryden (on “Aerodynamic Characteristics of Airfoils
    at High Speeds,”) issued in 1924 was considered a major contri-
    bution on airfoils at near supersonic speeds. I n 1939, the White
    House named Dr. Briggs as chairman of the original Uranium
    Committee to study the military use of atomic energy, which led
    to the Manhattan Project and Hiroshima. For his work on the
    proximity fuse during World War 1 ,he was awarded the Medal
                                            1
    of Merit by President Truman. Dr. Briggs retired in 1945, but
    continued research including confirmation in 1959 that pitched
    baseballs could curve as much as 17 inches in 60 feet. (Wash.
    Eve. Star, 3/2/63, A5)
March 26: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson reviewed his first 26
    months in office on ABC television interview. Referring to his par-
    ticipation in major national decisions, he referred to pushin
                                                                     3
    ahead with the large rocket booster program and the accelerate
    space program decisions in which he participated as Chairman of
    the National Aeronautics and Space Council. (Wash. Post,
    3/27/63 ;Wash. Eve. star, 3/27/63)
         Project Stargazer balloon fli h t from Alamogordo,
 USAF
                                           B
    N.M., canceled because of high sur ace wind‘s. Balloon was
    equipped with small aluminum gondola for pilot, Capt. Joseph
    Kittinger, Jr. ( USAF) , and civilian astronomer, William C. White,
    for a 24-hour observation with 12.5-inch gyroscopic telescope
                                                                  107
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3,

                                                    (UPI, Wash. Daily
    above 90 per cent of the earth’s atmosphere.
   News,3/26/63)
March .%: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced beginning of
         Apollo environmental control system tests in Garrett-AiRe-
    NASA
   search Los Angela. ECS would provide life supporting atmos-
   phere in command module of Apollo spacecraft. Tests would in-
   clude simulating prelaunch, ascent, orbital, and re-entry pressure
   conditions on the system. ( MSC Release 63-61)
 Dr. S. Fred Singer, Director of National Satellite Weather Center,
    told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcummit-
   t e on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition that re-
     e
   ports from Tiros weather satellites were being used by Soviet
   scientists in their weather research. Launching of a weather
   satellite “is probably an immediate Soviet objective.” (NASA
   L g Act. Rpt. II/46,3/28/63; Wash. Eve. Stur, 3/27/63)
     e.
 DOD announced Dr. Theodore von KBrmh had been selected to re-
   ceive.the second annual Thomas D. White National Defense
   Award, established in 1962 by Air Force Association to ‘be con-
   ferred on US. citizen for outstandug contribution to national
   defense. (DOD Release 420-63)
 Award of $358,076,923 contract b u 8 8 ~ design and manufacture
                                          for
                                   B
   and testing of X-20 (Dyna oar) manned space glider to the
   Boeing Co. was announced by Senators Warren G. M a g n w n and
   Henry M. Jackson (D.-Wash.). Contract covered airdrop tests
   of the X-20 from B-52 aircraft and an orbital flight from Cape
   Canaveral expected in 1965. (AP, N Y T [West. Ed.], 3/27/63)
 Britain’s Postmaster General, John Bevins, dismissed as unrealistic
   the idea of his country’s going it alone in putting communica-
   tions satellites into orbit. He did not say which course the Gov-
   ernment would choose, except that he ruled out an all-British
   system. A satellite system, he said, cannot be established unless
   other countries are willmg to put ground stations on their own
   territories and unless they are willing to put traffic over the sys-
   tem. (NPT,Western Edition, 3/27/63)
 Ernie Smith, who made first civilian airplane flight to Hawaii from
   Oakland, Calif., on July 15,. 1927, died in San Francisco. 2,393-
   mile flight took 25-hrs. 26-rmn. (AP, Wuah. Post, 3/27/63)
March 27.-NASA launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to an esti-
   mated peak altitude of 185 mi. from White Sands, New Mexico.
   Objective of the experiment was to measure the absolute alpha
   radiation resonantly scattered by atmospheric atomic hydrogen
   at night. Instrumentation included eight ion-chamber nodules
    and two aspect photometers. (NASA Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching,
    4/4/63)
        Administrator James E. Webb, in address before the Los An-
  NASA
       les Council on World Affairs, pointed out the unique role of
    %lifornia in the national space program: “During Fiscal Year
    1962 and the first six months of FY 1963,47 per cent of NASA’s
    prime contracts over $25,000 were awarded to firms in California.
    I f the second ranking state is excluded in each of these years,
    California industries received more NASA prime contract dollars
    than all of the other 48 states combined.
108           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

      “Unless the nation decides to forego the opportunity it now
   has to insure a pre-eminent position in space, I foresee no pos-
   sibility, certainly not in the near future, that the volume of space
   activity conducted in California will decline . . . It does seem
   likely that as our national investment in space research and devel-
   opment increases, California will find it more difficult to main-
   tain its present percentage of the total . . . .”
              procurement, Mr. Webb said : “In short, we are making
      NASA’s
   a deliberate effort to use the self-policing forces of the market
   place, to avoid building government competition with industry,
   and also to maintain sufficient managerial and technical capabil-
   ity in our own organization to make certain that our contractors
   are giving us the reliability we must have and the taxpayers a
   dollar’s-worth of work for every dollar we spend.“
      I n reviewing the international aspects of the NASA program,
   the NASA Administrator cited the provisions of the National
   Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, and said: “Some citizens,
   who regard military necessities as the prime justification for our
   space effort, find it, difficult to accept the open, unclassified char-
   acter of our civilian space program. Some re ard basic scientific
                                                    t
   results as a national treasure. which should e keDt under lock
   and key, and ask ‘Why do ‘we give away our iecrets to the
   Russians?’
      “The answer is that our program involves both science and
   technology. There are no red secrets of nature, and it would
   be self-defeating to try to classify the science and principles of
   nature. On the other hand, technological advances and inventions
   are the product of men and effort, and can properly be classified
   and kept from potential enemies where the national interest so
   re uirerj.
      aAccordingly, our national space program moves forward with
   the basic scientific research conducted by the civilian agency,
   available to the whole scientific community, but technological
   development conducted by both NASA and the Department of
   Defense which is shared by both agencies, and classified when
   defense and military interests are involved. I n this manner we
   have protected our national security while making the maximum
    contribution to the advancement of science . . . .” (Text)
March 27: I n a letter to Rep. George P. Miller (I).-Calif.), Dr.
   Jerome B. Wiesner discussed the problems of scientific manpower.
       “The manyfold demands for technical manpower draw on the
   same pool of talent-for defense and space, for innovation of
   ‘civilian products able to compete in a world market, for meeting
   such domestic problems as mass transportation and environmeiital
   pollution associated with a rapidly urbanized society, for medical
   advancement, and for the effective management of our resources
    in such a way that we can help upgrade the way of life of citizens
   throughout the world without downgrading our own. Super-
   posed on these requirements is the need for science, mathematics
    and engineering teachers to meet the rapidly growing college en-
    rollment. A sharp competition for manpower has resulted, par-
   ticularly for the superior individual having advanced training.
                                                                     109
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,          1963

    I n that competition, not all sectors of demand have succeeded in
    meeting their needs, and the future outlook is not encouraging.
       “For tlie first time., we are confronted with a plurality of goals
    that may well outstrip our technical manpower resources.
       “Faced with the same manpower problem as the Soviet Union,
    how, in a democratic society where each citizen must have a free
    choice of his or her occupation, do we meet this challenge?
       “The urgent need for more individuals having advanced train-
    in is clear . . . . To keep pace with our national needs, it is tlie
      3
    ju gment of the Presidents Science Advisory Committee that
    we should and could increase the number of Ph.D.’s each year in
    engineering, mathematics, and physical sciences (EMP) to reach
    7,500 in 1970, the number of master’s or equivalent to 30,000.
    This annual production of 37,500 advanced degrees by 1970
    should be compared with 15,000 in 1960, 11,000 in 1950.
       “A substantial fraction of these new graduates, incidentnlly,
    must, be plo\.red back into the universities for teaching, and
    soon . . . . With regard to students, the major barrier to continua-
    tion of full-time graduate study is financial . . . . Another barrier
    is inadequate graduate facilities . . . . I n addition, there is very
    convincing evidence that some geographical areas produce a much
    greater proportion of doctorates than others . . . . Relatively
    few students are prepared to study more than several hundred
    miles from their homes. It would thus appear that we have a
                                                                      dis-
    special problem in terms of meeting an unequal geog~npliical
    tribution of centers of educational excellence.
       “The present barriers to graduate edu~%tion-limitations in
    student support, number of faculty, and educational facilities-
    must be overcome. It is to that end that the President has pro-
    posed that the Federal Government take the initiative and pro-
        -
    vide the leadership needed to meet these national needs.
       “1’0 meet goais for graduate education in the three iieids of
    potential shortage-engineering, mathematics, and physical sci-
    ences-it is of critical importance that we increase the number of
    graduate students enrolling in tlie fall of 1964 from the 88,000
    which may be expected on the basis of projected trends to some
    30,000 . . . . Support would be provided within existing legisla-
    tion, through NSF, mc, and NASA fellowships, and through lien-
    XSF science development and training grant programs . . . . I n
    virtual1 all of these cases, assistance to students would be accom-
            i
    panied y a grant directly to the college or university to help
    meet the true cost of education, and thus would assist tlie uni-
    versity to maintain an internal balance between fields . . . . The
    President also proposes Federal support for new physical f acili-
    ties . . . .
       “The proposed program is designed to achieve a substantial
    and unprecedented acceleration in the rate of production in ad-
    vanced degrees in these three fields.” (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86,
March 27: r. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Director of SASA Office of
   6’10’6%
   Advanced Research and Technology, told House Committee on
   Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on SpRce Sciences :“The
110                                                   1963
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     essential pur ose of . . . [NASA’s    advanced research and technol-
     ogy programy is to lay the foundation and to determine the build-
     ing blocks which will be needed for pre-eminence in aeronautics
     and space in the near future . . . .
        “Ithink that the history o technology over the past 100 years
                                     f
     has shown that true progress in any branch of technology such as
     space technology requires and even demands a sharp cutting edge
     of advanced research. The kind of things we read about in the
     papers like the manned spaceflight effort, scientific probes, com-
     munications, and meteorological satellites and airliners we ride
     on today all rest upon a foundation of research which was done
     in previous decades; and the research we do today in our labora-
     tories and universities, in industry derives vigor and freshness
     from the motivations of these projects and things that we are
     doing to benefit mankind.
        “At the same time, there is really a feeding in both directions.
                                                                  ring
     The research derives freshness from the things that are
     in the way of projects and the projects later derive bene ts from    On
     the research . . . .” (Transcript)
March 27: D. nrainerd Holmes, NASA Deputy Associate Adminis-
     strator and Director of Manned Space Flight, told Manned Space
     Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astro-
     nautics that current cost estimate of Project Apollo was $20 billion
     or less. (Transcript)
   Contract for $2,143,900 awarded to Kaiser Engineers to design a
     100- by 120-ft. space environment chamber to simulate pressure
     and temperature conditions existing at altitudes up to 100 miles.
     (LRC Release 63-11 ; Lewis Chronology, 2)
illarch 28-30: First national Space, Science, and Urban Life Con-
     ference at Ihnsmuir Hcuse, Oakland, Calif. 150 I T S . leaders-
     prominent Government figures, distinguished aerospace indus-
     trialists, eminent schol,zrs, and leading: research scientists gathered
     to discuss political, sociological, physical, and economic effect of
     space scientific R&D on the average American and his community.
     (NASA Release 63-62)
March 28: NASA launched Saturn S A 4 in successful flight test from
     Cape Canaveral, the 1.%mil1 ion-1b.-thrust rocket reaching 7’7-mi.
     altitude in last of four successful tests of first stage :done. After
     100 sec. of flight, one of the booster’s clustered eight engines was
     cut off by pre-set timer, and that engine’s propellants were re-
     routed to the other seven, which continued to burn. Experiment
     confirmed engine-out capability designed into the Saturn I vehicle
     system by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center engineers. (NASA
     Release 63-61)
   Launch of NASA atmospheric structure satellite (S-6) from AMR was
     postponed because of difficulties in payload checkout. (AP,
     Wash. Post, 1/29/63,1)
   NASA launched a two-stage Nike-Apache from Wallops Island,
     Va., with an experiment designed to measure nighttime air
     density and composition at altitudes of about 60 to 120 mi.
     The 70-lb. payload reached an apogee of approximately 118 mi.
                                                                           111
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,             1 9 63

    and impact occurred in the Atlantic Ocean 114 mi. from the
   launch site. (NASA Release 63-30)
March 28: I n speech to the North Carolina Citizens Association at
    Raleigh, GSFC D i m t o r Harry J. Goett reriem-ed.the scientific
    exploration of space, its meaning, and future. He concluded:
    “From a scientific point of view it may matter little how quickly
    we come to understand sun-aqrth relationships, whether Nimbus
    [weat-her satellite] gets launched this year or next, or whether
    we land a man on the moon during this decade or not. But
    there is no doubt that our iiatioiial prestige demands that the
    United States l e d the world in the Iiard-won knowledge and
    technology in the important amqs of eophysics, solar physics
    and interplanetary science that have feen opened by the ad-
    vent of the sp                   We must continue R n aggressive pro-
                           “Y-
    gram to assure ace t le United States retains its leadership. . . .
                         that
          “Our future in the exploration of space does not hold any
    simple pmaceas, scientifically, tecli~iologically,and financially.
    But neither did the del-elopnieiit of the United States come
    easy nor has the future ever been an emy one for a free peoplz
   seaking truth and knowledge, and the preservation of freedom.
    (Text)
 Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
   carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to altitude of 100 mi., in
   experiment to measure electron density profile, electron tempera-
   tures, and solar radiation in the ionosphere. Secondary objective
   of the flight was to check out hardware to be flown from Ft.
   Churchill, Can., during solar eclipse in July. (Wallops Release
   63-31)
 Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Director of Space Sciences, addressed
   Space, Science, and Urban Life Conference in Oakland, Cali-
   fornia: ‘‘The budget of $3.7 billion for the current fiscal year and
                       $5.7 Liliioii foi ilie iieiit ESCZ: j~~1.i’ S Z ~ ) ; ! S
     11
   Lilt: r q u e > i e ~                                       %E.
   of money, approaching one per cent of the gross national product
   in magnitude. But, perhaps even more important than the abso-
   lute magnitude of these sums, is the leverage they exert or can be
   made to exert on other more general activities and associated
   resources. Although the effect of tlie space program on tlie total
   national scene may be quite modest, in certain localized regions
   it can be quite large. For example, . . . it appears nt the present
   time that in Fiscal Year 1963 about 47 per cent of all NASA prime
                                                   .
   contracts will go to California firms . . .” (Text)
 Defense Department announced deployment, of first of three Fleet
   Ballistic Missile ( FBM) submarines in the Mediterranean and that
   these three would come from those operating from Holy Loch,
   Scotland. (Poloris Ghranobgy, 1955-63)
 Promotion of Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, coinmander of eoviet
   rocket forces, to Chief of the General Staff as reported in
   Soviet military newspqper Krnsnnyn Zvezda. (AP, Wash. Post,
   3/29/63)
Narch 29: In an address to the Press and Union League Club of Sail
   Francisco, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said that the two
112           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   basic policy questions repeatedly raised concerning the US. space
   program were :
      (1) “Is ex loration of the moon an objective of suflicient value
                 f
   to our drive or space leadership to warrant a btal investment of
   as much as $20 billion in this decade, and in the next fiscal year
   at a rate that requires two-thirds of our [NASA] space budget?”
      (2) ‘<Is  the ace a t which we are proceeding and the rats of
                     K
   expenditure w ich is required to explore the moon by 1970,
   necessary to insure eventual pre-eminence in space, and reasonable
   in the light of our other pressing national needs?”
      I n speaking to these questions, Mr. Webb traced the evolution
   of the U.S. space program and the determination of the national
   objectives in space after the strategic surprise of SPUTNIH I. He
   discussed the central considerations of world leadership in science
 ~




   and technology, and the role of space exploration and exploitation
   in national affairs. H e reviewed progress to date and the urgent
   requirement for full public understanding of the meaning and
   purpose of space exploration. (Text)
March 29: British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery announced
   U.K. had ordered a design study to determine suitable communi-
   cations satellite system, the satellites to be placed in orbit by ELDO
   vehicle (European Launcher Development Organization). To
   be undertaken by Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough
   and Signals Research Development Establishment at Christ-
   church, studies would consider : network of medium-altitude-orbit
   satellites, probably at least 12 ; system of stationary-orbit satel-
   lites, calling for much smaller number of satellites; use of
   Woomera rocket range, Australia, for launchings. U.K. was
   hopeful that such a system could be established in cooperation
   with European countries but independent of U.S. “No one coun-
   try should have a monopoly of space,” Amery said. H e also aii-
   nounced that contracts to industry for a third Ariel satellite, to be
   launched by U.S. rockets but to be built entirely by U.K., mould be
   awarded soon. (Wash. Post, 3/30/63; Av. Wk., 4/8/63,38)
 DOD announced study of emergency re-entry from manned space
   flight was being conducted by Armour Research Foundation
   under direction of AFSC Flight Dynamics Laboratory. Armour
   study would be based on theoretical re-entry vehicle with crew
   of three or less, performin in low earth orbits, re-entries, and
   short duration missions. xrmour would provide AFSC Flight
   Dynamics Laboratory with design criteria and drawings for con-
   trollable emergency escape systems enabling the vehicle to land
   in relatively small area. (DOD Release 441-63)
 Congressman Charles A. Halleck (R.-Ind.) publicly released letter
   from former President Eisenhower urging that “the new spend-
          programs in the pending budget . . . be drastically
   re uced . . . .
      “The space program, in my opinion, is downright spongy.
   This is an area where we particularly need to demonstrate
   some commoii sense. Specifically, I have never believed that a
   spectacular dash to the moon, vastly deepening our debt, is worth
   the added tax burden it will eventually impose upon our citizens.
                                                                 113
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   This result should be achieved as a natural o u t g r o d of demon-
   strably valuable space operations. But having made this into a
   crash program, we are unaroidably wasting enormous sums. I
   suggest that our enthusiasm here be tempered in the interest of
   fiscal soundness . . . .” (CR, 4/2/63, 5172)
March 3 . I n final meeting of the Space, Science, and Urban Life
        0-
   Conference a t Dunsmuir House, Oakland, Calif., NASA Admin-
   istrator James E. Webb said: “ . . . we must all concern our-
   selves with the progress and the promise of scientific research
   and technological development in this country, and the effects of
   this activity upon society. My own work on projects concerned
   with civic and urban problems, has left an indelible impression
   of their complexity and urgency . . . .
      “Today we are dealing not only with profound changes in the
   social and economic structure of the country and the world; we
   are dealing, as well, with an even more profound change in man%
   own conception of the boundaries and limitations of his hnbit-
   able environment and his understanding of the forces of the uqi-
   verse . . . Man is no longer rooted to terra fimm, either in the
   literal sense, or in his understanding of the powerful forces of
   the universe of which he is a minuscule part. Increasingly, he
   comprehends that the new understanding and knowledge which
   are being unleashed by science and technology will alter his
   existence in more ways, and more rapidly, than he can possibly
   foresee.. . .
      “Man has gained mobility, his horizons have broadened not
   only in the g v p h i c a l sense, but because he no longer feels
   bound by a family farm, or a traditional village industry . . . .
   A civilization whch can move with serious purpose to gear itself
   for travel to the moon and the planets ail1 not be content with
   old and outmoded socio-economic coiicepts . . . .
      I‘-
      --fivery ~ h e a c in the fabric of our wnnomic, sociai and
                         i
                                                                 8:;
   litical institutions is being tested as we move into space.
   economic and political relations with other nations are being
   reevaluated. Old concepts of defense and military tactics are
   being challenged and revised. Jealously guarded traditions in
   our educational institutions are being tested, altered, and even
   discarded. Our mnomio institutions-the corporate structure
   itself-are underping reexamination as society seeks to adjust
   itself to the inevitability of change.”
      Mr.Webb stated that two thou hts were of critical importance:
                                     B
    (1) “The need to create favora le conditions compatible with
   the American private enterprise system through which the knowl-
   edge which we gain and the skills which we develop in our huge
   program of federally sponsored research and development . . .
   are identified and made available for use in the industrial stream
   to contribute to economic growth and our nation’s power to sur-
   vive in a world where second best is more severely penalized than
   ever before”; ( 2 ) “The necessity for developing viable rela-
   tionships between science, education, industry, and govern-
   ment . . . .’’ (Text)
114           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,       19 6 3

March 30: USAF announced 15 names of fourth class of Aerospace
   Research Pilots School at Edwards AFB, Calif. (Wash. Post,
   3/31/63,1; Wash. Sun. Star, 3/31/63,1)
 Soviet news agency Tass reported astronomer Pyoter Shcheglov
   had discovered a “flat cloud of hydrogen shaped like a pancake”
   circling the earth at an altitude of 6,200 mi. Similar to a ring
   around planet Saturn, the cloud would be visible to spacemen on
   the moon with special viewing instruments. (UPI, AtZanta
   J m r n d and Constitution,3/31/63)
 By this date, 53 communications companies had filed with Federal
   Communications Commission for authorization to purchase com-
   mon carrier stock in Communications Satellite Corp. (Av. Wk.,
   4/1/63,30)
March 31 : Washington Post reported that the Federal Communica-
   tions Commission had proposed a compromise between astrono-
    mers and commercial television interests on channel37 of the radio
    spectrum (608 to 614 megacycles). Astronomers wanted chan-
   nel 37 set aside for science; T V interests wanted it for commerce.
   FCC proposed, article said, that 600-mile circle around Danville,
   Ill., would reserve channel 37 for the University of Illinois
    radiotelescope until January 1, 1968. Any channel 37 as-
    signed elsewhere, such as in Paterson, K.,J., would be off the
    air between midnight and 7 a.m. local time. (Wash. Post,
    3/31/63, A2)
 Reported that Boeing Co.,     North American Aviation, and Imkheed
    Missiles and Space Co. had won study contracts on the proposed
    supersonic transport airplane. The (Seattle) Post-Zntelligencer
    quoted Senator Warren G. Magnuson (D.-Wash.) as saying he
    and Senator Henry M. Jackson (D.-Wash.) had received con-
    firmation of the awards from FAA Administrator R’ajeeb Halaby.
     (AP, Wash.Post, 4/1/63)
During March: Comet Ikeye, discovered by Japanese amateur astron-
    omer Kaoru Ikeye, was most brightly visible in western horizon
    for about a week before its brightness began to fade as it drew
    closer to the sun. (Wash. Daily News, 3/12/63)
 Testimony of Defense Secretary Robert S. McKamara before House
    Committee on Armed Services Feb. 2 \\-as released, in which
    Secretnry McNamara said : “A substantial amount of funds
     [for F Y 19641 is requested for DYN.\-SO.\R. I mention this
    only to say . . . that technology as it a plies to space advances
                                             f
    so rapidly that we must expect many cianges in programs be-
    fore they are completed. I personally believe that rather sub-
    stantial changes lie ahead of us in this DYNA-SOAR.
       “Isay this, in part, because of the GEMINI development. GEMINI
    is a satellite project carried on up to the resent time by NASA,
    on which has been spent to date about g300 million, and for
    which they will request $300 million in 1964, toward a total pro-
    gram cost of $800 million; it will provide a capsule capable of
    carrying two men into earth orbit . . . .
       “GEMINI is a competitive development with DYNA-SOAR in the
    sense that each of them are [sic] designed to provide low earth
    orbit manned flight with controlled re-entry. DYNA-BOAR does it
    one way, and with flexibility, and GEMINI another . . . .
                                                                  115
                                                   19 0 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

      “[The NASA-DOD Project Gemini joint planning committee] . . .
    will insure that the military requirement for near-earth orbit is
    properly taken account of in the GEMINI prpject.
      “We don’t have any clear military requirement, or any known
    military requirement, per se. But I think we do have a require-
    ment, for environmental testing and experimentation in near-
    earth orbit.
      “We are very much interested, therefore,’in the Gemini project.
    When we become more familiar with it and understand its po-
    tential I suspect it will have a great influence on the future of
                ....
    DYNA-SOAR
      “I guess that we will find that GEMINI has a greater military
    potential for us, even though a rather ill-defined military po-
   tential, than does DYNA-SOAR, and, moreover, that it will be avail-
   able much sooner than DYNA-SOAR . . . .
       “I think the DYSA-SOAR project can work out satisfactorily.
   The real question is, what do vie have when we finish it. I t will
    cost to complete, in total, including funds spent to date, some-
   thing on the order of $800 million to a billion dollars. The ques-
   tion is, do we meet a rather ill-defined military requirement better
   by proceeding down that track, or do we meet it better b modify-
    ing GEMINI in some joint project with NASA . . . .‘, [Hearings
   on H.R. 2440, pp. 465-67)
During Ma?-&: Space Orientation Center, designed for briefing Mar-
   shall Space Flight Center visitors and new employees and opera-
                                                              (Marshall
   ted by the Historical Office., was opened a t BISFC.
   Historian ;Huntsville Times, 3/6/63)
 Entire issue of Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering devoted
    to launch operations, including detailed summary articles by
    Dr. Kurt Debus, Director of LOC, on “Launching the Moon
    Rocket,” Georg F. von Tiesenhausen on “Toward the Orbital
                  ..        Ar~n!dTV. F r z t k i ~ “Iziteriintima! C s
    T,snncir Fnr&ty,”
    operation in Space Research.”
 TSSS Transit navigational satellite program was classified, with 110
    further information to be released until fully operational system
    is placed in orbit, Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering re-
    ported. (A&&?, 5/63,141)
 Army Transportation Corps loaned 20 sea-going barges to SASA for
    use in space vehicle development program. Barges vould be used
    initially for transporting supplies from Marshall Space Flight
    Center to Mississippi Test operations; later, they would be fitted
    with liquid hydrogen and liquid o x y p n tanks to store the pro-
    pellants for fueling Saturn S I C static-test boosters. (Mar.sha2Z
    Star, 3/6/63,1)
 Industry proposals to define advanced nuclear space propulsion sys-
    tems for 1970’s were submitted to NASA Marshall Space Flight
    Center. The mission-oriented studies would analyze post-Nerva
    developmental engine systems for maximum operational use and
    flexibility in US. space program. (Au. Wk., 3/18/63, 53)
 Canadian government authorized four additional satellites for iono-
    spheric research in joint U.S.-Canadian space program. ( M d W
    3/11/63,9)
116                                                19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

During March: Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the soldier and
   statesman for whom NASA Marshall Space Flight Center was
   named, donated to the center the Executive Order naming NASA’s
    Huntsville, Ala., facility and the fountain pen used by President
    Dwight D. Eisenhower for signing it. (Chattanooga Times,
   3/10/63)
 A group of British scientists, belonging to the British Astronomical
   Association, &as engaged in the accurate measurement of lunar
   craters, utilizing the Mercury computer at Manchester. By the
   end of this month, the group had measured the depths of more
   than 200 lunar craters and was in the process of studying data
   on numerous others. (#pace Intelligence Notes, Oct., 1963)
 Study by Comptroller General Joseph Campbell reported that lack
   of “timely guidance” by DOD was largely responsible for failure
   of nuclear-powered aircraft project. Conceived in 1946 and de-
   clared technically feasible in 1951, project was canceled by Presi-
   dent Kennedy in 1961 after DOD and AEC had spent more than $1
   billion on the project, which did not reach the protot pe stage.
   GAO’S report, said that DOD “agrees that the program sutf   ered con-
   siderably from lack of prom t decisions and from frequent
   changes in emphasis and goals.” (Wash. Post, 3/9/63 ; Au. Wk.,
   3/18/63,25)
 Dr. G. A. Tokaty, former chief of the aerodynamics laboratory of
   the Zhukovsky Academ and later chief rocket scientist of the
   Soviet Government in zermany (194&47), published an articls
   on “Soviet Space Technology” in Xpacefli ht, magazine of the
                                               E
   British Interplanetary Society. Article su mitted that the “So-
   viet Government have manifested their keen interest in the [space]
   field throughout the entire history of their existence [since 19171‘’
   and reviewed this history in interesting detail to 1961. (Xpace-
   Fight, 3/63,59-64)
 The development and operation of the first plastic laser was re-
   ported by the Radio Corp. of America. The experimental device
   is made with a fiber of transparent material of the same type
   used in making many familiar clear plastics. Employing a newly
   discovered hysical effect, it produces coherent pulses of intense
               f:
   crimson lig t at the highest visible frequency yet known to have
   been attained by a laser. The unique laser mechanism that is
   employed may permit the development of plastic lasers that emit
   coherent light over the visible spectrum from infrared through
   ultraviolet. The way may now be opened for the use of stll;
   other materials that resist laser action when contained in inorganic
   crystals. Some of these materials may be capable of producing
   coherent light at yellow, green, blue, and other frequencies. (Data
   Supplied by Radio Corp. of America; MSFC h‘pace Informofion
   Digest, 4/15/63)
 Radio and optical astronomers of the Mount Wilson and
   Palomar observatories announced the discovery of what prob-
   ably are the brightest objects in the universe observed so far.
   Their brilliance, they believe, may make it possible to penetrate
   two to three times deeper into space than was considered possible
   with present-day telescopes. Five of these super-bright celestial
                                                                      117
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    bodies have so far been recognized. Radio astronomers detected
                                                 longer wavelengths, at
                                                in the third Cambridge
                                                 3C48,3C-196,3C-286,
                                           are so bright that they had
    been thought to be nearby stars in our own Milky Way Galaxy,
    but there is now growing evidence that they are very distant
    galaxies involved in titanic explosions. The study of such distnni
    objects is vital to cosmologists in determinin the kind of universe
                                                  8
    me live in-whether it n-ill continue expan ing, stop expanding,
    or will eventually contract. ( N Y T , Western Edition, 3/26/63,
    Wm. L. Laurence)
During March: NASA scientists discovered a new “hot spot in the sky”
    over Wallops Island, Va., where in winter the temperatures
    34 to 60 mi. above the earth reach more than 75” F and winds blow
    at speeds approaching 400 mph. Current1 there is no existing
                                                  9
    scientific theorv to account for the super-hig 1-altitude, jet-stream-
    like wind and hot air that seems to blow or-er Washington, Bnlti-
    more, and Annapolis during the winter. Details of the discovery
    Kere distributed this month in a NASA technical note entitled
    “Preliminary Jfeasurements of Temperatures and Rinds Above
    50 KM (31 mi.) over Wallops Island.” Authors of the pamphlel
   are Dr. William Nordberg and Wendell Smith, of the Goddard
    Space Flight Center. (Balt. Xun, 3/31/63)
                             APRIL 1963
April 1: Third anniversary of orbiting of TIROS I, first U.S. meteoro-
    logical satellite, which provided during its 78-day lifetime more
    than 19,000 usable cloud-cover photographs. TIROS I was fol-
    lowed by five additional successful Tiros satellites, the last two
    of Which-mRos v and n-were still in operation after more’than
    nine and six months respectively. To date, TIROS v had trans-
    mitted more than 44,000 useful cloud-system photographs and
    TIROS VI, more than 39,000. TIROS v and VI photographed hurri-
    canes and typhoons in J ~ i l yAugust, and September 1962; in Au-
                                    ,
    gust alone, they discovered two Atlantic hurricanes and four Pa-
    cific typhoons. Since April 1, 1962, there were only seven days
    when a Tiros satellite was not in operation. Information gath-
    ered by satellites was being used in daily operations of Weather
    Bureau’s National Meteorological Center in weather analyses
    and forecasts for entire U.S. (NASA Release 63-65; Commerce
    Dept. Release WB 6 3 4 )
 USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle.
    (Pres.Rpt. on &pace, 1963,1/27/64)
 Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, testified
    on NASA facility anning before House Committee on Science
    and Astronautics’ ubcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced
    Research and Technology. “There are several basic agency
    guidelines under which the Program Directors establish their fa-
    cility requirements. I n addition to money constraints, always
    present, every effort is made to meet requirements through modi-
    fications to existing facilities and the use of government owned
    facilities and sites in lieu of new constructiop and land purchase.
    As a result, facilities and sites which otherwise mi ht be obsolete
                                                         f
    or unused become effective tools for the conduct o our program.
    I think NASA has an unusually fine record in this respect . . . . 9 7

     (Testimony)
 I n address to the annual meeting of the NU’S elementary school
    principals at Oklahoma City, NASA Administrator James E. Webb
    stated that every segment of society needs to reexamine its activi,
    ties in the light of changes brought about by science
    and technology.
       “In the field of education it is evident that a first and obvious
    demand of this age is an inci-easing sup ly of scientific and techni-
                                            K
    cal manpower, including scientists, mat ematicians, and engineers
    with advanced degrees . . . .
       “A sscond obvious demand on education is the development of
    a citizenry with a higher level of scientific literacy, not merely to
    motivate more young people. toward careers in science, but to
    assure our nation of a body politic better qualified to understand
      118
                                                                     119
                                                      1 96 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     and cope with the problems of government and society during a
                       t and rapid change.
     p$:,g
      e ;;f =
                     ally, achievement of our goals in space will demand
     the hi hest scholastic efforts and intellectual accomplishments in
           f
     virtua ly e v e q field of sbudy.
         “Space is, mdeed, a new and challenging frontier, but it is
     a frontier of the intellect-one which challenges brain, not brawn,
                                            atest weapon . . . .” (Text)
    with creative intelligence our
                                    ff“
ApriE 1 - Selection of Lockheed Ca ifornia Co. and Boeing‘Co./North
         .
    American Aviation, Inc., as contractors to conduct airframe re-
    search in supersonic trans ort program was announced by FAA Ad-
                               P
    ministrator Najmb E. Ha aby. Lockheed would perform research
    in three study areas under $950,000 contract; Boeing/North
    American, operating as a joint venture, would perform research in
    six areas under $850,000 contract. Under the cost-sharing agree-
    ment, government was providing $1.8 million and industries $1.6
    niillion toward total program costs. ( F A A Release 6<3-35)
  Norman V. Petersen, USAF m Technical Director, told House Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautis’ Subcommittee on Manned
    Space Flight that if Soviets emphasize “single lunar mission,
    using earth-orbital rendezvous, they would have the ability to
    accomplish this [manned lunar landing] a t the present time.”
    Petersen estimated Soviet techni ue would involve launching
                                          f
    10-15 rockets to place lunar vehic e components in earth orbit,
    where they mould be assembled for flight to moon. ( UPI, Wash.
    Post, 4/2/63)
  V. Arsentyev of State Astronomical Institute, MOSCOW, quoted   was
    as saying Soviet Cosmos satellites were planned to map the atmos-
    pheric layer between 124 mi. and 995 mi., as well as to provide
            ific data for space flights and spacecraft design. Cosmos sat-
    e lites supplied current space weather data before and during
    Gighi d Y!XTCE m sr\,dIV .TIC! ere n f ~ to stidy mirromptporoid
                                                    d
    impact on s acecraft. (,4v. Wk.,4/1/63)
                P
April 2: NJASA aunched EXPLORER x m ( S a )atmospheric structure
    satellite from Cape Canaveral, using Thor-Delta launch vehicle
     (its 16th consecutive success in 17 attempts). Satellite attained
    orbit of 5’71-116. apogee, 158.9-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period, 57.6”
    inclination to the equator. The sphere-shaped satellite, measuring
    35 inches in diameter and weighing 405 lbs., contained instruments
    (two neutral mass spectrometers, four pressure gauges, and two
    electrostatic probes) to measure density, composition, ressure,
                                                                pk
    and temperature of the atmosphere; it was equipped toma e direct
    samplings of atmospheric constituents such as helium, nitrogen,
    and oxygen. Under project management of NASA Goddard Space
    Flight Center, EXPLORER XVII was the first scientific earth satellite
    to use new pulse-code-modulation telemetry system, a solid-state
    system providing output power of 500 milli-watts and capable of
                    40 separate channels of information in digital form.
    supplyinf
    Vseful li etime of the satellite was estimated at two-three months.
      NAsA4Release 6 3 - 5 9 ; ~ Project EXPLORER XVII Prog. Rpt. No. 1)
                                    ~s~
 U.L.S.R. announced successful launching of LTNIH IV probe on a
    31/-day flight toward the moon. Mission of 3,135-1b. instrumented
120           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

   spacecraft, said to have been placed in parking orbit around the
   earth and then fired toward the moon, was not disclosed. Tass
    announcement said all onboard equipment was functioning nor-
   mally, scientific stations in U.S.S.R. were tracking the probe and
    receiving scientific information from it. “According to data
   which was already processed the flight of the automatic station
   continues along a trajectory which is close to the calculated tra-
    jectory.” At 4:OO 9.m. Moscow time, LUNIK IV was reported
    50,486 km. (31,350 mi.) from earth. ( NYT, 4/3/63,1,14; Pruvdu,
   4/3/63, EOS Trans.)
April 2 : Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator,
   testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’
   Subcommittee on Applications and Trackin and Data Acquisi-
                                                5
   tion, described the four areas of N.ZSA’S app ications program-
   communications systems, meteorological systems, future applica-
   tions satellites, and industrial applications :
       “The space research and development effort is so broad that
    there will be ideas and innovations in almost every field. Prod-
    ucts, based upon space development and produced using techniques
    and materials created for space use, may become increasingly
    evident with time in the everyday life of the nation.
      “The applications program ranges over a very broad spectrum
    of scientific and industrial activity. We are concerned with
    investigations from purely scientific interest in atmospheric
    physics t o problems associated with commercial communications
    satellites. It is a very challenging area of work and it is most
    satisfying to our people to find that great benefits are accruing
    to the nation from meteorological and communications satellite
    developments, and now from industrial applications as well.”
    (Testimony)
 NASA announced signing of $456.6 million contract for Project
    Gemini spacecraft with McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Development
    of the two-man spacecraft began at McDonnell in December 1961
    under preliminary letter contract. Contract called for 13 flight-
    rated spacecraft, 12 of which would be used for space flight and
    one for ground testing. McDonnell would provide other servites
   and equipment under the contract, includin two mission simula-
   tor trainers, a dockhg simulator trainer, f v e boilerplate space-
    craft, and three “static articles”-spacecraft      for  ound test
                                                         ff
    evaluation in vibration and impact tests. (NASA Re ease 63-66;
   MSC Release 63-71)
 Leunard Jaffe, NASA Director of Communications Systems, testified
   before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Sub-
   committee on Applications and Tracking and Dlta Acquisition :
    “NASA program objectives in this area . . . [communications
    satellite systems] are first, to insure the full development and
    realization of communications satellite potentials through con-
   tinued research, development and flight test and second, to assist
    in the early establishment of operational communications satellite
   systems. The fact that communications satellites are feasible has
   certainly been demonstrated with the Echo, Telstar, and Relay
   satellites. Much information and experience has been gained as
                                                                    121
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3
                                                  1

   a result of the last year’s experiments with regard to the satellites,
   the space environment, and with the earth-based elements of such
   systems. Much remains, however, to be done before economically
   practical systems can be established, but a sound foundation has
   been laid and all of the established interests are cooperating to the
   fullest extent in the research and developmental programs.
      “In all areas of satellite applications, NASA has many inter-
   actions with other organizations. Typical interactions already in
   existence in the area of communications satellites are those with
   the Department of Defense, and the American Telephone and
   Telegraph Company. Shortly, a continuing liaison will be ini-
   tiated with the new CommunicationsSatellite Corporation . . . .     9,

    (Testimon )
AprilB: NASA % i m t o r of Manned Space Flight, D. Brained Holmes,
   said in response to questions by members of House Committee on
   Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned S ace Flight
   that there was nothing about Soviet LUNIK IV probe ‘P cause us
                                                            to
   to reevaluate our [space] program . . . .
      ‘bAsfar as our lunar program, as far as our program for Gemini,
   for man’s greater conquest in space, I think the rate at which we
   aregoingisreasonable . . . .
      “I think it would be foolish to squander funds on an all-out
   program. I think it would be unnecessary to lose lives just t o get
   there first. I think it is necessary to run a sound program . . . . 9

    (Transcript)
 Dr. Albert J. Kelley, NASA Director of Electronics and Control,
   testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’
   Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and
   Technology: “AS a result of our review and study on the im-
   plementation of electronics responsibilities for future space mis-
   sions, in our FY 64 Budget we are requesting Congressional ap-
   proval for initial funding of $5hf to establish a new Electronics
   Research Center to be located in the Greater Boston Area. Our
   long range plans call for an installation buildup over a period of
                       r
   six to seven years ielding a staff of approximately 2,000 person-
   nel, of whom 600- 00 viould be professionals, and a plant value of
   approximately $50M.
      “The rate of Center growth will be gradual and represents an
   investment in the future of space flight, analogous to the invest-
   ment made in the older research centers many years ago which is
   paying off so handsomely today. This rate of growth together
   n-ith up-grading of Center personnel by continued graduate edu-
   cation after they are on-board is expected to allow us to meet our
   sta5ng requirements with little or no impact on scientific and
   engineering manpower as projected during this grovth period.
      “The NASA considered many potential sites throughout the coun-
   try for location of the Electronics Research Center. On balance,
   the overall university-industrial strength and capability in elec-



               -
   tronics and guidance research in the Greater Boston Area resulted
   in its selection as the location for the Center. This area, noted
   for its past and current heary concentration on electronic re-
   search, both in industry and universities, provides a compatible,
     741-823
122             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

      stimulating environment for growth of NASA capabilities in this
      important area of technology.
         “The Center will have the principal function of conducting and
      directing research and component technique investigations in the
      related fields of communications, data processing, guidance, in-
      strumentation, and control. It will be staffed and equlpped to
      perform original work and to work closely with industries and
      universities with common interests. For example, component test
      facilities will be provided for evaluation of industrially developed
      experimental components. The Center will serve to focus the in-
      creasing NASA out-of-house efforts in the burgeoning area of
      electronic technology. Most important, it will provide a re-
      generative path for the early exploitation of advanced techniques
      of developments for space flight, whatever their source.”
      i
Apri Testimony) H. Zimmerman, NASA Director of Aeronautical
       2 : Charles
    Research, testified before House Committee on Science and Astro-
   nautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research
    and Technology: “Our goals are to provide the research and ad-
    vanced technology which mill :
       “1. Enable oiir aircraft industry to produce aircraft which will,
    to the greatest practicable extent, mxke the convenience and speed
    of air transportation available, and economically feasible, to the
    people of this country;
       “2. Enable our armed services, working with our industry, to
    develop military aircraft superior in performance, in utility, and
    in requirements for logistics and manpower support to those of
    any other country.
       “In working toward these goals, we coordinate our efforts closely
    with the Federal Aviation Agency, the Department of Defense,
    and other government agencies . . . and with the aircraft manu-
    facturers and their customers . . . .
       “Aviation no longer offers the glamor and excitement which
    so strongly influenced its growth in its early years. We are not
    striving for speed and altitude records. Men hare circled the
    earth at orbital speeds. The X-15 has flown practically out of
    the atmos here. Our objective now is transportation, T n o m i -
    cally feasi 3le transportation for commercial purposes, militarily
              f
    superior transportation for military purposes. I would like for
    you to consider our program as directed toward maintenance and
    enhancement of our leadership in air transport at’ o n . . . .9 ,
                                                             i
     (Testimony )
 D .Hugh L. Dryden, NASA De uty Administrator, said in address
  r
                                    P
    at Annual Dinner Meeting o Pittsburgh Post, Society of Ameri-
    can Military Engineers : “Space science and technology require
    research and development at the frontiers of almost every branch
    of science and technolo . Any industrial nation d i i c h refuses
                              if?
    to devote substantid e ort to space exploration is incurring the
    hazard of future technological obsolescence of its industries, the
    hazard of potential loss of leadership, and the hazard of military
    surprise by potential enemies . . . .
                                                                    123
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

        “While the new technological developments offer the earliest
     contributions to economic development, m the long run the scien-
     ti& h o w l e e obtained in the great unknown envimnment of
     the celestialY o d le6 and interplanetary spaca may bring much
     greater returns. For, judging from past txrperience, advancec; in
     scientific howled are the foundation of advances in technology,
                      P
     which a m a key actor in economic develo ment . . . .
                                                 R
        “We live, in the language of the old clic e, at a great moment
     in history. Man has begun to lift himself above the restrictions of
     his l a n d into a new and strange environment and to expand his
        P
     inta lectual horizons. This is no visionary activity but one essen-
     tial to the strength and security of our nation and to the future of
     man in the universa” ( T e 3
ApriJ 2.- Newly created NASA anagement Advisory Committee on
     Manned Space Flight visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center.
     Chairman of committee was Dr. Marvin J. Kelley, retired Presi-
     dent and Board Chairman of Bell Telephone Laboratories; other
     members were Dr. Hendrick W.Bode, James McCormack, Dr.
     Hector R. Skifter, and Dr. Arthur E. Raymond. (Huntsville
     Times, 4/4/63)
A p d 3 Aerobee 150A rocket launehed from NASA Wallops Station
         :
     carried instrumented payload to 147-mi. altitude in experiment
     to flight-tst components of equipment for Eogo satellite and to
     measure propagation of VLF signals through ionosphere. Flight
     was joint project of Stanford Research Institute and NABA God-
     dard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-32; NASA Rpt.
     of Sounding Rkt.Launching)
  U.S.S.R. reported LUNIK IV had covered 216,000 km. (134,150 mi.),
     more than half the distanw to the moon, during its first 24 hours
     of flig’ht. Tass announcement said several meatmmments had been
     made to establish spacecraft’s trajectory but did not indicate
     whether the “automatic station” was on c o m Telemetq data
     indicated onboard instruments were operating nomdly, and in-
     ternal pressure and temperature were withip prescribed limits.
     There still was no description o the probe’s mission. Article in
                                      f
     Zzvestia by Soviet geologist Aleksandr Khabakov said that “a
     s f landing on the moon of a container with instruments and
      ot
     auxiliary apparatus seems to be technically feasible.” (NIT“,
     4/4/63,18 ;Zmestia, 4/4/63, ~ 0 Trans.)
                                       8
  I n press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “By when do
     you think we will be first in space, and in view of Russia’s current
     lunar probe [LUNIK IV], do you think we will beat the Russians
     with a man to the moon P”
        He replied: “I don’t know. We started well behind. Quite
     obviously they had a tremendous advantage in big boosters and
     we are still behind, because obviously we haven’t gotten our new
     boosters yet, which we won’t get until 1964, ’65 and ’66. We Will
     have to wait and see but I can assure you it is an uphill TBCB at
     best, because we started behind, and I am sure the Russians me
     making a major effort. Today’s indication of what they are doing
     makes me feel that their program is a major one, and it is not
     spongy, and I think that we would have to make the sa.me our-
     selves.
124           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       “So I would say we are behind now, and we will continue to be
    behind, but if we make a major effort we have a chance, I believe,
    to be ahead a t the end of this decade, and that is where I think we
   ought to be.’’
       Questioned about his reaction to General Eisenhower’s charge
    that the national budget could be reduced by billions of dollars
    and that enormous sums were being wasted in the space program
    (letter to Congressman Charles A. Halleck made public March
    29 ,President Kennedy said :
            . . The United States Congress almost unanimously made a
       ’)L.
    decision that the United S a e would not continue to be second
                                 tts
    in space. We are second in space today because we started late.
    It requires a large sum of money. I don’t think we should look
    with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all
    through the sixties and possibly the seventies. We have the
    potential not to be. I think having made the decision last year,
    that we should make a major effort to be first in space. I think
    we should continue to do so.
        “President Eisenhower-this is not a new position for him.
    H e has disagreed with this at least a year o r year and a half ago
    when the Congress took a different position. I t is the position
    I think he took from the time of Sputnik on. But it is a matter
    on which we disagree. It may be that there is waste in the space
    budget. If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut by the
    Congress, and I am sure it will be. But if we are going to get
    into the question of whether we should reconcile ourselves to a
    slow ace in space, I don’t think so.
         K
       “T is Administration has concentrated its attention since it
    came into office on strengthening our military. That is one of
    the reasons why you could not possibly put in the Gut which has
    been recommended, nine or ten billion dollars, without cutting the
    heart out of the military budget. The fact of the matter is when
    we came into office, we had 11 combat-ready divisions and we how
   have 16. We increased the scheduling on Polaris, nearly double
    per year. We increased the number of planes on the 15-minute
    alert from 33 per cent of our strategic air force to 50 per cent.
    I n a whole variety of ways-in the Navy we have added about 46
    vessels, and stren hened ourselves in defense and space . . . .7,
    (Transcript, Was?Post, 4/4/63)
April 3: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National
   Aeronautics and Space Council, said in speech before American
    Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in New York City that
    launching of LUNIK rv was an initial step “in a very well orga-
   nized man-on-the-moon program.” He warned that U.S.S.R.
   would “employ its growing space competence for military pur-
   poses if it finds such action is effective. We must be ready to
   handle such a threat.”
       Dr. Welsh disputed former President Eisenhower’s recent
    charge that “enormous sums of money” were being wasted in the
    National space program. “Mr. Eisenhower is consistent. He
   was wrong about the space program two, three, four years ago,
    and he is wrong now.” ( N Y T , 4/4/63,19)
                                                                     125
                                                     19 6 3
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,                8

A@   3: Morris Teppr, NASA Director of Meteorological Systems,
   testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’
   Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisi-
   tion. He discussed the Tiros meteorological satellite system and
   described the Nimbus advanced meteorological satellite, first of
   which would be launched in 1963, and said :“Each one of these fire
   element~;--orientation,    coverage, direct local readout, lifetime and
  growth potential, represents a major advance over Tiros. Nim-
   bus, including all these, represents an extremely large step for-
   ward beyond the Tiros capgbility. The Nimbus technical diffi-
  culties of the past were associated with the development of these
  five elements. We now believe that our major difficulties are be-
  hind us. . . .”
      He described the meteorological sounding rocket program, and
   said : “In the large meteorological sounding rocket program, it is
   planned to fire approximately 45 per year. These will be dis-
  tributed at various latitudes to measure the atmospheric structure
   in the various climatic regions from the Arctic t o the Tropics.
      “The small meteorolo cal sbunding rocket program is aimed
                            f
   at providing a standar ized flight article which will meet the
   requirements at an overall minimum cost. Apgroximatelp 100
   rockets will be launched per year in this rogram.        (Testimony)
D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Director of d n n e d Space Flight, dis-
  cussed the manned space flight program before Yale Chapter of
  Sigma Xi, New Haven, Conn., and said: “In two centuries, the
  United States has grown from a small collection of settlements
  here along the Atlantic seaboard to a great nation of almost 200
  million people s read across a continent. We have dug canals,
  d a m m e d rivers, Euilt railroads, launched ships, constructed high-
  wa s, and flown aircraft. We have constructed buildings, bridges,
     B
  an a nationwide grid of electrical power. We have developed a
  qzttem of kk~stt,r;.,    q,+mjtz~ and diqtribiition by which our
  people are provided with food, clothing, automotive transporta-
  tion, and other necessities and conveniences in such volume that
  the United S a e has assumed an unprecedented position of
                   tts
  wealth and power in the world.
     “Some historians explain this growth in terms of challenge and
  response. Under this interpretation, which appeals to me, the
  frontier and external danger have provided stimuli for growth.
  Now, however, Kith the frontier gone and the external danger, we
  hope, decreasing, we are entering a new period of change. What
  will now spur us to further growth ?
     “Exploring space can rovide such a c h a l l e ~ e . Here is an
  endeavor, clearly in the L e r i c a n tradition, which will unleash
  again the urges to build and explore-and which will employ for
  a great national purpose the tremendous productive capacity of
  our economy.” (Text)
Charles W. Frick resi ed as Apollo Project Manager a t NASA
  Manned Spacecraft E n t e r to accept a position with industry.
  MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth appointed Robert 0. Piland
  as Acting Project Manager. (xsc Release 63-72)
126           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

April 4: Sixth Apollo spacecraft impact test conducted by North
    American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div.,
    Downey, Calif. Highly instrumented capsule fell f p m 10-ft.
    height at vertical speed of 18 mph into test tank contalnlng 300,-
    000 gals. of water. (CBS-TV     “Newsnight,” 4/5/63 ; L.A. Herald-
    Examiner, 4/4/63)
 Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Tech-
   nology Utilization and Policy Planning testified before House
    Committee on Science and Astronautics’ kubcommittee on Appli-
    cations and Tracking and Data Acquisition : “NASA is committed
     to a hard, driving effort to transfer the useful fruits of our re-
    search and development effort to the private sector of the economy
    in as quick and as useful a way as possible.
      “We are committed, first, because the Space 14ct requires it.
    NASA is directed to ‘Provide for the widest practicable and ap-
    propriate dissemination of information concerning its activities
    and the results thereof.’
      “We are also committed because we are mindful that a large
    part of the Nation’s R&D effort is occupied by the Federal agen-
    cies; and that it is essential that the maximum value be wrung
    out of this part of the total effort.
      “The requirements for space exploration begin in the field of
    anatomy and run through virtually the whole gamut of scientific
    and technological interest, through new power sources to zero
    gravity. Further, those things which are made for space travel
    receive no compromises from that harsh environment. Which is
    to say that a very large part of the total space work is at the very
   leading edge of the state-of-the-art; and that in another large
   part of the state-of-the-artmust be extended.
      “It is reasonable to think that an effort of such size, range and
   sophistication, extending over a number of years, cannot fail to
   have major scientific and economic consequences : consequences
    that begin a s scientific and technological advances and then are
    converted into new techniques of manufacture, new systems of
    organization, and new products and services. The space effort
   mill be, we think, altogether comparable in its effect on the Amer-
   ican economy to that of World War 1 . Our objective is to
                                                1
   maximize, to facilitate, to speed up this effect. . . .
      “We are aware that past experience indicates severe problems
   in the transfer of government research and development efforts to
   private use. However, we feel that the Nation’s well being re-
   quires a major effect to determine whether these problems can be
   solved.” (Testimony)
 Alton B. Moody, Chief of Future Aplications Satellites in NASA
   Officeof Applications, testified before House Committee on Science
    and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking
   and Data Acquisition. H e summarized NASA accomplishments
   and plans in two areas-navigation satellite systems and data col-
   lection satellite systems-and said : “Both of these projects illus-
   trate the operating procedure adopted for Future Applications.
   Before a flight program will be undertaken, several questions
   must be answered affirmatively :
                                                                  127
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

           Is
       LLl.them a requirement?
       “2. Is the requirement suflicient to justify the expenditure of
    the funds needed?
       “3. How would such a system operate?
       “4. Is the design feasible and within current state-of-the-art?
                                                                    s
     By answering these questions serially, we a r e not committin
     funds very f a r downstream and can turn back at any point i
     the results am unfavorable.’’ (Testimony)
April 4: Ballute dr balloon was being built by Goodyear Aircraft
    Corp. for us8 in%emini manned spacecraft, NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center announced. Ballute would be used as part of Gemini
    ejection-seat-escape system, planned means of emergency escape
     for altitudes below 70,000 ft. The inflatable rubberized fabric
    structure would stabilize and slow the astronauts’ fall until con-
    ventional parachutes could be deployed at lower altitudes. ( MSC
    Release 63-67)
  Congressman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House
     Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke out during com-
     mittee questionin of Dr. Albert J. Kelley, NASA Director of
                       8
    Electronics akd ontrol, about location of proposed NASA Elec-
    tronics Center in Boston area. Miller made his comments after
     Congressman Thomas N. Downing (D.-Va.) asked Dr. Kelley
    why NASA had not chosen Langley Field, Va., as site for new
    center: “Frankly, we’re making this thing right now a question
    of where are we going to put it because it’s going to be a plum.
    We’d all like this in our s a e . But do you want to make a
                                      tts
    W.P.A. project out of this or are we interested in the space
    program ?” (AP, NYT, 4/5/63)
 Tass announced LUNIK IV was 314,000 km. (194,494 mi.) from earth
    at 8:OO p.m. Moscow time and would pass close to the moon’s
    surface, indicating for the first time that the probe would not
              l~~d.
    c&it             CIrrpt-iilsltirrn ~ z that ECNX E might h a w e hen
                                            s
                     -r----------
    planned to soft-land an instrument package on the moon. Tass
    said radio communication with the spacecraft vias good and that
    onboard instruments were functioning normally. (AP, Wash.
    Post, 4/5/63 ;Pmuda, 4/5/63, ms Trans.)
 NASA and AEC announced agreement to standardize the reduction
    ratio and size for microcopy of miniaturized forms of scientific
    and technical reports generated within the two agencies. (NASA
    Release 63-64)
 Dr. Brockway McMillan, Assistant Secretary of Air Force, gave
    to House Committee on Science and Astronautics a list of 10
    experiments DSAF would like to include as p a r t of its participa-
    tion in NASA Project Gemini :visual definition of objects in space;
    cooperative tar et inspection ; angle-track-only rendezvous
                   #
    ance; hybrid I /laser guidance equipment; passive i n f r a r & ~ ~ ~
    and satellite tracking; visual definition of terrestrial features;
    observation of missile launches ;extravehicular operations ;autun-
    omous navigation; and radiation levels within the space capsule.
     (N&R,4/15/63,15)
 I n address at Virginia Polytechnic Institute at Blacksburg, Secre-
    tary of Commerce Luther Hodges said: “Of the nearly $17 bil-
128                                                1903
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    lion we in the United States are spending on research and devel-
    opment, only about $4 billion is spent by American industry for
    non-military, non-space work. And of that $4 billion, only about
    $1.5 billion is aimed at increasing the productivity of our economy.
        “The countries of Wsstern Europe are spending twice as large
    a proportion of their gross national product for civilian research
    and development. . . . Japan, which many people still think of
    as an imitator and copier of western scientific and technical devel-
                                a
    opments, actually has as hi h a ratio of scientists and engineers
    working on its civilian tec nology as we have. . . .
        “American industry must be much more alive t the need, for
                                                          o
    more research and development work in the civilian sector of our
    economy. There must be a wider diffusion of this work through-
    out industry, and there must be greater industry support for the
    training of people capable of doing this work.
        “Some 80 per cent of all our industry sponsored research is
    done by 300 companies, and 73 per c n in on1 5 industries.
                                            et
                                                   9
        “Two of these industries, aerospace and e ectronics account
    for 25 per cent of the industry sponsored research, but their
    products account for on1 3% per cent of the total roduction
                                                           8
    of goods and services in tKlis country. . . .” (Text, C ,4/25/63,
    2444-2445)
April 4: Dr. James R. Killian, former president of B ~ I Twas quoted by
                                                           ,
    James Reston of New Y o d c Times : “Will several billion dollars a
    year additional for enhancing the quality of education not do more
    for the future of the United States and its position in the world
    than several billions a year additional for man in space?”
     ( NYTNS, Chattanooga Times, 4/5/63)
 James J. Tart, of NASA Langley Research Center, w a s one of five
    recipients named for second annual E. H. Rietzke Achievement
    Awards of the Ca 3itol Radio Engineering Institute of Washing-
                      f
    ton, D.C. Cited or his work to help overcome communications
    blackout during re-entry ionization of space vehicles, Tart de-
    vised and built a 9,000-megacycle telemetering system for an X-
    band radar to enhance re-entry communications. (Newport News
    Times-Eerald, 4/4/63)
 Ham, first chimpanzee to be successfully launched on (suborbital)
    space flight, became a permanent resident of Washington’s Na-
    tional Zoological Park. Ham flew in MercuT-Redstone flight
    MR-2 down the AMR on Jan.,31, 1961. (Was . Post, 4/5/63)
Apri2 5: Tass reported LUNIH IV spacecraft was 365,000 km.
     (226,680 mi.) from earth at 6 :OO p.m. Moscow time and was con-
    tinuin on its flight toward the moon. Radio communications
          F
    with t ie probe were good, arid telemetry data indicated onboard
    instruments and systems were functioning normally. “Experi-
    ments and measurements, provided for by the program, are be-
    in conducted.”
       %ir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental
    Station ( radiotelescope facility), reported receiving signals from
    L U N I H Iv for 45 mill., ceasing abruptly at 8:50 p.m. (10:50 p.m.
    Moscow time). Lovell said there appeared to have been some
    “complicated maneuvers” with the probe.
                                                                     129
                                                     19 63
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

       Italian astronomers reported receiving 45 min. of TV pictures
                    closeup of moon’s surface.
    shoT
       I n oscow, two scheduled lectures on LUNIH rv flight were can-
    celed by Moscow radio; a television discussion of hi&               of
                                                                  (Z~aa-
    lunar research made only passing reference to LUNIH m.
   naya Zvezda, 4/6/63 m Trans.; NYT, 4/6/63, 2; UPI, NPT,
   4/6/63,2; w-TV ‘dewmight,” 4/5/63; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
A@ 6: Lewis scientists report new and unusual us8 for liquid gal-
   lium, which appears ideally suited to the task of lubricating mov-
    ing parts in space-bound machinery. (LBC Release 63-12 ;Lewis
    Chronology, 3)
 u s 0 announced launching of unidentified satellite with Blue Scout
    rocket from Vandenberg AFB. (AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 4/6/64)
 USAF memorandum chargmg that NASA was planning to build $77
    million worth of facilities that would duplicate existing USM fa-
                                                                     rding
    cilities was detailed in New Pork 7%72.4?8. Interviewed
    the memorandum, NASA Deputy Director Dr. Hugh L%den
    said NASA had frequent coordination meetin with DOI) and that
    %o such statement has been made to us.’’He               described the
    memorandum as representing “a point of view of junior people
    who can’t &et their superiors to support their desires.” On
        int made m memorandum about U~AF’Sofferhg bioastronautics
    c h r a t o r i e s to NASA, Dr. Dryden said: ‘We have offered to
    carry half the cost of bioastronautics laboratories but this was
    not accepted by the Department of Defense.” (NIT,            4/5/63)
 USN made second attempt to lace opemtional Transit navigational
                                3
    satellite into orbit from t. Arguello, Calif., Astronautk8 and
    Aerospace Engineering re rted. A h A E said spacecraft failed
    to attain orbit because op“       malfunction in fourth stage of USM
    Blue Scout booster. (A&AE,5/63,141)
 John L. Sloo , Directur of NASA Propulsion and Power Generation
               P
    i w-CP e, -4dT2ErP.l Reep_rc.ph        %EdTWh-!dQgy,testified lxfom
      E
    House Committea on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittea on
    Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Pro-
    pulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the
    moon in this decade will depend completely on chemcal propul-
    sion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion
    in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propul-
    sion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use
    emh type in the a plicntion best suited to its characteristics. We
                       K
    see much larger c emical propulsion systems than we have today.
    Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of
    ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satel-
    lites and between distant points on the earth. We sea chemical
                                carried dormant for months on long s am
                                                                    P
                                       touch of a button or a signal rom
                                 task. We see chemical propulsion systems
                                    from the moon, Mars, and Venus where
     compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed.
    Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency
     use . . . .,’ (Testimony)
130           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

April 5: g c announced Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer would be recipient
    of Enrico Fermi Award, AEC’S highest honor, in recognition of his
    leadership in development of the atomic bomb and of atomic
    energy for peaceful purposes. Dr. Oppenheimer has headed In-
    stitute for Advanced Study, Princeton, since 1947. ( N Y T ,
    4/6/63,1,5)
 Va.sily V. Parin, president of Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences
    and expert in space medicine, was awarded the Order of Lenin
    “in recognition of his great contribution to the advancement of
    Soviet medical science,” Tam reported. (AP, Balt. Sun., 4/7/63)
ApriZ 6: LUNIK IV passed within 8,500 km. (5,281 mi.) of the moon
    a t 4 :26 a.m. Moscow time, Tass reported. “The experiments and
    measurements which were conducted by means of the spacecraft
    are completed. Radio communication with the spacecraft will
    continue for a few more days.
       “Broad experimental data, which are of           at value for the
                                                  ff“
    solution of a number of technological probems related to the
    wnqu& of the moon, were obtained. Measurement data are now
    being processed and studied in scientific centers of our country
    which are responsible for the inveistigation of cosmic space.”
    Tam still did not reveal nature of probe’s mission.
        Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental
    Station in England, mas quoted as saying he believed the Soviets
    had failed in an attempt to land instruments on the moon. “It
    is hardly conceivable, after a lapse of three years, with all the
    improvements in techniques, that the Russians would merely set
    out to do again what they did with LUNIK 111.” (Pruvdu,
    4/7/63, EOS Trans.; AP, Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A7; AP, Wash.
    Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
 USAF satellite (1962 Beta Kappa-1), launched Oct. 26, 1962,
    to study artificial radiation, had dimvered evidence that radi-
    ation from U.S. Starfish high-altitude nuclear test would last up
    to 10 years, Project Diredor Dr. Ludwig Katz of USAF Cambridge
    Research La’boratories disclosed. The previously unidentified
    satellite, called “STARAD,” was built a t DOD request when it became
    apparent artificial radiation might be damaging orbiting sa,tel-
    lites, carried nine different instruments for measuring the arti-
    ficial radiation. USAF spokesmen said, in their opinion, data from
    this satellib were influential in Dr. James A. Van Allen’s rever-
    sal of his previous position that the radiation would last only a
    year (see March 15). Dr. Katz said the satellite found there had
    been little decrease in artifical radiation’s intensity since the
    satellite was launched. “The decay of the belt is so small that
    a lifetime of five to ten yea& would not surprise me.” STARAD
    also detected increased radiation from Soviet high-altitude nu-
    clear explosions of Oct,. 28 and Nov. l. It transmitted until
    Jan. 18 when its batteries deteriorated. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star,
    4/7/63 ;Wash.Post, 4/7/63 ;Au. Wk., 4/15/63,26)
 Mining of water on the moon could provide rocket fuel for inter-
    planetary spacecraft, thus eliminating need for more advanced
    rockets, John W. Salisbury of USAF Cambridge Research Labora-
    tories said. Converting water to its components oxygen and
                                                                 131
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    hydrogen would provide the two fuel elemente of Saturn v’s
    upper stage. Salisbury said lunar water would be present either
    as subsurface ice or as’one-eighth of silicate rock h m t i o n s
    known as olivine. usm was csnducting studies to determine most
                    s
    efficiimt way of          water thus trapped in the moon. (NYTNS,
     Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A )
                          x
A@ 6: Dr. Otto Struve, rominent U.S. astronomer and former Di-
    rector of National Ra io Astronom Observatory at Green Bank,
    W. Va., died a t 66 in Berkeley, Cagf. (Chicago Tn’b., 4/10/63)
  Fourth annual Conference on Peaiceful Uses of Space would be held
    in Boston in May 1964, NASA Administmhr Webb announced.
     (Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
April 7: At Fourth Congress of the World Meteorological Organiza-
    tion, being held in Geneva, US. delegation circulated paper de-
    scribing plans to orbit a Nimbus weather satellite in 1963, the
    satellite to provide daily photographic observations of the globe.
     (Reuters, Balt. Lhn74/8/63)
  Senator Clifford P. Case (K.-X.J.) announced he had requested
     Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert to investigate the
     reported us= memorandum asserting NASA planned to construct
     facilities which would duplicate those of USAF. (UPI, Wash. Post,
    4/8/63)
                                           r
       nationally televised interview, Con essman Chet Holifield
9 In

      (D.-Calif.) said that funds for the $20- illion manned lunar pro-
    gram could be better spent in raising living standards on earth-
    on schools, hospitals, housing. Prestige value of landing a man
    on the moon was not worth the cost. Senator Clinton P. Anderson
     (D.-N. M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and S ace
                                                                 !
                                                                 i
     Sciences, said that even if these funds were not spent for lan ing
     a man on the moon, the funds would not be spent on raising living
    standards. “If we would stop everything we’re doing i space n
    tnmnrrnw, T think p i wniild find there would be still Dlenty of
    people who would vote no on a pro m of better roaas, better
     hospitals, better education.” (C B S - ~ “Washington Report” ;
    UPI. Wash. Post, 4/9/63)
  Recipients of third annual Federal Women’s Award were c -           p
    nounced. Chosen for ‘Loutstandingcontributions to the quality
     and efficiency of the service of the Federal Government, for their
     influence on major Government programs, and for pemnal qual!-
    ties of leadership, judgment, integrity, and dedicatlon,” the SIX
     winners included Eleanor C. Pressly, Head of Vehicles Section,
     Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., NASA Goddard
     Space Flight Center. Miss Pressly was cited for her pioneer
     work in sounding rocket development and her “demonstrated
     organizational ability in scheduling and coordinating launchings
     of sounding rocket vehicles in support of u p p r atmospheric re-
     search.” She developed the Aerobee Jr. sounding rocket, co-
     developed Aerobee-Hi 150, and directed improvement of Aerobee-
     Hi 150A, all used extensively in IGY. (FWA Release)
  Proposal b NBC t~ television industry t televise Astronaut
                                                   o
             F
     Gordon ooper’s Mercu flight MA-9 in color would not be
                              7
     adopted, Executive Vice resident of NBC News William R. Mc-
132                                                    19 6 3
               ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,

      Andrew acknowledged. Proposal had been rejected, science re-
      porter William Hines said, in February by officials of ABC and
      CBS networks, but NASA had been quietly trying to persuade them
      to accept the proposd. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
a p r i l 8 : Attempt to launch two-sta e Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket
      from NASA Wallops Station faikd with first stage of the vehicle
      failing to perform properly. This was NASA’s          first attempt to
       launch the Astrobee, and purpose of test was to evaluate the
      rocket’s perfoimance as a NASA test vehicle. (Wallops Release
      63-36)
   NASA announced selection of Avco Corp., Research and Advanced
      Development Div., and General Electric Co., Missile and Space
      Div., for negotiation of conceptual desi study contracts of Voy-
      ager spacecraft. The two six-month, f?OO,OOO contracts were to
      supplement in-house NASA feasibility studies to determine scien-
      tific merit and technical possibility of initial Voyager planetary
      flights before 1970. (NASA Release 63-70)
   Boilerplate model of A p l l o spacecraft arrived at NASA Marshall
      Space Flight Center for dynamic and compatibility tests with
       the Saturn I. Boilerplate model included command and service
      modules and mockup of launch escape system. (Huntsville
       Timen.4/9/63 ; NAA S&lD Skywriter, 4/19/63,1)
   Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, in Associated Press interview,
       was asked: “Mr. Vice President, as chairman of the Space Ad-
      visory Council [i.e., National Aeronautics and Space Council],
      you were intimately concerned in drafting the 5.7-billion-dollar
       space budget. Former President Eisenhower says the budget is
      spongy, and there is no hurry about getting to the moon. I n
       view of this recent Russian shot [LUNIK IV], what is your
       reaction 2’’
           The Vice President replied : “The Administration has sub-
       mitted to the Congress what we believe is a sane and responsible
       proposal to insure the maximum efficiency and effectiveness of our
       space program. I know of no reckless desire in any responsible
       quarter to get to the moon at all costs and without regard to the
       consequences to other vital aspects of our national
           “Theobjective of reaching the moon is one aspect o policy.
                                                                 our national
       space program which v-ill be of great benefit to our country, and
       I think to all mankind. It may be possible by appropriating
       more money to speed up slightly the attainment of that goal and,
       of course, we a11 know it would be mighty easy to slow that gpal
       down. Rut I don’t think that either alternative would be helping
       our country. Gaining a short period of time would almost cer-
       tainly be at the expense of other crucial programs. Slowing
       down might bring us some one of these days face to face with the
       shocking knowledge that we had permanently assigned ourselves
       to second place.
           “So, a11 in all, I think the Administration has submitted a pro-
       b“nm which we can all embrace and both parties can fully sup-
       port.” ( AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)
   Europem space organization, Eurospace, issued report recommend-
       ing program of communications satellites, time-keeping and navi-
                                                                      133
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     ational satellite, and rocket development. Report said Europe’s
   f r s t operational communications satellite could be launched by
   1968 and suggested a network of 12 communications satellites or,
   as alternative, two stationary satellites, in equatorial orbit; a light
   satellite orbiting a t about 625-mi. altitude as time-keepmg and
   navigational aid; development of launch vehicles based on exist-
   ing models of European nations and ELDO (European Launcher
   Development Organization) ; and studies on equatorial launching
   site. E u I - o s ~ ~ ~ ~ association o 125 members represent-
                       is private              f
    ing industries, professional bodies, and industrial associations
   from nine countries-Belgium, France, Great Britain, Italy, the
   Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and West Germany.
    (Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/9/63 ;NYT, 4/9/63)
April 8: Milton B. Ames, Jr., NASA Director of Space Vehicles in
   Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before
   House Committee on Science and Astronautics Subcommittee on
   Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology: “The
   objective of the Space Vehicle Systems Advanced Research and
   Technology Program is to identify and solve critical technical
   problems bearing on present-generation space vehicles, as well as
   to advance the frontiers of knowledge that will enable the develop-
   ment of more advanced space vehicles for future space missions.
   The increased complexities of the advanced space vehicle systems
   that will be required to accomplish our national space objectives
   for the next two decades attest to the need for a broad, yet
   thorough and timely research program to establish the technology
   required to insure the continued superiority of our’country’sspace
   flight capability . . . .” He then reviewed the areas of activity
   covered in the space vehicle research and technology pro am-
                                                                  K
   advanced space vehicle concepts, space vehicle aero ermo-
   dynamics, environmental factors and technology, s ace vehicle
                                                             PP
   sitriict~~iqs i p criteria, arid yehi& txhnrJ!~croimht Pxneri-
                 &                                     aJ          --L

   ments. (Testimony)
 John H. Rubel, DOD Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engi-
   neering, told House Committee on Science aqd Astronautics’ Sub-
   committee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition
   that DOD planned to initiate a communications satellite program
   definition study in May or June, the program based on goal of
      utting 2 4 3 0 operational satellites into orbit by end of 1965.
   ‘Approximately six satellites will be launched per booster, using
   the . . . ,Qtlas-Agena D. The six satellites mill be ejected at
   slightly different velocities into an approximately 6,000-mi.-
   altitude circular polar orbit, where they will gradually spread
   out. The successive clusters will be injected into orbital planes
                                                         s
   spaced 45 deg. apart.” System would be develo ed jointly by
   K-SAF and Army, USAF being responsible for space-re ated activities
   and Army for ground stations. (Au.Wk.,4/15/63,27)
 Design for 216-ft. nuclear- owered space station had been awarded
   patent by US. Patent 6fice, Lockheed Missiles and Space CO.
   announced. Invented by S. B. Kramer and E. H. Visscher of
   Lockheed, prefabricated station would be assembled in orbit from
   cylindrical and spherical subsections. Lockheed said it would be
134                                                   19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    useful as a manned space station and observation platform.
    ( N Y T , 4/9/63,10)
April 8: Polaris A-3 missile successfully flown 1,800 mi. down Atlan-
    tic Missile Range, third successful test in 1 firings. Navy re-
                                                     1
    ported the missile achieved all test objectives. ( AP, Wash. Post,
   4/9/63)
 District Judge David Zenoff issued temporary restraining order
    against 16 unions striking at Nevada atomic tevt sits since April 4
    and an injunction ordering management to “restore the status
    quo.” Unions were protesting AEC order to contractors at the site
    eliminating travel pay and other fringe benefits in their contracts.
    Judge Zenoff scheduled a hearing for April 15. (UPI, N Y T ,
   4/9/63,53)
L4pril 9: I n its first few days of operation, EXPLORER XVII satellite had
    obtained data that more than tripled all previous direct measure-
    ments of the neutral gases in earth’s up r atmosphere, NASA
                                                 !?
    Goddard Space Flight Center announced. atellite was traveling.
    in elli tical orbit (578-mi. a ogee, 153-mi. peri ee, 96.4-min.
                                                            P
    periodf and was transmitting fata of excellent qua ity and quan-
    tity. I t had been commanded more than 75 times, and each time
    it responded with approximately four min. of data on density,
    pressure, composition, and temperature of upper atmos here gases.
                                                                i
    New communications system, utilizing special data rea out station
    at GSFC, was providing scientific and technical data from the
    satellite within minutes of its transmission. (CSFC Release)
 Nike-Apache sounding rocket carried instrumented payload
    to 101-mi. altitude in experiment from NASA Wallops Station to
    measure density and conductivity of electrically charged particles
    in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions. Exce t for fail-
                                                                B
    ure of solar aspect sensor, experiment was considere a success.
    The 80-lb. payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean 77 mi. from launch
    site. (Wallops Release 63-38; NASA Rpt. of Sounding Rkt.
      Launc1rin4)
  Televised I4 lite House ceremony, with President Kennedy signing
    bill making Sir: Winston Churchill an lionoraq: citizen of the
    IT.S.l IVHS transmitted to England aiid Europe VIR RELAY I com-
    munications satellite. Broadcast was viewed by millions of
    Britons and Sir Mhston himself, and both audio and visual
    reception were considered perfect. (NASA Relwse 63-69 ; Wash.
    Post, 4/10/63)
  Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, testified
    on NAS.\’S contractual arrangements with industry in systems engi-
    neering aiid in checkout, reliability assessment, and inte ration
    before Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data
    Acquisition, House Committee on Science and Astronautics : “In
    February 1962, ~ - 4 requested . . . AT&Tto provide an organiza-
                            s~
    tion of experienced men able to employ the most advanced ana-
    lyt ical procedures necessary to develo the factual bases needed by
                                           Y
    responsible NASA officials to make t le wide range of decisions
    required for the successful execution of the manned space flight
    program.
                                                                       135
                                                      196 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

       AT^ responded to this request by forming Bellcomm, Inc., in
                        .
   March, 1962 . . .
       “It IS important to note that the Bellcomm organization assists
    and supports a technical office within the Government rather’than
    an administrative office. This important distinction makes it
    possible for the Government to properly carry out its total techni-
    cal responsibilit utilizing a contractor for assistance, but main-
    taining final tecfmical, engineering, and procurement judgments
    within the Government itself . . . .
                                                           between systems
                                               a relatively small orpniza-
                                                   and checkout, reliability
                                                            massive amount
                                        be handled, require large manpower
   efforts.
       “In systems engneering, we have developed the system conce t
                                                                        P
    and are now writing the overall specifications for project Apol 0      .
    You should recognize that a portion of these specifications will
    include the general requirements on the checkout system, defini-
    tion of the requirements for reliability assessmelit, and technical
   monitoring of the program. Bellcomm supports NASA in this
    work.
        “We have asked General Electric to provide support in areas
    in which the details require many people. G.E. is implementing
    the checkout s stem, beginning hardware produccion, and under-
                    K
    taking compre ensive work in integration and related data gather-
    ing and processing, which will help to insure that the overall
    systems en ineering requirements are being met in detail.”
    (Testimony7
April 9: LUNIK IV was Soviet Union’s third attempt in 1963 to send in-
    strumented payload to the moon, William Nines reported in
    Washington Evenhy Star. HP qiiot~dII ~ o v m n r n m tnffiuial-
    outside of NASA and DoD-as saying: “We are tryin to make a
                                                              f
    record to place before the world. The pre aration o this record
                                                 B
    is now in progress. There has been no o cia1 statement to date
    r e y r d i n g thin that are up there which we know about and don’t
         ong to us. g u t there are such things, and they should be made
    public-by us, if the Soviets refuse.” NASA and DOD had no com-
    ment on any unannounced Soviet space launchings. (Wash. Eve.
   Star, 4/9/63, A l )
 Senator John L. McClellan (D.-Ark.) introduced in the Senate a
    bill (S. 1290) to establish a uniform national olicy concernin
                                                        K                !i
    proprietary rights in inventions made throug expenditure o
    public funds. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on the
   Judiciary. (CR,4/9/63,5609)
 Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASA Director of Biotechnology and
    Human Research in Office of Advanced Research and Technology,
    outlined N A ~ A ’ Shuman factors systems mgram before House
                                                 8
    Cormnittee on Science and Astronautics’ ubcommittee on Space
    Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology and said:
    “This program is designed not only to do human research and
                       of adequate life support and protective system for
    dev-ent
136           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     man’s survival in the aerospace environment, but to adequately
     determine man-machine relationships, and integrate them prop-
     erly into the advanced aerospace systems. Our success and prog-
     ress in the next 10 to 20 years depends upon the Biotechnology
     and Human research wedo today . . . .
                                                 (TestimonP
A p d 9: First college rogram to train USAF astronauts ad been es-
                                               ”
     tablished a t P u ri ue Univ., USAF announced. Fourteen June
                          f
     graduates of Air Force Academy had been selected to begin the
     specialized program in Purdue’s School of Aeronautical and En-
       ineering Sciences, their studies leading to newly created Master’s
     8egree in astronautics. (Chica o Tri’b.,4/10/63
                                                      h
                                    &
  Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., o cially opened C icago and Mid-
     west Space Month with his televised dinner address in the Museum
     of Science and Industry, Chicago. Dinner marked the opening
     of ‘‘America in Space’’ exhibit in the museum, largest space dis-
     play ever made available by NASA in the midwest. Space Month
     activities would be climaxed by third national conference on the
     peaceful use6 of space in Chicago, May 1-9. (Chicago Trib.,
     4/9/63)
  NASA Langley Research Center announced selection of E. W. Mul-
     ler, Contractor, Inc., of Newport News for preparing the site for
      NASA Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, Newport News, Va.
      (Langley Release)
  Andrew G. SwanSon, scientist at NASA Langley Research Center,
     was one of 45 outstanding young executives awarded an Alfred
     P. Sloan fellowship in executive development a t Massachusetts
      Institute of Technology. Award was announced by Dean How-
      ard W. Johnson of MIT’S School of Industrial Management.
      (Langley Release)
  I n speech before Public Relations Society of America luncheon
      meeting in Washington, MSC Public Affairs Officer Lt. Col. John
      H. Powers (USAF) said preparations for Project Mercury flight
     MA-9 were proceeding on schedule. Fli ht was scheduled for
                                                5
     mid-May. (AP, B i m i n g h a m Post-Eeral ,4/10/63)
  U.S.-U.K. agreement on purchase of Polaris missiles for use in
     British submarines was published in Washington. Contract was
     technical version of Nassau agreement signed last December by
      President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan establishing
      Polaris as substitute for Skybolt wea on system. It was signed
                                           F
     March 16 and submitted to British arliament today. ( N Y T .
      4/10/63,3)
  ReDorted that Soviet cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov had been pro-
     Aoted from major to lieutenant colonel. (UPI, N Y T , 4/9/63,*15)
April IO: FAA announced award of contract to Cornell Aeronautical
     Laboratory, Inc., an affiliate of Cornell Univ., to conduct systems
      analysis in supersonic transport reearch program. Under con-
      tract, Cornell would perform intensive effort in direct support of
     .Joint Systems Analysis Group, composed of representatives of
      NASA, MID, FAA, and the commercial airlines.   (FAA Release 63-41)

                    x
  Sym osium on ex loration of Mars would be held in Denver June
       k
      6- ,cosponsore by NASA, American Astronomical Society, Amer-
      ican Institute of Biological Sciences, and American Institute of
                                                                                137
                                                              196 3
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    Aeronautics and Astronautics, NASA announced. (NASA Release
    63-68)
April 10: TSN nuclear-powered submarine Thresher was lost at sea
    with 130 persons aboard.
  First attempt to launch Polaris A 3 missile from ship (U.S.S.
     Observation 18Sland) failed with missile’s veering off course
    shortly after liftoff, when it was destroyed by safety officer.
     (Space Bw. Daily, 4/12/63,474)
 Unnamed source was quoted as saying Egyp4had test-fired at least
    two rockets near port of Suez during the p/”t meek. (AP, W a h .
    Post 4/11/63)
 Adm. &orge W. Anderson ( u ~ N ) Chief of Naval Operations, said
                                                ,
    in news conference that there was “no danger of radioactive
    contamination” from sunken nuclear-powered submarine.
     ( N Y T , 4/11/63, and 4/14/63)
A p d 11: X-15 No. 1 flew a t speed of 2,864 mph (mach 4.25) and
    altitude of 74,000 ft. in its first test as an aerial mapping plane, a
    camera having been installed into the underside of the craft’s
    nose. Piloted by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) ,X-15’s rocket
    engine burned a record 2% min. Primary purpose of flight was
    to measure photograph distortion caused by shock waves, air flow,
    and other aerodynamic turbulence. Flight marked first test in ad-
    vanced research program in which X-15 would photograph stars,
    measure meteoroids, and investigate infrared rays in space. (UPI,
    Wash.Post, 4/12/63 ;AP, N Y T , 4/12/63)
 NASA announced selection of 10 experimenters for Mariner space-
    craft’s Mars fly-by mission, scheduled for 1964. Experiments
    for the probe, which would make measurements of interplanetary
    space as well as of vicinity of Mars, were: television, magnetom-
    eter, low-energy cosmic-ray experiment, cosmic-ray spectrum ex-
    ymment, cosmic-ray ionization experiment, plasma probe, cosmic
       nc+ eqK?ri,?.,eZlt, iEL?fLpttZx-! Si3n_&trmCtCr, d t r n 7 i G k k i;!’otanek=,
     UU””



    and radio propagation. (NASA Release 63-71)
 Telev’sion broadcast of biweekl program narrated b Jacques
                                                                        9
                                                                        .
    Sallebert, French radio and TJcorrespondent in New ork, sent
    direct from New York to Paris via RELAYI communications satel-
    lite for first time. Program consisted of views of lower Kew
    York City and of New York Harbor. Reception in Paris was
    described as considerably better than rerecorded broadcasts
                                                       P
    previously used and as comparing favorab y with any TV program
    originating in Paris. ( N Y T , 4/12/63, 45)
 Harold B. Finger, Director of NASA Xuclear Systems Office
    and Manager of NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, testi-
    fied before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Re-
    search and Technology, House Committee on Science and Astro-
                         x
    nautics: “The s ace nuclear systems rogram involves large
    amounts of fun s, manpower, and faci8ties in N-\SA’S program
    and, in addition, involves substantial effort on the part of the
    Atomic Energy Commission. We are convinced that the high
    performance potential of these systems for space propulsion and
    electric power generation justifies the substantial effort that we are
    devoting toward the early development of such systems. It is
      741-623 -
              1
              0
138                                                  1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    clear that if we are to perform extensive space exploration mis-
    sions beyond our first manned lunar landings, it will be necessary
    to have available to us nuclear propulsion systems and if we are
    to establish large space laboratories, lunar bases, and are to
    travel to distant planets, we will have to rely on the availability
    of large nuclear electric power generating systems . . . .” (Testi-
    mony 1
Apm2 11; I n news interview, physicist Herman Yagoda of USAF
    Cambridge Research Laboratories said that living organisms on
    planet Mars would receive 30-50 times more radiation than orga-
    nisms on earth, and during a solar storm the radiation dosa e on
    Mars is a million times what it would be on earth. “Thus, !bars
    with its marginal environment for sustaining primitiqe life forms
    is subjected periodically to comparatively intense radiation leqels
    which may have profound effects on the mutation and evolution
    of Martian plant and animal life.” (Wash. Post, 4/11/63)
  Reported that Senator Strom Thurmond (D.-S.C.) told closed ses-
    sion of Senate that U.S.S.R. was deploying antimissile missiles
    capable of intercepting Polaris missiles and possibly even Minute-
    man missiles. Senator Thurmond spoke in favor of s eeding u
                                                              E          P
    U.S. Nike-Zeus antimissile missile development, but enate rol
    call vote (58-to-16) cut a proposed $196 million authorization for
    Nike-Zeus from the military spending authorization bill for F Y
    1964. Senate Armed Services Committee had added the Nike-
    Zeus funds to the Administration’s proposed bill. (Wash. Eve.
    Stay, 4/13/63)
  Dr. Simon Ramo, of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, was quoted as
    being skeptical of feasibility of using artificial satellites for mili-
    tarily aggressive purposes, saying : “We often hear the mistaken
    impression that a bomb dropped from a satellite will fall to earth.
     Of course, it won’t. I t will reach the earth only if it is pushed
     away from the satellite with the right amount of force and with
     controlled direction. The whole launching operation (from a
     satellite) is more difficult that that of launching an ICBM from a
    point on earth. Also, the flight will take very much longer.. . .”
     (st.Louis Post-Dispatch, 4/11/63)
  AEC announced it would Commission scientists in several universities
    to study fragments of meteorite that landed last August in Upper
    Volta, Africa. (MinneapolisStar, 4/11/63)
  Scientist Dr. Charles R. Warren of U.S. Geological Survey’s Mili-
     tary Geology Branch said in Science magazine that the moon is
     probably covered with a layer of fuzz, about an inch deep. The
     “skeletal fuzz consists mostly of empty space” and could be a
     mesh or miniature tinker-toy structure or it might resemble a
     loose aggregate of snowflakes or reindeer moss. Dr. Warren had
     made study of lunar terrain for Army Corps of Engineers.
      ( N Y T ,4/12/63,29 ;UPI, Wash.Post 4/12/63)
  Next Soviet space flight would be “spectacular” and “more com-
    plicated,’’ four Soviet cosmonauts indicated in Evening Moscow
     interview. The c m o n a u . t S Y u r i Gagarin, Gherman Tiwv,
     Andrian Nikolayev, and Pave1 Popovich-said U.S.S.R. was
                                                                      139
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,          19 6 3

      busily preparing for a forthcoming space launching. (UPI,
      Wash. Post, 4/12/63)
B p i 2 18: George J. Feldman, Communications Satellite Corp., in-
      corporator nominee, said in address on international arrange-
      ments for satellite communications: “Last July 10, when Telstar
      went into orbit, communications via satellite literally entered
      the homes of millions of men.and women. This historic event
      symbolized technical developments which open up unparalleled
      opportunities and will, in time, significantly affect the daily lives
      of people in many parts of the world. A new dimension has
      been added to communications by telephone, telegraph, radio and
                  .
      television. . .
         “Cooperation on the international level, bilaterally and multi-
      laterally, is a keystone of a successful communications satellite
      system and it is self-evident that the wider the range of the s ~ s -
      tern, the more extensive will be the need for aider participation
      and agreement. . . .
         “The development of the communications satellite system is
      underway. It will involve intricate negotiation and arrange-
      ments, and there are many problems to be tackled. But tech-
      nology has thrust greatness upon us and, as in some other mani-
      festations of this technological revolution, we are summoned to
      the challenige. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/24/63, A2426)
  US.-Australian experiment to obtain data on the ionosphere con-
      ducted at NASA Wallops Station, with Aerobee 150A sounding
      rocket carrying 144-lb. payload of radio instruments 1,253 m.
      high during eight-minub flight. Experiment ms designed to
      measure intensity and spectrum of VLF radio waves above “E”
      region of the ionosphere. This was third U.S.-Australian at-
      tempt of the space experiment and first success, the previous two
      having failed t o reach desired altitude because of vehicle struc-
      tiiral fai l i jE. Scientifi_c m-vlnarl was pm~idedby .A&.ro,!ia’s
                                     r J----
      Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization.
      Technical facilities, telemetry m r d i n g , and the two-stage rocket
      were provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops
      Release 63-39)
  Andrew E. Potter, Jr., Lewis scientist, described Lewis plans to
      launch a man-made comet. Such a comet, he said, rould answer
                                                               x
      a number of questions. “If the simulated comet du licates the
      behavior of an actual comet, we will have a better un erstanding
      of natural comets,” he said. (mc Release 63-13; Lewis Chro-
  Lt. Co . Stanley C. White (CSAF), s ace s u r p n and Chief of
            3,
                                           B
    Crew Systems Div., NASA Manned pacecraft Center, would be
    reassigned to Aerospace Medical Div. of Brooks A=, iwsc an-
    nounced. Effective June 2, reassignment would conclude “de-
    tached duty” from USAF with NASA since October 1958. (MSC
    Release)
  Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, speaking over
    Radio Moscow in a “Cosmonautics Day” broadcast, called U.S.
    Project Mercury spacecraft SIGMA 7 an “unreliable American
    contraption. . . . T o be frank, I would not like to find myself
140                                                 1903
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     in his [Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s] place. You have no idea
     how cramped and uncomfortable this capsule looks in compari-
     son with the cabins of our remarkable Vostok cosmic ships.”
     Nikolayev had seen SIGMA 7 during his recent visit to S5o Paulo,
     Brazil, where the spacecraft was on display. (AP, Balt. Sun,
     4/13/63)
dpriZ la: Prof. Eugen Saenger, Prof. of Space Research at Tezhnical
     Univ. in Berlin, predicted in interview that if manned observation
     stations were established on the moon “no lar e-scale happening of
                                                f
     any consequence anywhere in the world wul go unseen.” Noting
     that it costs several thousand dollars to orbit a ound of pay-
     load, he predicted that by 1975 cost would be only 525 per pound.
     Dr. Saenger’s interview- was published in Good Friday issue
     of German weekly publication Christ und Welt. (CDNS, Wash.
     Post, 4/15/63)
dprik 13: COSMOS XIV scientific satellite launched by U.S.S.R. into
     orbit (apogee, 318 mi.; perigee, 165 mi.; period, 92.1 min.; in-
     clination, 48” 57‘ to the equator). Tass said satellite was carry-
     ing equipment “designed to continue the study of outer space,”
     and that the s:itellite was fuiictioning normally. (Tass, Kraz-
     naya Zveada, 4/14/63, 1, AFSS-T Trans.; NYT, 4/15/68, 25; UPI.
     Wash. Post, 4/14/63)
   Second of two Aris (advanced range instrumentation ship) ships
     for AMR, Gen. H . H . Arnold, docked a t Port Canaveral after
     shakedown cruise from Bayonne, N.J. (M&R,4/22/63, 20)
   Balloonists Don Piccard and E d Yost, both of Sioux Falls,
     S.D.,. crossed the English Channel in hot-air balloon-first time
     in history such a crossing was completed. Flying most1 at
     13,000-ft. altitude, they made the trip from R e, Englani, to
     Gravelines, France, in 3-and-3/4 hours. (AP, d a s h . Sun. Star,
     4/14/63, A4)
   Gas-filled balloon exploded near Herbede, West Germany, killing
     three persons and injuring eight. Balloon had flown with crew
     of four from Essen, had landed safely after flight, and was being
     deflated in a field when explosion occurred. (Reuters, Wash.
     Post, 4/14/63)
   Retired Admiral of the Soviet Fleet Ivan S. Isakov said in Zzvestia
     interview that nuclear-powered submarine Thresher had been
     compelled to undertake “risky experiments.” Admiral Isakov
                           a
     charged: “The sinkin of the newly charged atomic reactor is
     sure to contaminate t e Atlantic waters, all the more so since
     the tragedy took place in the northern current. of the Gulf
     Stream. . . .” U.S. naval officials had repeatedly asserted that
     sunken reactor created no radioactivity hazard. ( N Y T ,4/14/63)
--lpm’Z 14: British-French supersonic transport, to be in commercial
      service by 1970, was described in joint statement by the two
     developing companiesBritish Aircraft Corp. and Sud-Aviation
     of France. Problem of sonic boom greatly influenced design of
     the mach 2.2 airliner, named “Concorde.” “By adopting special
     operational techniques and by not flying at supersonic speeds
     below certain altitudes, disturbance can be reduced to a mini-
                                                                        141
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     mum.” Airfield noise was “expected t o be little more than that
     from current subsonic jets.” (A7YT 4/14/63)
April 14: Reported that Marshal Nikoiai I. Krylov, commander of
     Moscow military district, had been appointed Chief of Soviet
     Rocket F o m , replacing Marshal Sergei S. Birguzov, recent1
      named Chief of Staff of the Soviet Armed F o m . (AP, N Y Z
     4/16/63)
  Re ort by Legislative Drafting Research Fund of Columbia Univ.,
           National Security Industrial Association, was made public,
     the report examining statutes covering Federal compensation for
     deaths, injuries, and property losses caused by defense and space-
      related accidents. Research found victims of accidents ansing
     from AEC activities were almost completely protected under exist-
      ing laws, but that this was not the case for DOD and NASA pro-
      grams. Accidents in these programs would probably be infre-
      quent but might be “catastro hic,” report said. Entitled “Finan-
                                    E
      cia1 Protection Against Ris s of Major Harm in Government
      Programs,” study was prepared under general direction of John
     M. Kernochan, Director of the Fund. ( N Y T , 4/15/63)
d p ri l15 : Memorandum titled “Space Race with U.S.S.R.” from Dr.
      Edward C. Welsh, E x e m t i n Secretary of National Aeronautics
      and Space Council, to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, was
      made public. Dr. Welsh said U.S. space p                 m was in the
                                                       ’$”
      building stage this year and few space spectam am could be ex-
      pected in 1963; U.S.S.R. may attempt the following in 1963:
      manned orbital mission of eight days, manned orbital rendezvous
      mission, clase-up phot     phs of planet Mars (with M B R ~ probe),
                                                                    I
                            $”
      and several unmanned unar soft-landing probes. Memorandum
      had been writtan before launching of Soviet probe LUNX n,be-
      lieved by many scientists to have been an unsuccessful attempt to
      soft-land on the moon. (Test; Av. WE.,4/15/63,38)
   Hiighes Airrraft G x ani! Spm Twhnnlqgy h b r a t o r k h d h.5~
      selected by NASA for negotiation of contract for design, develop
      ment, fabrication, assembly, and testing of four Pioneer inter-
      planetary spacecraft. Award o contract, expected to be more
                                          f
      than $10 million, would be made to one of these two companias
      in about a month. (NASA Release 63-74)
   FAA concluded two day conference (A ril 12 and 15) on su rsonic
      transport aircraft with British anc French aviation oi cials i        n
                                                                    f
                                                                    ?
                                              !
      Washington. This Kas first in series of meetings to develop inter-
      national certification standards for supersonic transports, result
      of joint effort lanned last Februav in Europe b FAA Adminis-
                                                            91
      trator Najeeb halaby and his British and Frenc counterparts.
      Subjects discussed included :
      “ ( 1) systemworthiness standards and new areas requiring cover-
      age, (2) flight, service and reliability testing, (3) sonic boom
      and noise, (4) handling qualities and performance, and (5)
      structural problems.” (FAA Release T63-20)
   Discovery of new atomic particle, Phi-meson, was reported
      in Phy8ica.J Review Letter8 by the two grou s of mearche-
      Brookhaven National h b o r a t o r g L o n g Island: and Univ. of Cali-
      fornia’s Lawrence Radiation La ratory,Berkeley. New particle
142                                                          19 0 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     had been redicted b Dr.Jun John Sakurai last December, based
              R          f
     on researc by team rom these two institutions and on speculation
      8   nuclear theorist Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, Prof. of Physics at
        a1 Tech. ( N Y T ,4/15/63,1,14)
April 15: Dr. Arthur R. Kantrowitz, Vice President of AVCO Corp.,
     interviewed in U.S. News & World Report, said the moon was “set
      up as the priority target in our space program” because, at the time
      of the decision, “it was the most obvious goal . . . . But I think
      that, while it does provide us with a center for vigorous activity,
      it precluded other imaginative things that we might be doing, be-
                                                 .
      cause it absorbs so much of our funds . . .
         “I axn one of those who favor, M our next objective, the perma-
                                                                      ..
      nent manned station in a low orbit around the earth . . It
      would give us a chance to learn to live and to work in space. It
      would give us a chance to achieve a larger vision of the potentiali-
      ties of space . . . . A laboratory like this would enlarge m n ’ s
      horizons in an important way. . . .”
         Dr. Kantrowitz said there was “certainly a ossibility of going
      to the moon via a manned orbital station,” an that this might be
                                                     !   f


      the Soviet method. Asked if U.S. should be working on this
      approach in addition to LOR, he said : “Ifwe had two approaches,
      I would be willing to bet that it would accelerate our moon pro-
      gram, because there is a chance that either of these approaches
      will run into serious difficulties. Having two baskets for our eggs
      would seem to me to be a much more reasonable thing. Note that
      before the expensive later phases are reached by either approach
      a choice may be necessitated for economic reasons.
         “Furthermore, we might find after we’re dee er into the space
      program that there are more exciting things to E3 done than land-
      ing a man on the moon.” ( U S . News,4/15/63,64-66)
   India’s Defense Production Minister K. Raghu Ramiah said India
      would manufacture missiles with help of U.S.S.R. (N.Y. Herald
      Trib., 4/16/63)
- 4 p d 16; NASA announced it would negotiate vith General Electric
      Co. for an extension of GE’s Project Apollo support effort to
      provide plant and test support services at NASA Mississippi Test
      Facility. Estimated cost of initial one-year contract was $1.5
      million. (NASA Release 63-75)
   High winds forced postponement of an attem t to send two men to
                                                     f
      85,000-ft. altitude in Project Stargazer ba loon, Holloman AFB,
      New Mexico. Purposes of flight were to determine at what alti.
      tude stars cease appearing to twinkle and feasibility of manned
      balloon observatories. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/16/63, A3)
   28-nation le a1 subcommittee of U.N. Committee for Peaceful Uses
              8
      of Outer pace opened its fhree-week session at U.N. Headquar-
      ters, N.Y. (NYZ‘,4/14/63,21)
   Soviet Ambassador to U.N., Nikolai T. Fedorenko, announced
       Soviets had broken off private talks with U.S. on uses of space
      and would submit its own declaration on space exploration to the
      Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer
      Space. (NYT,4/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 4/17/63)
                                                                                                                            143
                                                                                                      19 6 3
                        ASTRONAUTICS                                AERONAUTICS,

Apn7 16: AEC announced Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg would visit
   C.S.S.R. in May at invitation of Andronik M. Petrosyants, Chair-
   man of Soviet State Committee for Peaceful Uses of Atomic
   Energy. Primary purpose of visit would be signing of memo-
   randum of coopemtion i peaceful uses of atomic energy, calling
                               n
   for exchange of scientists between U.S. and U.S.S.R. and ex-
   change of technical papers on research results. ( N Y T , 4/17/63,6)
 Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) said in press conference he would
   urge Congressional investigation to determine whether U.S. was
   channeling too many resources into space pro rams to the detri-
                                                                                                  8
   ment of other Federal programs. Senator ase said he would
   recommend to Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.) ,Chairman
   of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, that the com-
   mittee conduct “a retty thorough review of the whole space
   program.” (AP, d a s h . Eve. Star, 4/17/63)
 Saturn I ground test booster arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day
   trip from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
   It would be used with S-IV stage in series of tests to check out
   the launch complex. (Huntsville Times,4/16/63)
 The first NASA Saturn S-IV stage destined to fly in space left the
   Douglas Missile and Space Systems Divisions a t Santa Monica,
   Calif., on the initial leg of its journey to Cape Canaveral. (Space
   Newa Roundup, 1/8/64,2)
 Donald L. Kored, Lewis engineer, described NASA contract with
   Stanford Research Institute to study one of the most complex
   problems in high-energy rocketry-simple ignition. Preliminary
   results offer promise that a tiny quantity of ozone difluoride mixed

                                     r
   with liquid oxy n will cause the lox to ignite immediately on
   contacting liqui hydrogen. (LRC Release 63-15; Lewis Chron-
   ology, 3)
 Federal mediators announced tentative agreement between Boeing
                                                                          +
                                                                          .                                                     hn
    0. and T l~ + l~ .r m nUCI :L I . - . h*A I.mnn:a+:.) ~ I c k I I l U I I U I lKanl,;n;.+eU U ,      cI\ h- nnCoA
                                                                                                              ..
     . *.                       n           lI u J u n                                                                   nn
                                                                                                         c” “V IY C V
                                                                                                          .
    V . * *A
     U       ** L.z * ckUI I (                                                    *.I*”*I*IIILI                                 “J
                                                                                                                        U VI.


    union members April 17. Agreement was reached after nine
    dags of intensive negotiation in Washington and averted the
    str!ke of more than 40,000 Boeing employees scheduled to begin
    midnight April 16. (Wall StTeet Journal, 4/16/63)
April 17: Whilden P. Breen, Univ. of Maryland research assistant,
    emerged from isolation chamber where he had lived since Nov. 17,
    1962, under continuous and highly programed experimental
    environment. Breen was “in excellent ph sical condition” and
                                                                                              K
    would undergo extensive medical and psyc ological tests during
    the coming week. Experiment was conducted bv Univ. of Mary-
   land S ace Research Laboratory, Dept. of Psychology, and
    f i n a n J b y NASA grant. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/17/63; Univ. of
   Maryland Release)
 Five New Jersey newspapermen held first ress conference through
                                                                                        lp
    space, using RELAY I communications sate lite in 25-min. broadcast
    to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Photo of newsmen sent via RELAY I
    during conference was of good quality, Rio officials said. (AP,
    Santa Monica Evening Outlook,4/17/63)
144            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

April 17: Dr. Donald E. Gault of NASA Ames Research Center told
    American Geo hysical Union that moon dust, from one to 10 tons
                    ’
                    I
    a day, was fa ling on earth. Dr. Gault estimated that 54 per
    cent of dust sprayed off moon (by impact of meteoroids) enters
    solar orbit ; 40 per cent enters earth orbit ; 3 per cent impacts earth
    directly soon after leaving moon ; and 3 per cent hits earth after a
    month or more. He suggested methods of finding moon dust for
    analysis : launching rocket to collect sample particles from upper
    atmosphere; and obtaining samples of sea sediment in polar re-
    gions where, he said, layers of moon dust must have been deposit-
    ed and trapped. ( N Y T , 4/18/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
 Results of optical astronomy, radioastronomy, and radarastronomy
   observations of planet Venus as well as MARINER 11 Venus fly-by
    data were discussed at American Geophysical Union’s annual
   meeting, Washington, D.C. Thomas Gold, theoretical astrophys-
   icist a t Cornel1 Univ., told the session that there were too many
   incongruities in data obtained on Venus’ characteristics to rule
   out one conclusion in favor of another. Results of the various
   research efforts often appeared contradictory. (Simons, Wnsh.
   Post, 4/18/63)
 Dr. Bruce Murray of Cal Tech reported Venus observations from Mt.
    Palomar Observatory during December had detected a Venus
    “storm” 1,000 mi. wide. The “hot spot‘’ on Venus was observed
    with ultrasensitive heat detector mounted on 200-in. telescope.
    Dr. Murrav was addressinp session of American Geological
    Union, m e e h g in Washingt\n.       (Wash. Daily News, 4/17u/63 ;
    Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
 NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in address before Milwau-
   kee Press Club Gridiron Dinner :
       “From the results of the past five years of effort, it is apparent
    that, if we are to achieve mastery of space, we must add sub-
    stantially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of
    technology. The NASA program is moving forward on both of
    these fronts. Essentially, our efforts in the Gemini and A 0110
                                                                     .%
    programs, leading to exploration of the moon, will provi e us
    with an understanding of the limitin factors in space utiliza-
                                             8
    tion, and the skills which will be nee ed to meet such future re-
    quirements in the space environment as our nation decides to
   undertake . . . .
       “All of these skills are needed not only in the pursuit of peace-
    ful rewards for mankind from space exploration, but for the de-
    velopment of any space missions which may become necessary
    to our national defense, to insure that space will not be used as
   an unchallenged avenue of aggression a ainst us. As these skills
                                               Be
    increase, a growing close relationship tween the nation’s best
   experts in the underlying technologies is utilized to make the best
   decisions on new operat ional systems, whether civilian or military.
       “It is also recognized that our space program must be broad
   enough) including considerable basic research, to give us a flexible
   base suitable for a continuity of effort in a direction or directions
   perhaps still unknown. Our broad and varied space effort per-
   mits us to lead from our great national s t r e n g t h e t h e remarkable
                                                                                            145
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 18 63

  flexibility of our economic, social and political systems, the great
  variety of our talents, and the vast resources of our university-
  industry- overnment complex.
     ‘LAccor%ngly,we have not allowed ourselves to be trapped i      n
  a narrow competition, but have developed a national space pro-
  gram which embraces a wide range of activities . . . . (Text)
                                                           ”
A@ 17: Soviet declaration of 1 basic rinciples of space activity
                                   1
                                                           8
                       Subcommittee of .N.
  presented to                                Committee on Peaceful
  Uses of Outer pace. U.S. source6 said pmposls were virtually
  unchanged from those offered last year. ( N Y T , 4/18/63,22)
Discovery of planet (“Barnard’s Star B”) in constellation Ophiu-
  chus was reported to astronomers at Tucson, Ark., by D .Peter
                                                              r
  van de Ramp, Director of Swarthmore College’s Sproul Observa-
       ,Swarthmore, Pa. Six light years from earth, planet is one-
  an -a-half times mass of planet Jupiter or nearly 500 times mass
  of earth. Dr. van de Ramp’s measurements of amount of wobble
  it produced in motion of its sun, Barnard, determined object to
  be a planet. Barnard’s Star B was third planet discovered out-
  side our solar system but the most nearly planet-sized one of all.
   f Wash. Daily News,4/18/63 ; NYT, 4/19/63,4)
USAF announced selection of three contractors to begrn development
  work on large solid-fuel rocket motors: Aerojet General Corp.,
  Thiokol Chemical Corp., and Lockheed Propulsion Co. Thiokol
  and Aerojet would conduct parallel p r o p m s leading to demon-
  stration static firing of half-length 260-m. motor of about 3 mil-
  lion-lb. thrust; depending upon results of this work, UBAF would
  select one of the companies to proceed with development aimed at
  demonstration of 6-million-lb. thrust motor. In addition, Thio-
  kol would work toward demonstration Static firing of 156-in.-diam-
  eter motor of 3-million-lb. thrust, using two segments in solid-
  fuel motor; Thiokol would work toward demonstration static
                                                                                       -
              1 F;R :- A : n m n t n r                                          thmqct ;n ninrrlo
                                                                -;ll;nn    lh
  G4-m                                   mntnr n+ n-0
         n+
                                                                                   ,?
                                                                                   .“     “Fl
                                                                                           -j”
              L””-I*I.-UIc&-”*~*         l Y V V V L V I Vll”                   Y
                                                                                ..
                                                                                 .
                                                                .U**.*”U   1.
                                                                            ”
  u-
  1      VI

  segment, steerable through use of movable nozzles; Lockheed
  would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-h-diame-
 ter motor of one-million-lb. thrust, in single s       ent, steerable
                                                                            T
  through use of deflectors. USAF was managing t e solid-pro
                                                                                            &%
 lant rocket motor development under NASA-DOD agreement.
 Release 493-63)
Draft report on two bills (S. 132 and S. 152) “to create the National
 Weather Council and to provide coordination and central direc-
 tion for an accelersted pro          of weather research, basic and
                                            F
 a plied,)) sent to Bureau o the Budget for consideration and
   $
 a vice prior to submission to the Chgmss. Proposed council
 “would coordinata and centrally direct meteorological and
 weather research and experimental programs” of represented
       cies and would ‘consist of: Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau
     ouncil Chairman), Director of NBF, Administrator of NABA,
    ecretaries of Agriculture, Interior, Army, Navy, and Air Force
                                  S. 132 would also include Adminis-
 or their respective des’
  trator of F u . (N&A&YA        ct. Rpt. II/55 and 56; ltr, NASA ad-
 ministrator to Ron. Warren G. Magnuson, 4/17/63)
146           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

April 18: NASA launphed 85-lb. scientific payload to 208-mi. altitude
   at exact moment EXPLORER XVII atmospheric structure satellite
     assed over the Wallops Island, Va., laynch site, an unusual
   &irst” in NASA sounding rocket program. Launched by Aerobee
   300A sounding rocket, experiment obtained temperature data on
   electron and neutral particles and measured ion and neutral par-
   ticle densities. Data from this experiment would. be compared
   with similar data obtained from EXPLORER xvn as it assed over
                                                             B
   Wallops Island at 198-mi. altitude during its 236th or it of earth.
   Miss distance was 35,000 ards. Preliminary evaluation by NASA
                             6
   Goddard Space Flight enter scientists indicated data were of
   excellent quality. (Wallops Release 6340; Au. Wk.,         5/6/63,
     21)
 X-15 No. 3 flown to 92,500-ft. altitude at speed of 3,770 mph (mach
      5.51) by NASA pilot Joseph A. Walker in test to invest1 ate heat
                                                                 P
      transfer rates and unusual air flow over certain parts o the air-
      craft. More than 400 heat-measuring devices and 25 presssure-
     measuring devices were mounted on the aircraft to determine how
     heat caused by air friction is transmitted to aircraft’s surfaces
      and to record information concerning air flow. (mc Release;
      UPI, N . Y . Herald Trib., 4/19/63; M&R, 4/29/63,10)
 Data from EXPLORER XVII indicated the earth is surrounded
      by belt of neutral helium atoms, scientists of NASA Goddard Space
      Flight Center said at American Geophysical Union meetin .
                                                                       %
      Based on preliminary data received one day after launch, Go -
      dard scientists said EXPLORER XVII atmospheric structure satellite
      had sent back more than eight hours of scientific information on
      physics and chemistry of tenuous gases making up the earth’s
     atmosphere. (NASA Release 63-79)
 P h sicist S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite
 ,rn!(
  ee
   t!           said at American Geoph sical Union meeting that the
                                       k
      millions of tiny copper dipoles to placed in orbit in USAF Proj-
      ect Wrest Ford could remain aloft for as long as a century. Dr.
      Sin er added that he did not regard the orbiting copper dipoles
       5
      as t rent to scientific observations, but he criticized secrecy sur-
      roundinq first attempted West Ford launching. H e urged freer
     and earlier public discussion of proposed space projects and sug-
      gested that U.S. invite scientists from other nations to discuss
      proposed U.S. scientific experiments with possible global come-
     quences. (Wash. Post, 4/19/63; AP, Balt. Sum, 4/19/63)
 USAF X-21A experimental aircraft was flown for first time, from
     Northrop Corp. facility a t Hawthorne, Calif., to Edwards A m .
     Calif. where it would undergo extensive flight tests. X-21A is
    .modified WB-66 type twin-jet aircraft on which were installed
     new laminar-flow wings, new engines relocated back on fuselage,
     and laminar-flow control pumping system placed in former en-
     gine pod positions. Two X-21A’s would study near-elimination
     of friction drag in test program at Edwards. (DOD Release 547-
     63)
 Informed NASA sources were quoted as sayin Astronaut Leroy Gor-
                                               %
     don Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 would e delayed about a week
      from the May 7 planning date because of technical problems in
                                                                            147
                                                           19 6 31
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    the Atlas boo&r. A s revealed was name Astmnaut Cooper
                           lo
    selected for his Mercury spacecraf.t”F‘a,ith 7.” (UPI, Wash.
    Post, 4/19/63)
A p d 18: Addressing meeting of Aviation and Space Writers Asso-
    ciation, Vice President and General M a n a p of Boeing Co.Aero-
    space Div., Lysle A. Wood, roposed: (1) orsiting weather con-
                                     if
    trol station that could provi e a “better foreign aid pro ram than
    any of our efforts t o date”; (2) orbiting industrial la ratories
                                                             %o
    to supplement Government space laboratories ; (3)orbiting cardi-
    ovascular laboratory for studying and treating selected patients
    in space environment; (4) research by chemists and others for
    substances, compounds, and organisms “for which we do not recog-
    nize a need or desire because we cannot imagine the possibility of
    their existence”; and (5) orbiting vehicles as new medium of
    advertising. He suggested that US. would benefit from com-
    mercial ventures into space, and such benefits could help pay for
    scientific and military programs. ( N Y T , 4/19/63, 86)
 AFOAR announced USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists
    were develop       a compact, lightweight instrument to give direct
                    Y
    readings of re ractive indices of the atmosphere at microwave
    frequencies. (OAR Release 443-5)
 U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully performed
    inflight maneuvers in test flight at White Sands Missile Ran .
                                                                             T-
    Missile was launched from underground cell. (DOD Release 55 -
     63L
  Mem rs of International Association of Machinists Local 2061 at
       C a p Canaveral returned to work after one-day walkout against
       Boeing Co. The local had rejected Boeing’s contract offer, but
       returned to work while awaiting results of nationwide vote on the
       contract. (UPI, Wash. Post, 4/19/63)
A p r i l 19: U.S. proposal for a major international effort to establish
                                  fnr~castinm v c f D m Z’RS presezted ! Richarc!
                                                                       y
       \\-odd n-idc i r ~ a t h e r         E

       K. Gardner, Deputy Assistaft-$&Ztary of State for Interna-
       tional Organization Affairs, at meeting of American Geophysical
       Union and American Meteorological Society, in Washington.
       Proposed system would collect and analyze weather data on
       regional and global-rather than national-basis; it would call
       for expansion of ground weather stations and launching of
       weather satellites to obtain global views of weather patterns. He
       noted that recent U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement for coordinated
       weather satellite launchings would “give increased significance to
       this international effort.” (Finney, NYT, 4/20/63)
  TIROS v meteorological satellite, launzhed June 19, 1962, entered its

                                                                     Ty
       eleventh month of operation, surpassing previous lon
       duction record of TIROS n. Since launch, TIROS v had co lectedpro-    and
       transmitted. more than 53,000 cloud-cover photographs of which
       more than 42,000 were meteorologically usable. (NASA Release
     63-77)
  Titan I1 missile, launched by USAF from Cape Canaveml, did not
    reach programed range because second-stage engine cut off pre-
    maturely. (WD Release 563-63)
148            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

April 19: Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of AAAS magazine Science,
       criticized in editorial the four justifications cited for manned lu-
       nar landing program: propaganda value of program had been
       “vastly overestimated” ;possibility of military applications seemed
       “remote”; “technological fallout” would recover “not more than a
       small fraction of the cost of the moon program”; and scientific
       questions about the moon could be satisfied with unmanned, instru-
       mented probes. I f a scientist is not among the crewmen, “the al-
       ternative of exploration by electronic gear becomes exceedingly at-
       tractive. The cost of unmanned lunar vehicles is on the order of 1
       percent of the cost of the manned variety ; unmanned vehicles ciwl
       be smaller and need not be returned. Most of the interesting ques-
       tions concerning the moon can be studied by electronic de-
       vices . . . . Unmanned exploration could provide the basis for
       realistic design of manned landing craft, thus decreasing the total
       costs and increasing the chances of success. A reexamination of
       priorities is in order.” (Science,4/19/63, in CRY6/11/63)
   Maj. Robert M. White (USAF) was awarded the Distinguished Serv-
       ice Nedal for his achievements as pilot of x-15 rocket research
       aircraft. Presentation \vas made by Secretary of the Air Force
       Eugene 31. Zuckert in ceremony at Edwards AFB, Calif. (AP,
       Wash. Eue. Xtar, 4/20/63)
* Members of International Association of Machinists employed by
       Roeing Co. voted to reject ne,w labor contract that had been pro-
       posed by IaM-Roeing negotiators. Union officials said no strikes
       would be sanctioned until further talks with managment. ( N Y T ,
       4/20/63)
d p r i l 20: Praliminary test of instrumentation to be used in joint
       Italian-U.S. San Marco Project was made with launching of two-
       stage Shotput sounding rocket from NASA Wallops Station, the
       rocket carrying 180-lb. instrumented payload to 265-mi. altitude.
       Flight was first in three-phase project being conducted by Italian
       Commission for Space Research and NASA, t~ be followed by
       further tests of San Marco instrumentation with launching of
       Shotput vehicle from towable platform in Indian Ocean and to be
       culminated in launching of scientific satellite into equatorial orbit
       from the platform. Basic objective of San Marco Project was
       to obtain high-altitude measurements of atmospheric and iono-
       spheric characteristics in equatorial region. (NASA Release 63-
       76 ;Wash Xun. A‘tar, 4/21/63)
   President Kennedy said in convocation a d d m at Boston College:
       “. . . there is indeed an explosion of knowledge, and its outward
       limits are not yet in sight. I n some fields progress seems very
       fast, in others distressingly slow. I is no tnbute t modern
                                                t                 o
       science to jump lightly to the conclusion that all its secrets of
       particle physics, or molecular lift, or heredity, or outer space,
       are now within miraculously easy reach. The truth is more
       massive and less magical; it is that wherever me turn, in defense,
       in space, in medicine, in industry, in agriculture, and, most of
       all, in basic science itself, the requirement is for better work,
       deeper understanding, higher education.
                                                                      149
                                                      19 6 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

       “And while I have framed this comment in the terms of the
    natural sciences, I stand squarely with those who insist that at
            level of learning there must be an equal concern for history,
                                       for man as a social being, in the
    for etters, and the arts-and
    widest, meaning of Aristatle’s phrase. This also is work for the
    universities . . . . (Text, in CR, 4/23/63, 6494-95)
                          ”
ApriZ 20; D. Brainerd Holmes, speaking before American Society of
    News aper Editors meeting in Washington, said of P o e t         rjc
          P
    A p l 0: “If we do not make these efforts, we will not be first on
    the moon, we will not be first in space and, one day soon, we will
    not be the first on earth.” (Wash. Post, 4/21/63)
 NASA Administratur James E. Webb, speaking at American Society

              r
    Nempa r Editors meetin in Washington, said purpose of U.S.
                                 %
    space e ort was “not to ma e a Roman holiday or a stunt, but to
    build a solid base of technology.” Reply?, to charges made by
    Dr. Philip H. Abelson in Scieme editoria Mr. Webb said he
    did not bdieve Dr. Abelson had given the same careful “scTtiny
                                                                  P
    of facts” about manned lunar program that he would
                                                                         to
    scientific experiment in his laboratory. Mr. Webb said he t ought
    Dr. Abelson, in criticizing manned lunar landing effort, had mer-
    cised “editorial license” not borne out by the facts. (Wash. Sun.
    Star, 4/21/63 ; Wash. Post, 4/21/63)
 Dr. R b r Jashow, Dimtor NASA Goddard Institute of Space
         oet
    Studies, s eaking at the American Society of Newspaper Editon,
    a t t e m p d t o explain the “scientific effort” in the context of the
    entire space program :
       “I think, personally, that there is also a powerful general
    stimulus which comes from the need for developing new ideas and
    technolo ‘e6 to operata in and master a new environment. One
              T
    must go ack to the explorations of the late 15th Century to find
    a parallel IB what we are about to Pritness in the next 30 to 50
    s ~ Thnap Pynlnmtiong 4.50 ymm ago and their results awak-
                 ~.
    ened int&&t-%&-&&d            and an intellectual ferment which were
    the necessary foundations for the development of a scientific
    revolution.
       “The ideas of a scientific revolution could not have flowered
    in a static society with fixed ideas of what could and could not be
    done. It took the explorations of the 15th and early 16th cen-
    turies to shake established notions enough to permit the birth of
    modern scientific thought. I n a subtle and deep sense, this is
    one of the reasons for the interest of the scientist in the explora-
    tionelementsofthespaceprogram . . . .
       “I think that the history of the last 100 years denionstrates
    that we need nat expect a very long wait before space research
    will feed back into everyday affairs and play a role in them.
       “In the 19th century, the la was rather long. The Scottish
    physicist James Clerk Maxaely published a treatise on electro-
    magnetism in 1864, but not until 1901 did Marconi transmit the
    first wireless signal a c m the Atlantic.
       “More recently, in 1932, Chadwick discovered the neutron in
    En land. Fermi set the first atomic pile critical at Stagg
    Fiefd in Chicago in 1942, only 10 years from the basic discovery
    to a very formidable application.
150          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1983

       “Still more recently, BQrdeen and Brattain and Shockley at
   the Bell Labs discovered the transistor in 1948 and only six years
   later the first transistorized power amplifier appeared on the
   market . . . .
       “. . . the exploration of the moon has a very special role to
   play, precisely for the reason that would make one think the
   moon is uninteresting scientifically-specifically because the moon
   is a relatively lifeless body. It has no atmosphere, no oceans,
   nothing to wear away the record of the history of the solar
   system, and of whatever has occurred to the surface of the moon
   since its birth.
       “On the earth, record of even tremendous surface events dis-
   appear within 10 to 50 million years, a very short time compared
   to the age of the planet, and mountains form and are turned
   over. With the action of weather, everything changes and dis-
   appears as the millions of years go by. That is probably also
    true on Mars and Venus which resemble the earth in this respect.
    But the moon has no oceans, no atmosphere, no mountain-building
    activity that we can discern. For this reason, the moon is a
   kind of Rosetta Stone of the solar system from which we can
    read the past. That is wh it is so interesting to the scientist.
    He has the opportunity to i n d there the record of the early his-
    tory of the solar system.
       “To the student of the origin of the earth, the moon is even
    more interesting scientifically than Mars or Venus.
       “. . . if the moon and the planets mere formed out of gas and
    dust in the condensation that surrounded the primitive sun,
    then we can expect such condensation to accompany the birth of
    every star. There are one hundred billion stars in our galaxy
    alone. Nearly every one of them we expect to have a planetary
    system around it. Some small fraction of those planets will be
    at the right distances from their suns, from their stars, and of
    the right size to have conditions favorable to the development of
    physical life as we know it.
       “If that is the case, it follows that life must be a relatively
    commonplace thing, physical life in the universe . . .
       “. . . there is one small instrument on the Tiros which has not
    achieved as much attention as it deserves. The size of a quarter,
    it is a black disc which detects the infrared energy radiated from
    the top of the atmosphere. That is the energy which is reflected
    back into space from the earth. We can accurately estimate the
    energy coming to the earth from the sun and we can take the
    difference between the two and calculate the amount of energy
    remaining in the atmosphere.
       “This energy deposited in the atmosphere constitutes the driv-
    ing force that generates weather activity. With the aid of satel-
    lites, for the first time we can measure the energy difference and
    hope to break through from the day-to-day forecasting, which
    depends on immediately preceding events, to the week-long or
    two-week forecasts.” (Text)
April $0: During prelaunch preparations at Holloiiian AFB. N.M.,
    Projezt Stargazer balloon broke loose and soared away, finally
                                                                    151
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     landing 120-mi. east of Holloman. Balloon was t o have carried
     gondola with two men, Capt. Joseph Kittinger (ma) astron-
                                                             and
     omer l17illiam White, and their 12.5411. telescope to study stars
     from above most of earth’s atmosphere. USAF spokesman said
     sudden wind blew the moored balloon from side to side, creating
     static electricity which triggered a safety mechanism to release the
     balloon. Damaged balloon would require r e p i r s by manufac-
     turer before it could be re-used. (AP, Wash. Swn. Star, 4/21/63)
d p d 90: Dr. Michael J. Ljpschutz, NASA Goddard Space Flight
     Center astrochemist, reported at American Geophysical Union
     meeting in Washington that 2,900-lb. iron meteorite Navititas
     found in Mexico in 1872 had been on eafth for 800,000years. I n
     addition, meteorite ma have traveled through space for 300 mil-
                            klt
     lion years in asteroid        before impacting on earth. Age was
     measured by examination of radioa~tiva of certain of meteor-
                                                age
     ite’s chemical elements. (Goddard Release)
  American Geophysical Union, a t annual meeting in Washington,
     adopted resolution urgin that FCO protect Channel 37 for radio-
                              2
     astronomy u e . FCC ha received applimtions for operation of
                   ss
     commercial TV on that channel in Paterson, N.J., and scientists
     feared that broadcasts from such station would interfere with
     research being performed with radiotelescope at Danville, Ill.
     FCC had pro osed in March to exclude for five years commercial
                 E
     stations on hannel 37 within 600 mi. of Danville and to limit
     nighttime hours that stations could broadcast on Channel 37.
     AGU resolution 8sserted that the “needs of radio astronomy are
     not met by the limited protection” provided b FCC proposal and
                                                    9
     that the pro sal “leaves unprotected nearly a1 of the active radio
     astronomy o ervatories i the United States.’’      (NYT, 4/22/63,
                  K              n
     2-4)
  I n interview duri annual meeting of American Geophysical Un-
                     3
     ion, Dr. Lewis       Ka lan of JPL said MAIU[NER 11’s discovery of
     800” temperatures of benutian surface indicated possibility that
     atmosphere of Venus and clouds surroundinf that planet con-
     tained organic compounds-including formal ehyde, oily hydro-
     carbons, and certain methyl compounds. Although large quan-
     tities of carbon dioxide were present in Venutian atmosphere,
     carbon dioxide alone would not account for the “greenhouse ef-
      fect.” Other substances-probably organic compounds--existed
     in Venutian atmosphere to absorb heat and radiation from planet
     and reflect it back to surfam. (Carey, AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     4/20/63)
  Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said in speech before
     American Society of Newspaper Editors: “. . . if we were to
     draft every scientist and engineer in the country into weapons
     development work, we could still develop only a fraction of the
     systems that are proposed . . . . This process of choice must
     begin with a requirement for solid indications that a proposed
     system would really add something to our national security. . . .
        “Development wsts alone on typical major weapons systems
     today average upward of $1 billion. Over a billion dollars was
     spent on the atomic airplane, which was little closer to being a
152           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   useful weapon when we canceled it, shortly after taking office,
   than it had been half a dozen years earlier, Eighty million was
   spent on the Goose decoy missile, essentially a pilotless aircraft
   that the enemy would confuse with our B-52’s . . . .
       “The RS-70 is an example of a weapon which, i t seems to me,
   fails to meet the basic requirement for a major systems develo -
                                                                        P
   ment: a solid indication that the weapon, if developed, wou d
   add significantly to our national security. It happens to be a
   particularly expensive weapon : to develop, procure, and operate
   a modest force of these planes would cost us a t least $10 billion.
   Yet considering the weapons we already have, or will have by the
   time the RS-70 could be operational, it is very hard to see how
   this weapon would add t our national security . . . .
                              o
        “As weapons systems grow more complex, more expensive, and
   more difficult to maintain in a high state of military readiness, it
   is essential that we limit as far as possible the number of new
   systems that we bring into operation; for we want to be as sure
   as possible that we can depend on every system to operate when
    it is really needed. A basic fact of life is that under the chaotic
   conditions of combat you do not get anything like the efficiency
   of weapons systems that you get on a test range. Relative simplic-
    ity is a most desirable characteristic of a weapons system, or of
    a combination of systems . . . .” (Text, in CR, 4/24/63,
    6580-83)
April 21 : Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Science Advisor to the President,
    said in speech before Federation of American Scientists in Wash-
    ington that the field of education was “probably the most back-
    ward field in our modern society” and that scientists were lar ely
    to blame. Pointing to “widespread lack of understanding” a k u t
    science and technology, he said :
        “It is surprising that we scientists and technologists in univer-
    sities who, in a sense, have made major contributions to the great
     revolution through which we are living, have failed to apply our
    methods to our own profession.
        “Modern teaching aids have been rarely employed either in
                                                            04
       eneral education or in the universities. The process invention
    !?as been almost ignored. The most highly developed devices
     in common use me still the old-fashioned textbooks, the black-
    board, the written examination . . . .” (Simons, Waeh. Post.
    4/22/63)
 Dr. Homer E. Nemell, NASA Director of Space Sciences, spoke ab
     American Nobel Memorial Foundation dinner, New York :
        “Because of the NABA policy of no exchange of funds, and of
     insisting on a mutuality of interest in entering into . . . coo e?-
                                                                   g.
     tive programs, various national programs ow up with a via ility
     that they might otherwise not have. T E y are not little NASA
     programs implanted on foreign soil. They are genuinely national
     programs, with strong national support, and vigorous national
      participation. They serve to strengthen the science and tech-
                                                           x
              of the cooperating country in a way that on1 such direct
     invo vement can. Moreover, in the case of scienti c programs,
     since a universal element of these efforts is an agreement that
                                                                   153
                                                    19 6 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   scientific results will be made generally available to the scientific
   literature, the entire world community of nations benefits.”
    (Space Quotes, 9/15/63)
April 21: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said in nationwide TV
   interview that U.S. could and would land a man on the moon:
   “We need no big, new scientific breakthroughs to complete this,
   we feel. We do not need the discovery of something as large as
    atomic power or anything like this in order to make the moon
   flight. Most of the tmhcal details are known. I t is now a lot
   o very hard and long engineering spade work and test proce-
     f
    dure to prove out all these details and put them all together on
   the lunar mission.” (“Meet the Press,” NBC-TV, 4/21/63 ; AP,
    Wash. Post, 4/22/63)
 Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experi-
    mental Station, said in article in New York Times Ma azine:
                                                               9
   “The challenge of space exploration and particularly of anding
   men on the moon represents the greatest challenge which has
    ever faced the human race. Even if there were no clear scientific
   or other arguments for proceeding with this task, the whole his-
   tory of our civilization would still impel men toward the oal.
                                                                   %
   I n fact, the assembly of the scientific and military with t ese
   human arguments creates such an overwhelming case that it can
   be ignored only by those who are blind to the teachings of his-
   tory, or who wish to suspend the development of civilization
    at. its moment of greatest opportunity and drama.” (NYT
   Magazine, 4/21/63,12f)
 22-orbit MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper was re-
    ported delayed from planning date of May 7 until at least May
    21 because o difficulties in Atlas booster’s guidance system.
                   f
    (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
 NASA Plum Brook Research Reactor, Sandusky, Ohio, reached full
    power for the first time. 6 : O kilowatts of thermal e n e r a were
                                0O O
    produced a t end of two-month-long approach to power. The
    reactor is scheduled for basic research experiments associated
    with NASA’s   plans to develop a nuclear rocket for interplanetary
    exploration. (Lewis Chronology, 2; LRC Release 63-20)
 N.MA announced award of study contract to Rendix Systems Divi-
    sion to compare behavior of soils in earth environment with that
    in vacuum chambers simulating lunar temperatures and pressures
    approaching lunar atmosphere. Results of 10-week study would
    assist in planning additional soil behavior research for planning
    possible future lunar roving vehicles. (NASA   Release 63-78)
 NASA contract to High Voltage Engineering Corp. of Burlington,
    Mass., for laboratory study of meteoroid impact effects on space
    vehicle components was reported. (Boston Sua.Herald, 4/21/63)
 Air terminal system run by Port of New York Authority-includ-
    ing New York International and LaGuardia Airports in New
    York, Newark and Teterboro Airports in New Jersey, and two
    commercial heliports in Manhattan-set records in all categories
    of air traffic in 1962, the Authority reported. (NYT, 4/21/63)
 Tass announced Bruno Pontecorvo, Italian-born physicist who had
    been leading member of British Harwell Nuclear Research In-
     741-823 M - 1 1
154           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     stitute before defecting to U.S.S.R. in 1950, had been awarded
     Lenin Prize for his pioneering research with neutrinos. (AP,
     Wash. S n Star, 4/21/63)
               w.
--1pril 22: I n letter to FCO Chairman Newton N. Minow, Director of
     National Center for Atmospheric Research Walter Orr Roberts
     urged that Channel 37 not be opened to television broadcasting
     but be reserved for radioastronomy uses. “I hope you will con-
     tinue your study of this critically important question until a clear
     decision is reached on the public interest. I f the channel is lost
     for research purposes, I believe that science will be significantly
                 .
     harmed : . .” (Letter, 4/22/63, in CR,5/1/63, 7123-24)
  U.S.S.R. placed COSMOS xv scientific earth satellite in orbit (apogee
     317 kin.; perigee, 173 km.; eriod, 89.77 min.; inclination to
                                   L
     equator, 65’). Tass said on ard the satellite was “scientific
     equipment intended for continuing the space research accordin
                                                                       %
     to the program announced by Tass on 16 March 1962.” Onboar
     equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Prcxvdn, 4/23/63,
     AFSS-T Trans.)
  “Faith 7” Mercury spacecraft was installed on Atlas booster at Cape
     Canaveral, in preparation for Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s
     MA-9 flight. (UPI, N Y T , 4/23/63)
  WAF canceled Project Stargazer (manned balloon astronomy ex-
     periments) because of lack of funds. (Chic. Tm’b.,4/23/63)
  astronaut John H. Glenn said in speech before annual luncheon
     meeting of Associated Press: “As a result of the space program,
     tremendous and vast new areas of information appear on the hori-
     zon and are increasing daily. Consequently, this space pro-
     gram will undoubtedly serve as a catalyst toward an expansion
     of information that will dwarf anything we have known
     heretofore . . . .
        “What we need is a national repository for information, or-
     ganized not alon traditional library-type lines,. but designed to
                       f
     utilize all the tec niques at our disposal for soyting, cataloguing,
     analyzing, storing and making readily accessible, new inhrma-
     tion as it becomes available . . . .
        “In short, I propose that we lose no time in establishing a
     National Information Center. Control of such an institution
     could be by government, private interests, or a combination of
     appropriate interests . . . .” (Text)
  Three men entered compression chamber at Naval Gun Factory
     for eight-day experiment in living under 45 lbs. of pressure.
      (Wash. Daily News, 4/23/63)
  .John L. Sloop, Director of Propulsion and Power Generation in
     NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified on
     NASA high-energy propellant program before House Committee on
     Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight :
     “Our interest in high energy propellants dates back to the middle-
     forties. A lar e amount of research on high energy
                   f
     was conducted y NACA. This research contributed to tgropellants
                                                               e develop-
     ment of the RL-10 engine. I t also led to the choice of oxygen-
     hydrogen for the upper stages of Saturn I and Saturn V . . . .
        “Let me assure you, however, that we are not thinking or dealing
     in the past. I firmly believe there are many opportunities ahead
                                                                      155
                                                      19 6 3~
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

      to usa hi h energy propellants in space explora.tion . . . . One
      phase of %gh energy propellant research in the 1953-1959 period
       is just beginnin t o reach fruition and offers significant potential
      gains in payloaf for existing vehicles and future vehicles. More
       work remains to be done . . . .” (Testimony)
April 22: Invention of edible structural material by Dr. Sidney
       Schwartz, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. physiologist,
       was reported in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Harder
       than tem red masonits, the edible structure could “reduce the
              B“
      need for ackup food i space flights,” Dr. Schwartz said. (Au.
                                n
       Wk.,   4/22/63,34)
  General Telephone and E l e c t r o b s Corp. Ned application with FCC
       for authority to purchase stock in Communications Satellite Corp.
       (AP, N P T , 4/23/63)
  Activities of Amateur Rocketeers of America (ARA)a t National
       Amateur Missile Analysis Center ( NAMAC) near Indianapolis were
       described in National Observer. NAMAC was built by ARA, national
       organization of high school-age rocket enthusiasts, and put into
       use in autumn 1962. Completion was planned for summer 1963.
       (NatimLal Observer, 4/22/63)
  National Academy of Sciences presented its awards during
      the 100th Annual Meeting of the Academy, in Washington.
       Draper Medal for investigations in astronomical physics was
       presented to Dr. Richard Tousey of NRL in honor of his achieve-
       ments in solar spectroscopy, a principal source of information
       about the chemical and physical structure of the sun. Under
       Dr. Tousey’s direction, series of high-altitude probes beginning
       in 1946 with use of captured German V-2 rockets produced the
       first detailed record of solar radiations in the f a r ultraviolet
       region of the spectrum. ( NAS Release)
A p r i l 22-24: American Ph’ysical Society meeting held in Washington.
       At meeting, Dr. William A. Fowler; Cal Tech astronomer, pre-
                                                      x
       sented photographic evidence he believed sup orted theory that
         igantic galactic explosions occur regularly in t e universe. With
       br. Fred Hoyle, Cambridge Univ. astronomer, Dr. Fowler con-
       tended that such explosions were only explanation for the ex-
       tremely powerful radio emissions detected in select points of dis-
       tant universe. N P T , 4/28/63,67)
                     6.     Claytun, Cal T c physicist, described new
                                            eh
           Dr. Donald
       method of dating creation of physical substances, a t meeting of
       American Physical Society in Washinfon Studying osmium-
       187,and osmium-186, Dr. Clayton conc ud& that iron and other
       heavy substances were formed 6-10 billion years before formation
       of our solar system, scattering into interstellar space with explo-
       sions of supernovae. These elements mixed with hydrogen clouds,
       from one of which the solar system was eventually formed.
        (Wash. Eve.Star, 4/23/63 ;N Y T , 4/23/63,17)
  American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and NASA co-
       sponsored second Manned Space Flight Meeting, in Dallas, Tex.
        (Advance Program)
           Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter described flight experiences
        in Project Mercury at the AIAA Second Manned Space Flight
       Meating, Dallas, and concluded :“1think this philosophy sums up
156           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

      our attitude toward manned space flight. It is the increasing
      importance of man in the system that is goin to characterize our
                                                   K
      space flights of the future. We will need ski1 ed pilots to fly these
     missions, and we are in the process of developing those skills now.
        “The era of manned space flight is just beginning, however,
      and Project Mercury is only the first step. We are convinced
      that it has been a very rofitable step and that succeeding pro-
     grams in manned space fight will continue to expand our h o w l -
     edge of the universe, hopefully for the benefit of all mankind.”
      (Text)
.4pril23’: Aerobee sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Sta-
     tion carried 195-lb. instrumented payload to 125-mi. altitude in
     71/2-min. flight. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Cen-
     ter, experiment was designed to measure electron densities in
     ionosphere by several methods and to yield informat‘ neces-ion
     sary to further development of direct measurement techniques.
      (Wallops Release 63-42)
  Dr. Hugh I,. Dryden, XASA Deputy Administrator, was elected to
     third four-year term as Home Secretary of Xational Academy
     of Sciences. ( NAS Release)
  Illinois Governor Kerner said in address before Rotary Club in
     Chicago: “With a greater share in the research efforts of the
     space age, Illinois and its taxpaying citizens would cease to be
     the underwriters for the doctors of philosophy other states recruit
     to advance their programs.” (Chic. Trib., 4/24/63)
  Vnited -2rab Republic announced it planned to orbit a weather
     satellite this year. (Tash. Pai7y N e w s , 4/23/63)
       AIAA Second Manned Space Flight Meeting, Dallas, presentation
     by Warren J. Xorth of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and
     William I% Cassidy of Ling-Temco-Vought described Gemini
               x
     1aLinch esca e systeni, and said: “A manual abort system will
     provide ad ed operational flexibility by enabling the flizlit c r e ~
     to choose an abort time which may reduce the possibility of
     aborts at high dynamic pressure: to choose optinium abort times
     compatible with contingeiicy recovery areas ; and to reduce the
     probability and the risk involve,l with an inadvertent abort . . . .”
      (Text)
  Dr. .Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director of NASA Office of Manned
     Space Flight, said at AIAA Second Manned Space Flight Aleet-
     iiig in Ihllas that aerospace industry must improve quality of
      rocket, and spacecraft components to ensure successful coin-
     pletion of Project Apollo. “Developing reliability of thousands
     of components so they all work together n-ithont error is the
     one main area where we need a big jump in the state of the art
     in the Apollo lunar Innding program.” (-4P, ITash. Ew. Star,
     4/23/63)
  Vice President Lyndon 13. .Johnson. Chairman of National Aero-
     nautics and Space Council, said in address before -ILL\ Second
     Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas: “The age of space is,
     for all regions of America, a second industrial revolution, a
     rev?littioii tliat is bringing a new future, a new degree of partici-
     patlon, a new scope of contribution for every region of our coun-
     try, and for every segment of our society.”
                                                                    157
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 31

        Regarding Project Apollo, he said that “to reach for the moon
   is a risk, but it is a risk we must take.” Failure to do s would be
                                                                o
                       (UPI, NYT, 4/24/63)
   ( 6even riskier.”

April E?: John W. Stone, Advanced Studies Manager of Launch
   Vehicles and Propulsion Directorate, NASA Ofc of Manned
                                                       fie
   Space Flight, said a t ALIA Manned S ace Flight Meeting that
                                             Be
   projected Nova launch vehicle would           so costly that it would
   require national policy ruling-such as President Kennedy’s
   decision to award high priority to manned lunar landing program.
    There would be no need for such a decision on Nova until 1968
    at the earliest, he said. (M&R, 4/29/63,16)
 Saturn project engineers James B. Bramlet and Robert E. Lind-
   strom, of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Saturn Systems
   Office, said at MAA Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas
   that NASA heavy launch vehicle p r o p m s are on tight schedules
   but are “within the bounds of our capabilities . . . . [and can
   meet requirement for a] manned lunar landing in this decade.”
     (Huntsville Times, 4/23/63)
 Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center,
   said he doubted that Russia has developed any new booster capa-
   bility despite rumors that the Soviets are about ready to launch
   another “space spectacular.” (Dallas M r i g News, 4/24/63)
                                                onn
 Re ort on laser research presented at meeting of American Physical
    gociety by Robert W. Terhune, Ford Motor Co. physicist. Ford
   scientists had succeeded in altering laser’s ultraviolet-ra fre-
    quency to other frequencies, an achievement hailed as {e,       ra-
   through toward using lasers for communications. (NYT,
    4/24/63,18)
April 2.4: President Kennedy, asked in prerjs conference if he “had
    any cause to reconsider” his commitment to goals of U.S. lunar
    p r o v m , replied:
         ,.8 1nnG~rlct it, cf ~QC-,          -p p c p & - c x r budcwt fnr
                                                                   e---”-
            -----I




    this year. We are looking at it again in relationship to next
    year’s budget. We are also looking at it because of the concern
    that has been raised in the Congress and out of the Congress.
    I h a w seen nothing, however, that has changed my mind about
                                                        .
    the desirability of our continuing this pro
                                                  Yrn
        “Now, some people say that me shoul take the money we
    are putting into spce and put i t into housing or education. We
    sent up a very extensive educational program. My judgment is
    that what would happen would be that they would cut the space
       rogram and you would not get additional funds for education.
    k e have enough resources, in my opinion, to do what needs to
    be done in the field, for example, of education, and to do what
    needs to be done in space.
        “Nom, this program passed almost unanimously a year a 0.
                                                                      7
    What will happen, I predict, will be a desire perhaps? possib y,
    to cut it substantial1 ,and then, a year from now or six months
                          B
     from now, when the oviet Union has made another new, dramatic
    breakthrough, there will be a feeling of W h y didn’t we do more.’
     I think our pro , m is soundly based. I strongly support it.
    I think it w o u l d c a mistake to cut it. I think time will prove,
158             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAFTICB, 19 6 3

      even though vie can‘t SBB all the answers which we will find in
      space, that the overall expenditures have been wortkmhile. This
      country is a c o u n t 3 of great resources. This propam in many
      mays is going to stimulate science. I know there is a feeling
      that the scientists should be vi-orking on some other matter, but
      I think that this program-I am for it and I think it would be
      a mistake to arrest it.” (Transcript, Wash. Eve. ~ C t n r 4/25/63,
                                                                 ,
    A45 1
Apm’l ,94 : N.ZSA announced Langley Research Center had requested
    industry proposals for studying manned obital research labora-
    tory systems capable of sustaining a four-man crew in space for
    one year. (NASA Release 63-81 ;Langley Release)
  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began hear-
    ings on technical and scientific aspects of US. space program,
    preparatory to hearinp on NASA proposed FY 1961 budget
    authorizations. Testifying mere ~ - 4 Administrator James E.
                                                         s~
    Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh I. Dryden, Associate,
    Administrator nr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of Space
    Sciences Dr. Homer E. ?;ewell. ( s a s . 4 Leg. Alct.Rpt. 11/59)
  XASA Administrator ,James E. Webb, testifying before Senate Com-
     mittee on ,\eronnutic;il :ind Space Sciences, said : “. . . It is im-
     portant to note that the budget requested for the total program
    of SASA for fiscal year 19G-1 includes less than $50,000,000 for
     new progmnis. The remainder is to maintain the projects non-
    underwray on schedule and to pay the contractors for the work
     they have ohliglted themselves to do to meet thess schedules.
        “The policy on wliich this budget is based is the mastery of
     space, and its utilization for the benefit of mankind. This
     mastery, and the relation of our position to those of other na-
     t,ions, will not he determined by any single achievement. Superi-
     ority in the spnce en\-ironment will be won and rcry likely can
     be held by that nation diicli first fashions into usable systems
     all of the scientific liiiou-ledge, all of the technolo , all of the
     experience, a11 of tlie space ~ a u i i c ~ i terminal gcilit ies, and
                                                      and
     all of the aids to space i i a v i p t i o i i required for safety and regu-
     lar operation.
        “These are the caixibilities and resources which the United
     States must have, aAd this budget is designed to make rapid
     progress toward acquiring them . . . .“ (Testimony)
  NASA Deputy Director nr. Hugh I,. Dryden discussed acconiplish-
     ments of NASA’s     international program and some future trends
     of lJ.S. spnce program in presentation to Senate C‘oniinittw on
     Aeronaiitical and Space Sciences. He described TT.S.-IJ.S.S.R.
     agreement for cooperation in weather satellite program and mu-
     tual experiments with Echo I1 passive-reflector satellite, and said :
     “The agreenient itself provides for the usual sixty-day period dur-
     ing \i-hlch each nation may change its mind on details and sug-
     gest c1i;inges. This ires an opportunity for review by rarious
                             f
     agencies within bot 1 governments, nnd changes can then be
     made without embarrassment. For that reason, the text of the
     agreement. will not be released until two months from March
           ....9,
      20
                                                                       159
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 W

      Dr. Dryden said Soviet maneuvers in Legal Subcommittee of
    U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were ‘.‘a small
      cloud on the horizon” threatening “that this effort ‘toward scien-
      tific cooperation may be terminated.” He suggested that some
      scientists in Soviet Academy were non-Communist Party members
      and were eager for international contacts and cooperation; they
      uyparently were allowed to discuss scientific and technical matters
      not involving politics. But possibility existed that “political
      elements” might “shut off” moves toward international coopera-
      tion-evidenced by Soviet “tendency to hint that scientific cooper-
       ation may not be so easy unless there is agreement on legal mat-
     ters.” (Testimony ;NYT, 4/28/63,41)
A p r i l $34: Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Director of Space Sciences,
       appearing before Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space
      Sciences, reviewed status of NASA space sciences programs. “Dur-
      ing 1962, the NASA space exploration program entered a new phase
      of its evolution. We passed beyond the relatively simple satellites
      and probes which characterized our early years and are heavily en-
      gaged in the development of advanced spacecraft and launch
      vehicles to accomplish the more rewarding, but more difficult
      missions. I n doing so, we met with both dramatic successes as
      well as some temporary delays. I n general, however, the year
      was one of intense activity and excellent progress. . . .”
      (Testimony)
  Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Maine) read letter from Senator
     Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) in session.of Committee on Aero-
      nautical and Space Sciences, the letter quoting three scientists
      who estimated that, a t present pace, 60 per cent of all physical
      scientists would be worhng as NASA employees. Senator Bennett
      called on Republican members of Committee to see what steps
      were necessary to ‘Lpreventthis concentration of scientiflc brains
      in !h-eramei?t z the expei?’”“ C i l p’i’ate CGrpCrsticns and
                                           of
                            i
      universities.” ( N Y T ,4/25/63)
  I n AIAA speech at Dallas on “Space Policy and Space Management,”
      Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC. reviex-ed the
      national objectives in space :
          “First of all, there is an over-all policy objective, which the
      President has ex ressed as the determination of this country ‘to
                      Ip
      become the Tor d‘s leading space-faring nation.‘ I t is worth
      mentioning that this is a broad umbrella. . . . Suffice to say that
      the space program is not a one-project design nor a short-run
     episode. It is a growing, expanding, multi-project program,
      which I predict will become an increasingly significant part of
      our way of life. As important as it is, the moon project is not
      the whole space program; it is just one portion and one phase of
      an over-all moqram which has breadth through variety and depth
      f a r into the future.
          “A few features of this broad space y l i c ? ?re:
          “1. I t s objectives are peaceful . . . t e distinction as to what
      is peaceful and what is not peaceful is a matter of intent and js
      not determined by what agency of t h e government engages in
     them . . .
160           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

        “2. Our policy asserts that space travel and space exploratia-
    are subject to international lw and that such activity should be
                                    a
    consistent with the provisions of the United Nations charter. . . .
        “3. It is our policy to seek increased internationa.3 cooperation
    in, and mutually advantageous agreements for,. the orderly and
    open conduct of space and space related activities . . . .
        “4. It is also our olicy that the concept and performance of
    our space responsibiyities shall be maintained and strengthened
    as a national program rather than a series of separate and unre-
    latedprojects. . . .
        “5. There are inherent risks in space exploration, particularly
    in manned flight, and they must be recognized . . . .
        “6. While we must continue to improve on state-of-the-art com-
    petences, it is essential that we strive just as hard to make so-called
    quantum jumps in technology and performnnce . . . .
        “7. It is a significant element of policy that progress be the
    joint product of government and private enterprise. . . .
        “In conclusion, the national space program is an essential and
    dynamic feature of our economy. It benefits the many rather than
    the feu-. It strengthens the nation, both at home and abroad. It
    looks forward rather than backward. It highlights the contribu-
    tions of the most able technologists and the most able managers
    and gives them an unprecedented peacetime opportunity to repay
    more fully the special bonus they have received by living in this
    great country.
        “We a n afford the space program. We must afford it. We
     can be satisfied with nothing less than first place-to the moon,
    to the planets, and throughout the solar system.” (Text)
April 24 :Evidence suggesting gigantic explosion in space 100,000
    years ago was reported by Dr. Jesse L. Greenstein of Mt. Wilson
     and Mt. Palomar Observatories. Spectrographic study led Dr.
     Greenstein to conclusion that there are at least two “radio stars”
     or “exploding gas clouds in very distant galaxies at distances of 2
     billion and 4 billion light years respectively.” Gas of each cloud
     weighs up to 100 million times as much as the sun, and the objects
     are 100 times brighter than Milky Way Galaxy. Dr. Greenstein
     said important consequence of findings was that it showed pos-
     sibilit of d&ting such objects twice as far awa as previously
          t
     thoug t possible. Dr. Greenstein reported his zndings at Na-
     tional Academy of Sciences meeting in Washington. (AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 4/25/63)
 I n press interview at NAS, Dr. Martin Schwanchild countered scien-
     tific critics of the U.S. space program, and said: “I a m for it
     and I think it would be a mistake to arrest it.
        “The moon project is the stirring spearhead of a movement
     under the wing of which man will do real exciting things. . . .
    We must do an enormous effort of sparkling and grand and
     wonderful things and out of them one little pearl will come. . . .
         “Energy in one program will increase the push in all others. J
     hope art will blossom and pure science and philosophy. The
     first time you stop the present momentum you will not save
     money but you will stop the impetus for improving education in
     this country.” (Loory, N . Y . Her& Trib., 4/25/63)
                                                                   161
                                                    1 9 0 81
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

April 2: Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, prof. of biology at Princeton
        %
     Vniv., urged at National Academy of Sciences meeting in Wash-
     ington that President Kennedy proclaim U.S. opposition to con-
     tamination of Mars by landing probes on that planet. He added
     that U.S. should make available its research on decontamination to
     U.S.S.R. Dr. Pittendrigh emphasized he approved decision to
     relax sterilization of lunar probes but declared his opposition to
     landing spacecraft on Mars where possibility of life exists.
      (NPT,4/25/63)
 USAF Atlas E ICBM was launched by BAG crew from Operational
     Systems Test Facility at Vandenberg AFB in successful flight
     test. (DOD Release 585-63)
 General Thomas S. Power (USAF) ,CinC of Strategic Air Command,
     predicted at AIAA Second Manned Space Flight Meeting that
     “space potentially offers unique militarg advantages, and we must
     anticipate that some nation or nations will endeavor to exploit
     such advantages to help them attain their political objec-
   ’ tives . . . . We may find that, eventually, the only really surviv-

     able command and control structure would be one employing a
     maneuverable command post in space.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     4/24/63 )
  Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully performed “strenuous
     maneuvers” in flight test at White Sands Missile Range, U.S.
     Army announced. Missile was launched from underground pit
     and guided by ground-based radar equipment. Information
     gained during Nike-Zeus development would be used in Nike X
     antimissile missile system, advanced version of Zeus. (DOD
     Release 579-63)
A p d 95: X-15 No. 1 flown by pilot John McKay to 105,500-ft.
     altiude a t maximum speed of 3,654 (mach 5.32) mph in test
     to measure distortion of p h o t o p p h s at extreme speeds
      Camera was recessed in underside of aircraft’s nose. (AP, Chic.
      Trib., 4/26/63)
  RELAY I communications satellite was used to transmit electroen-
      cephalograms (“brain waves”) from Bristol, England, to Min-
      neapolis, Minn., in demonstration experiment conducted in
      connection with meeting of National Academy of Neurology in
      Minneapolis. (NASA Release 63-85)
  After prolonged debate, Senate confirmed nominations of the 14
      incorporators of Communications Satellite Corp. (CR,      4/24/63,
    6606f; CR, 4/25/63,6698-99)
  Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Director of NASA Ofc of Advanced
                                                  fie
   Research and Technology, summarized scope of NASA advanced
   research and technology program before Senate Committee on
                                         “.
                                         . . although the cohesive-
    Aeronautics and Space Sciences:
   ness, technical direction, and much of the research effort of the
    pro ram is provided by the NASA field centers, a close coupling
        5
   of t e Nation’s universities and industry with the centers has
   been established. This three-way partnership is a key to the
    Nation’s future pre-eminence in aeronautics and space.”
    (Testimony )
  Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., Assistant Administrator for Tech-
    nology Utilization and Policy Planning, in an interview with
162             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

      Neal Stanford of the Wall Xtreet Journal, April 25,1963, stated
      that :“The dozens of ways that s ace research and development is
                                        f
      being transmitted into industria profits today are only a trickle
       receding the deluge that will follow, for the space age is only just
                one recalls that it took 112 years to develop photography
     ‘
     %e
      n
     to an advanced de        ,56 years to develop the telephone, 35 years
     to perfect the x 1 5 years to develop radar, with television
     taking 12 years, the atomic bomb 6 ears and even the transistor
                                            T
     5 years, one can appreciate not on how small the be innings
                                                                 8
     but how vast the prospects of harnessing space R&D to omestic
     usage.” (Space Quotes)
A p d 2 5 : Panel of scientists headed by Dr. Sverre Petterssen, prof. of
     meteorology at Univ. od Chicago, roposed in report to National
     Academy of Sciences’ Geophysics Sesearch Board a program of
     unprecedented collabomtion ‘between scientific institutions and
     national governments in atmospheric research, meteorological
     service, atmospheric surveillance, and meteorological education “to
     rake the effectiveness of the meteorological services on a world-
     wide basis.” Report was outgrowth of U.N. General Assemblj
     resolution in December 1961 calling on “all member states, the
     World Meteorological Organization and other appropriate agen-
     cies” to study ways of improving atmospheric sciences. Report
     was basis for U.S. recommendations to World Meteorological
     Organization, meeting in Geneva. (NAG-NRC Release; Wash. Eve.
     Stnr, 4/25/63, A3 ;N Y T . 4/26/63,4)
  XASA Manned Spacecraft Center announcd Cook Technological
     Center Div. of Cook Electric Co. had completed first of new
     biomedical tape recorders for use in first two-man Project Gemini
     space flight. Each recorder would receive and record continu-
     ously, for 30 hours, six kinds of simultaneous biomedical signals
     from sensors within astronaut’s spacesuit. Post-flight play-back
     of the tapes would provide continuous analysis of astronauts’
     physical and mental endurance in lon periods of space flight, a
     major goal of Project Gemini. ( M S C % ~ ~ , 63-78)
  Dr. Harold C. Urey, Unir. of California chemist, said at press con-
     ference in conjunction with National Academy of Sciences meet-
     ing in Washington that “more effort should be made to get more
     first-class scientists into the space program. If NASA really is go-
     ing to use only one per Gent of the nation’s scientists-how many
     among those will be first-class?” Comparing NASA with AEC, Dr.
     Urey said : “The atomic energy program had a very positive base.
     Many top scientists worked m the pmgrLm. But the space pro-
     gram is just the opposite. NASA grew too fast.” (Huntsville
     Times, 4/25/63)
  Martin-Marietta announced signing of $280 million contract with
     DOD for development of Titan I11 missile. (Wash.Post, 4/26/63)
  Editorial in Washington Evening Star quoted Vice President Lyn-
     don B. Johnson: “. . . To reach the moon is rz risk. But it is a
     risk we must take . . . [for] failure to go into space is even
     riskier . . . . Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be
     tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler.” Editorial
                                                              163
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    cited “soundness of what he has had to say a b u t our projected
    lunar voyages . . .” and added :“The warning is well-timed, espe-
    cially so because of what some otherwise sensible and perce ive
                                                            8-
                                        e
    peo le have been saying about the alle      nonsensicality of ymg
       K
    to t e moon when the money could be tter spent onsuch urgent
    projects as building schools, s e w v plants and more and more
    highways right down here on earth. (Wash. E v e . Star, 4/25/63)
April 26 : USAF launched Blue Scout rocket from P .Arguello, Calif.,
                                                    t
    with unidentified payload. (AP, Wash. Eve.S h ,4/26/63)
                                                    using mor-Agena
 USAF launched unidentified satellite f o P=
                                          rm
                    Chic.Trib., 4/27/63)
    vehicle. (m,
                                                                    of
 USAF successfully launched advanced Atlas ICBM with new ty
    nose cone inore than 5,OOO mi. down AMR. (Aetro.and Aero. K .  g,
    June 1963,7)
 NASA announced formation of Research Advisory Committee on Bio-
    technology and Human Research, chaired by D .Charles I. Bar-
                                                    r
    ron, fli ht surgeon and president of Aerospm Medical Associa-
           8 ommittee would report to Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff,
    tion.
    Director of NASA 0 c of Advanced Research and Technology,
                         5a
    through Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of Biotechnology and
    Human Research in OART. (NASA Release 63-82)
 NASA Acting Director of Ofc of Applications, Leonard Jaffe., ap-
                              fie
    peared before Senate Committee on Aeronautiml and Space Sci-
    ences, reviewing NASA programs of communications systems,
    meteorological systems, and future applications satellites.
       Describing division of responsibility between public interest
     (NASA) and Communications Satellite Corp., Mr.Jaffe said that
    ‘ eventually, perhaps” NASA would find way to develop necessary
      ower for bouncing radio and TV signals off satellites to “a very
    farge area of the earth.” Such transmissions would be beyond
   scope of ComSatCor and be ond its charter as common carrier
                      kP.2
    for broadcasters.     et Com atCorp. might benefit from NASA-
    developed technolo ,particularly in development of tremendous
                     $Y nder Communications Satellite Act, Mr. Jaffe
    p w e r supplies.
    said, NASA retained responsibility to cooperate with ComSatCorp.
    and to advise other Federal agencies on the subject, such obliga-
    tions requiring NASA to maintain independent research capabilit
    in communications satellites. (Testimony; Wash. Pwt, 4/27/633
 Testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space
    Sciences, Edmond C. Buckley, Director of ~ ~ 5 Office of Tracking
                                                      .4
    and Data Acquisition, described basic support job that trackin
    and data acquisition provide to NASA’s ht projects, indicate%
                                              fli
    major additional resources required, anc f concluded that “the
    success of the [space flight] mission depends on our ability to
    communicate, to receive telemetered data, to track, and to com-
    mand.” (Testimony)
 Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Vtah) announced he had asked
    Senate Committe on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to investi-
    gate complaint from three xientists that NASA was using “coer-
    cion” to recruit scientists. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
 Floyd L. Thompson, Director of N-WA Langley Research Center,
    announced he had formally accepted on NASA s behalf custody of
164           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

      110 acres of Government land at Oyster Point, Newport News, Va.,
      for use as site of Space Radiation Effects Laboratory being estab-
      lished by NASA. (Langley Release)
Aprilg6: NASA Langley Research Center announced award of contract
      to Univ. of Virgmia for developing “research apparatus and
      techniques for laboratory studies of drag on satellites.” Under
      one-year contract, U. of Va. would develop suitable laboratory
      equipment and make laboratory measurements of molecular im-
      pact forces exerted on samples of spacecraft materials. (Langley
      Release)
  NASA Ames Research Center selected three companies for negotiation
      of contracts to study solar probe project-General Electric Co.
      Missile and Space Div., Martin-Marietta Co., and Philco Corp.
      Each contract would call for four-month study providing “infor-
      mation in depth for the procurement of any future Solar Probe
       spacecraft, should the program become fully authorized.” (Ames
      Release 63-19)
  World Meteorological Organization, meetin in Geneva, agreed to
                                                 %
      establish ‘‘world weather watch” using U. . and Soviet meteoro-
       logical satellites and a network of meteorological centers, in at-
       tempt to make possible long-range weather predictions on global
       scale. www would use world centers, regional centers, and na-
       tional centers, world centers being located in Washington, Moscow,
       and in as-yet-undetermined site in Southern Hemis here. Re-
                                                             K
         ‘onal centers-in New York, MOSCOW, Delhi, To yo, Frank-
                                                 New
      Ert,   Brasilia, Nairobi, and Melbourne-would (1) select data for
       analysis and forecasting on global scale and pass it on to world
       centers, and (2) disseminate appropriate data to national centers.
       Costs of program were expected to be covered by international
       organizations, but WMO also appealed to national governments.
        (Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
  Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysics
       Laboratory and editor of Science, criticized costs of landing men
       on the moon in this decade: “What we are witnessing is the ex-
       pansion of a new, sophisticated form of the prewar Public Works
       Administration. Science is being used as a ‘front’ for technologi-
       cal leaf-raking. . . .” Dr. Abelson was speaking at Univ. of
       Maryland. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/63, A l )
  U.S. and Japan exchanged notes summing up agreement to increase
       missile defenses in Japan. (Chic.Trib., 4/27/63)
A p r i l 97: NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in interview at
       Princeton Univ. alumni meeting in Washington that first manned
       flight in Project Gemini would not be made for at least a year.
       He attributed the slippage to “some difficulty with the utilization
       of Titan 11” and “some problems” with Gemini spacecraft. “No
       one can forecast now when we will fly Gemini.”
          On subject of Soviet space competition, Mr. Webb said : “With
       their existing rockets, they will probably be able to do a multi-
       manned flight around the earth a year hefore we will do that.”
        (Hines, Wash. Sm. Star, 4/28/63)
  Titan I1 missile launched for first time from underground silo, in
                                            Re-entry vehicle landed in pre-
       USAF test from Vandenberg AFB.
       selected target area and flight was described as a complete success.
        (UPI, W a h . Post, 4/28/63, Al)
                                                                   165
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

April 27: Robert J. Parks, Director of JPL Lunar and Planetarg Pro-
      am mas quoted as saying sterilization of lunar spacecraft no
    Enger appeared necessary, because “intense ultraviolet radiation
    on the surface of the moon would kill any microorganisms that
    mi ht be carried up from the earth.
       f1f a probe should dig beneath the surface, it is believed there
    would be no chance of contamination spreading.
      “These factors, coupled with the resent lack of an assured
                                           %
    method of achieving sterilization, ma e it appear that efforts to
    sterilize Ranger VI may be unnecessary.” He emphasized that
    planetary probes would, however, be sterilized. (L.A. Times,
    Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
 Explosions at Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory, Rocket Center, W.
    Va.,.with three men resumed dead and 10 others injured. EX-
    plosion occurred in Building used for processing chemicals, de-
    stro ing buildin and several large trailers. ABL is Navy-owned
        9
    faci ity, primariyy a research center for solid-rocket propellants,
    operated by Hercules Powder Co. Cause of explosion was not
    immediately known. (Wash. Swn. Star, 4/28/63)
 Daniel Webster,20th U.S. Polaris missile-firing submarine, launched
    at Groton, Conn. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/63)
April 28: COSMOS XVI launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit of 401-km.apo-
    gee, 207-km. perigee, 90.4-min. period, and 65’01’ inclination to
    equator. Tass said the satellite contained “scientific equipment
    intended to continue the space research in accordance with the
    program announced . . . March 16, 1962.” ( a s Pruudu,Ts,
    4/29/63,3 ;AFSS-T Trans.)
 Senator Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.), asked in televison interview
    about the pace of the U.S. manned lunar effort, said: “I think
    we might move forward a little more slowly, but I do believe that
    those who control space, in the years to come, will control the
    world.” (“Meet the Press,” NRCF--TV,4/28/63!
April 29: NASA Deputy Director Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, at U.S. Na-
    tional Committee of International Scientific Radio Union meeting
    in Washington, referred to recent criticism of Project Apollo by
    scientists who had char ed that scientific returns from manned
    lunar landing program %d not justify $20 billion cost : “They’ve
    been setting up a straw man and knocking it down. . . . No
    one in NASA had ever said the program was decided upon solely on
    the basis of scientific return. . . .” He described the manned
    lunar program as ‘‘a technological program, though it does have
    some science content,” and said it, like overall US.space program,
    was d e s i g d t o p this country “mastery and pre-eminence” in
    space.       owle ge gained through Project Apollo, in rocket
    techniques as well as biosciences, would help pre are U.S. “for
    whatever we are called upon to do for both civil anI f military uses”
    of space. (AP, Balt. S n 4/30/63)
                            w,
 I n editorial on “Apollo and Its Critics,” Aviation Week and Space
    Technolog Editor Robert Hotz said : “Like all great pioneering
               I
    ventures, t e Apollo manned lunar landing program is the target
    of a continual barrage of carping. This anti-Apollo chorus usu-
    ally reaches a crescendo in the spring, when the National Aero-
166           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   nautics and Space Administration budget is facing significant
   congressionl decisions, and dwindles to a barely audible pianis-
   simo after eve successful U S . and Russian manned space flight.
                  X
       “This year t e critics’ chorus is louder than ever and studded
    with many familiar faces ranging from ex-president Eisenho\yer,
    who still wishes the space age would dry up and blow away, to an
   esoteric wing of the scientific community which appears to be
    disturbed b the fact that non-scientist types, such as engineers
    and pilots, %ave crept into the space program and are running
    their portion of it with vigor and enthusiasm directed toward
    specific goals that some scientists regard as unseemly. . . .
       “The scientific community has traditionally provided the most
    solid opposition to the manned space flight program, but there has
   been a steady rate of conversion from critics to supporters during
   the Mercury years. This has been helped by the fact that it has
   become obvious that NASA does not intend to neglect scientific ex-
   ploration because of the Apollo priority. As the NASA program
   has unfolded with the years, it has become apparent that consider-
    able scientific exploration by instrumented satellites and probes is
   a necessary preliminary to extending the parameters of manned
    space flight. I t is also evident that manned space flight itself
    will offer a greater opportunity for scientific exploration of the
    universe than could ever be possible using only remotely controlled
   instruments and data transmission . . . . There are a great many
    valid, vital reasons why this nation must continue to press its
    exploration of space at the maximum feasible pace.
       “We intsnd to discuss them as the Apollo debate continues.
    But for the moment, there is no better summation of the purpose
    in this national effort than that stated by Braiiierd Holmes, NASA’s
    director of manned space flight and the chief engineer of the
        0110 program, when he said in a recent speech :
      A


     “‘If we do not make these efforts me will not be first on the
    moon, we will not be first in space and one day soon we will not be
   the first on earth.’ ” (Aw.   Wh.,4/29/63,17)
Apm’ZB: AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, speaking at Centennial
   Charter Day Convocation, Univ. of Massachusetts, said : “If we
   look back a number of centuries to the Middle Ages, we find that
   man and society in the Western World were dominated by rather
   static concepts. The individual was born into a world that was
   essentially unchanging by our standards. He was not very im-
   portant. Poverty, disease, toil, and natural calamities were
   simply an inevitable part of life. He accepted the proffered
   explanations of the world and the universe, and his curiosity was
   not encouraged. Man was a fearful and superstitious plaything
   of his environment. The concept that man might improve his
   lot was not widely considered. Nor were the tools at hand for
   such a task.
      “The beginning of the changes in this outlook are generally
   identified with the Renaissance and the Reformation. The
     uestioning and inquisitive human spirit could not be stifled
               Men began to question old forms and beliefs-in reli-
   !orever.
   gion, pplitics, and the law; in art and literature; and in science
   and phlosophy.
                                                                   167
                                      AERONAUTICS, 19631
                ASTRONAUTICS   ANI)


       “The rocess of breaking out of a closed world and liberating
            B
    the min was a slow one, and it is by no means complete. There
    were many landmarks, established by many brave men in all walks
    of life, on the route to liberation. An example was the overthrow,
    by the evidence produced by Copernicus and Galileo, of the dog-
    matic concept that the earth is the center of the universe. It is
    difficult for us today to estimate the impact, on a closed s stem
    of thought, of the knowledge that the earth and the other fanets
                                                               P
    revolve around the sun. I f such an important belief cou d fall,
    were not others vulnerable? While science was opening man’s
    eyes to the truth of his surroundings, a change was 111 the making
    concernin the concept of &an himself. The themes of individual
    rights an3 freedom were being developed in the period of the
    enlightenment and the first crystallization of these revolutionary
    ideas was in the American Revolution-the first revolution of
    which I am to speak to you today. Beginning with the Declara-
    tion of Independence and culminating with the adoption of the
    Constitution, the place of the State mas confined to protecting the
    rights of the individual and becoming the instrument for man’s
    self-government . . . .
       “The freedom to embrace new ideas, the concept that men need
    not accept miserable conditions of life, and the hope inherent in
    science, unleashed as never before the economic energies of man.
    Our second revolution, the industrial revolution, and the rise of
    science and technology, saw a beginning of the realization of . . .
    a huge increase in industrial and agricultural production a t a cost
    of less total labor, the conquest of many diseases, the lengthening
    of life, the improvement of health . . . .
       “As we now enter the early stages of the scientific revolution-
    our third revolution-the full flower of creative evolution is burst-
    ing upon us. Yet’powerful as the forces of science and tech-
    n o l w have already demonstrated themselves to be, relatively
    speaking we are only beginning to feel their influence. Our
    Nation and the world are committed to an accelerating cycle of
    knowledge-gathering and knowledge-exploitation. We cannot
    visualize in detail the consequences for the future. We can, how-
    ever, clearly see that we can, if we have the wisdom, create an
    environment essentially of our own choosin . The scientificrevo-
                                               B
    lution can provide for the essential needs o men around the globe.
    Our small world will grow smaller. A t the same time our per-
    spective will be broadened unimaginabl: by the exploration of
    space. We can only guess at the distant impact of this dynamism
    on man, his institutions, the content of thought and the quality
    of life. We can be sure, however, that successful adaptation to
    the changin environment can be achieved, in an atmosphere of
                 f
    freedom, on y through advancement of men generally to higher
    levels of education . . . . (Text, in CB,4/29/63,6847-49)
                                 ”
A p d 29: Addressin the Senate space committee,. Deputy Defense
                     7
    Secretary Roswel Gilpatric summed up DOD’S philosophy on space :
       “The United States has a single national space program. . . .
    Space, like other mediums, affords useful and often unique ways
    for achieving defense objectives. Some of these are by no means
168           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    uniquely militmy . . . similar remarks would apply to machines
    and devices used in the air, on land and on m,.and space is no
    exception. . . . As a corollary to these observatlons, the totality
    of our military space efforts, assessed from a national rather than
    a departmental standpoint, greatly exceeds the efforts of the
    Department of Defense alone. Space systems and devices are not
    simply military o r non-military merely because they are developed
                ncy or another.” (M&R,5/6/63)
              eneral Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air
    Force Systems Command, testifying before the House Science and
    Astronautics Committee, said that the Air Force was reviewing
    its space program, at the request of Defense Secretary McNamara,
    to determine how the Air Force might better achieve its military
    mission capabilities. Stressing the importance of both the Mih-
    tary Orbital Development Station (MODS) and Aerospace Plane
     (ASP), he said that MODS was ‘bof fundamental importance to
    achieving various military capabilities in space, both manned
    and unmanned.” (M&R,        5/6/63)
  Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity (USAF) ,DCS Systems and Logistics, Hq.
    USAF, testifying before the Subcommittee on DOD Appropriations
    of the House Appropriations Committee, stated that USAF was
      oiiig to modify as space boosters at least 15 of the 64 Thor IRBM’S
    feing withdrawn from the U.K. but was dismantling the 45
    Jupiter missiles that were withdrawn from Turkey and Italy.
    Rep. Daniel J. Flood (D.-Penn.) recalled that this Subcommittee
    had been in the thick of the original Thor-Ju iter controversy,
                                                     B
    asked “what is the peculiar, special, and signi cant and distinct
    thing about the Thor missile which would argue that 15 at least be
    modified” while Jupiter missiles were being discarded as “gar-
    bage.” Gen. Gerrity replied that the reason was quantity rather
    than quality. that USAF had had more experience with Thor, and
    “We have launch facilities for the Thor but do not have launch
    facilities for the Jupiter.” Rep. Flood pressed Gen. Gerrity on
    ;‘the marked physical distinction [between Thor and Jupiter]
    which would rush you into this conclusion ?” The General did
    not recall a marked distinction. Rep. Flood asked “did NASA
    twist your arm and insist they get Thor instead of Jupiter?” Gen.
    Gerrity said he knex “of no such circumstances.” ( D O D Appro-
      riatiom Eearings, House, 88th Congress, 1st Session, Pt. 5,973-
      h,
  Four-day meeting of US. National Committee of the International
     Scientific Radio Union opened in Washington. Six of the seven
     technical commissions met in simultaneous sessions at National
     Academy of Sciences. (NAG-NRC Release)
dpri.2 30: NASA launched two Deacon-Judi meteorological sounding
     rockets from Coopers Island, Bermuda, first in series of tests “to
     measure atmospheric winds and density at altitudes above con-
     ventional balloon level up to about 300,000 feet.” Data from
     these tests would be used in support of AEC experiment to be
     launched by NASA four-stage Scout vehicle from Wallops Island,
     Va., on planned re-entry south of Bermuda, objective of such ex-
     periment being to obtain test data on designing nuclear space re-
                                                               169
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    actor to break apart and disintegrate upon atmospheric re-entry.
     (Wallops Release 63-43)
April 30: Contract award for two Apollo mission simulators, for
    trainin astronauts from launch through lunar orbit and return
    to e &
         a , was announced by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center.
    Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., was selected by North Amer-
    ican Aviation’s Space Systems Div. to develop and install the two
    spacecraft simulators, one at MSC in Houston and one a t Atlantic
    Missile Range. (MSC Release 63-79)
 Stephen J. Grrllo, Director of NASA Headquarters’ Administrative
    Services since 1960, died.
 I n speech reprinted in the Gong. Record, William 0. Bennett, VP
    for research and engineerin of the Bulova Watch Co., cited 145
                              f
    examples of “technological allout” from space research that have
    been produced in consumer byproducts. He also
    development of the electronic timepiece (not deve
    resenrch) powered by a mercury cell which
    families of satellites. (CR,4/30/63, A2595-96)
 Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman of AEC, testifymg before Senate
    Committee on ,Qeronautical and Space Sciences, said :
       “We expect other space nuclear power units (the RNAP devices)
    to be arailable to provide continuing life support power for
    bases on the moon and orbiting space stations, power for un-
    manned missions to other planets, solar probes, or other missions
    using ion propulsion, and surveillance and communications satel-
    lites of any s u e or power range.
       “Therefore, our pro a m in space nuclear power units are di-
                          T
    rected toward the deve opment of nuclear units varying in power
    capacity from a few watts to megawatts, varying rn operational
    lifetimes from several days to several years, and varying in
    weight from less than five pounds to over a thousand
    pounds. . . .”
       Also testifying were Harold B. F n e ,Director of NASA Nu-
                                         igr
    clear Systems and Manager of Joint AEC-NASA Space Nuclear
    Propulsion Office; Richard L. Kirk, SNAP Program Director,
    AEC; and Dr. Frank K. Pittman, Director of AEC Division of Re-
    actor Development. (Transcript)
 House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on
    Applications and Tracking and Data Aquisition resumed hear-
    ings on NASA F Y 1064 budget authorization, with testimony by
    Dr. Joseph V. Cha k, President of Communications Satellite
    Corp., and Leo D. %el&, Chairman. Asked whether ComSat
    Corp. would conduct its own R&D or depend upon NASA-sponsored
    research, Mr. Welch said, “We Ian to do both. We plan to
    contract for design studies, [andfwe obviously plan to take ad-
    vantage of the work done by NASA.”
       Mr. Welch said space communications system ma link US.,
    Europe, Japan, and Latin America, by 1967. Dr. 8haryk said
    ComSatCorp. expected initial planning to take about a year and
    development of hardware about another three years. (NAEA
    Leg.Act. Rpt. 11/63 ;AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 5/1/63)
     71
      4-   -
           1
           2
170                                                    1963
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

A M 3 0 : DOD announced U.S. would deploy ICBM’s rate of one a day
                                                      at
    during rest of 1963. Announcement came as 100th Minuteman
    site was turned over to SAC at Malmstrom AFB, Mont. (DOD Re-
    lease 612-63)
  USAF fired Minuteman ICBM from underground silo at Vandenberg
    AFB ((with complete success,” fourth successful firing of Minute-
    man from West Coast in past four weeks. (DOD Release 616-63;
    UPI, Wash.Post, 5/1/63)
During April: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center issued requests for
     proposals for preliminary study contracts on (1) rotating manned
    space station to house 18 crewmen; (2) non-rotating, zero-grav-
     ity station to house 25-30 crewmen ; (3) reusable logistics vehicle.
      (M&R, 4/29/63,18)
  NASA Manned S acecraft Center completed eighth of series of drop
     tests on storal! le gliding parachute. (M&R, 4/22/63, 13)
  Dr. John V. Harrington of MIT Lincoln Laboratory was selected to
     direct new MIT space research center, to be completed in 1965.
     Dr. Harrington was also named professor in departments of elec-
     t,rical engineering and aeronautics and astronautics. (Boston
     Eve. Globe, 4/23/63)
  Writing in Hypnosis Quarterly, Frank M. Frazitta said astronaut
      trained in self-hypnosis could alleviate pain and discomfort dur-
      ing space flights. I n event of air-conditioning unit’s failure, self-
     hypnosis could be used to lessen astronaut’s perspiration rate or
     make him feel cooler or warmer. (M&R, 4/8/63, 21)
  NASA awarded four-month study contracts for Synchronous Mete-
     orological Satellite to Radio Corp. of America and Hughes Air-
     craft. RCA would study camera resolution requirements in syn-
     chronous-orbit weather satellite and ways to modify Tiros satel-
     lite launched into highly eccentric orbit (about 22,000 mi. apogee
     and 200-300-mi. perigee). Hughes would study way in which a
      Syncom communications satellite could be modified for installa-
      tion of weather satellite cameras. (M&R, 4/22/63, 10)
   Wind-tunnel studies to evaluate aerodynamic d r a i and jet engine
      mass air-flow characteristics with 3/10-scale mo el of free-flight
      lunar landing test vehicle were begun at NASA Langley Research
      Center. Model was built at NASA Flight Research Center. Data
       from Langley tests would be supplied to Bell Aerosystems Co.,
      building two full-scale lunar landing research vehicles under con-
       tract from Flight Research Center. (Av.Wk.,       4/22/63, 77)
   Preliminary results of the first lunar contact with the new Lincoln
      Laboratory high-resolution radartelescope were reported at the
       44th annual meeting of the American Geo hysical Union by Ver-
                                                  I:
       non L. Lynn. The report was jointly aut ored with M. D. Sohi-
       gian and E. A. Crocker, also of Lincoln Laboratory. Lynn said
       that the first radar reflections from the lunar surface obtained at
       a frequency of 35,000 mc., more than four times that of previous
       radar probes, su gest that the moon’s surface is fairly rough
                        f
       with respect t o t e dimensions of the 8.6-mm. waves employed.
       I n addition to the advantage of being able to view a smaller area
       than previously possible, the new. radartelescope would provide
       data on the absorption and reflection characteristics of the lunar
                                                                       171
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 31

    surface at a new wavelength, offering additional clues to its com-
    position and roughness. (Av.         Wk.,5/6/63,91)
During -4pri7: Alexander Bakunin, Soviet Vice-Minister for Com-
    munications, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. mould soon launch
    synclironous system of communications STtellites for transmittin
                                                                          8
    television worldwide. Using Cosmos satellites, the service woul
   be called “cosmosvision.” ( N d R , 4/8/63,9)
 Gaston Palewski, French Minister for Scientific Research, said in
   meeting of Space Council of France that France had fired more
    than 30 rockets in two-year period 1959-61. (AP, Y T , 4/24/N
    63, 7)
 Space orbital simulator, designed to simulate conditions 200-mi. high
    with temperature as low as -320’ F, was shipped from manu-
    facturer, Tenney Engineering, Inc., to University of Rome. De-
     vice was believed to be first such ai-ailable to Western European
    scientists. ( N Y T , 4/7/63)
 RABD Corp. report on communications satellites estimated that world-
    wide revenues from international communications would reach
    $210 million by 1965, $350 million by 1970, and $620 million by
     1975. Large part of these revenues mould come from undersea
    cables. ( N P T , 4/24/63)
 F. J. Krieger, RAND Corp. specialist on Soviet astronautics, said in
    report for usm Project Rand that Soviet Cosmos satellites prob-
    ably are “para-military” spacecraft of two types: (1) recoverable
    vehicle as large as Vostok spacecraft and (2) 4,400-lb., non-re-
    coverable vehicle launched from another site and with different
     booster. Krieger also stated his belief that U.S.S.R. had six
     attempted probe launchings end in failure between August 25
     and January 4 caused by inability to get fourth stage out of park-
    in orbit. First three were attempted Venus robes; next two,
                                                       B
     &&rs probes; last oiie moon probe. (RAND X emorandum RM-
    S~~SS-FR iri A u. VA.,    $3/‘29/’63,~j
                                                               r
 Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson,. speaking editorial1 in Astro-
     mutics and Aerospnce Engineer2ng magazine, Apri 1963, em-
     phasized that : “AS satellites extend man‘s vision into new dimen-
     sions, weather forecasting will make major advances as a science,
     until we see reliable predictions a Season ahead.
       “This Kill have far-reaching economic benefits for all. Follow-
     ing are some estimates of cost-savings, assuming that we can
     predict weather accurately on1 five days in advance: $234 billion
                                     T
     a year in agriculture; $45 mi lion in the lumber industy; $100
     million in surface transportation; $75 million in retail mar eting;
     and $3 billion in n-ater-resources management. These estimates
     of savings are for just the United States. Worldwide benefits
     would be many times as great.” (A&AE,Apr., 1963)
  Dr. Barry Commoner, Prof. of Plant Physiology at Washington
     Univ., St. Louis, said in speech before convention of National
     Science Teachers Association in Philadelphia that U.S. scientific
     research was becoming too “mission oriented.”
        “In 1962 about one-third of the total federal obligation for
     basic research-and federal funds are nom the major source of
     support for basic s c i e n c w a m e from a single agency, the National
172           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   Aeronautics and Space Administration. I n a total federal budget
   of about $900 million for basic research, NASA was obligated to
   provide $350 million, while the National Science Foundation pro-
   vided under $90 million . . . .
       ‘ W e are engaged in a spectacular balancing act. Education is
   supported by science, science by space, and space by the man on
   the moon . . . [The] policy of supporting education through
   science and science through space is dangerously unsound . . . . We
   should recognize this policy for what it is-a short-sighted, pinch-
    penny effort to buy a few selected fruits of the tree of knowled
                                                                      T’
    without accepting the honest responsibility of nourishing t e
    whole living, growing organism.” ( N Y T , 4/7/63 ; St. Louis
   Post-Dispatch, 4/7/63)
During April: William A. Hyman, internationally known trial law-
    yer and author of “The Magna Carta of Spa-The           Legal Lode-
    star,” speaking at the Inter-American Bar Association in
    Panama, said:
       “The Space Committee of the United Nations has failed to
    give due consideration and take appropriate action on the im-
    portant question of sovereignty and security as they become in-
    volved in the use of space.” (CR,    6/27/63, A4133-34)
 Dr. John R. Pierce, executive director of research and communica-
    tions principles/systems divisions of Bell Telephone Laboratories,
    said at ceremony dedicating John Crerar Library at Illinois In-
    stitute of Technology that use of computers for document re-
    trieval “would smother the user under a flood of information and
    misinformation it would produce.” One of first men to suggest
    feasibility of communications satellites, Dr. Pierce acknowledged
    the value of computers for library indexin but added : “If I have
                                               B
      ainted a rather gloomy picture of the re ations of computers to
    Ebraries, I have done so deliberately . . . to counteract the sadly
    fanciful picture that has been painted by some irresponsible
    people.” (Au. Wk.,     4/29/63,74)
 The April issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, included
    an article by Dr. Robert E. Marshak, entitled “Reexaminin
                                                                  f  the
    Soviet Scientific Challenge.” I n this article, Dr. Marshak, c air-
    man of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the Uni-
    versity of Rochester, pointed out that Soviet preeminence in space
     does not necessarily mean that the U.S.S.R. has “achieved a
    decisive scientific and technological supremacy.” Comparing the
    “closed” economic and political structure of Soviet Russia with
    its controlled educational system to the “open” society of the
    United States, he suggested that the Soviet system was geared
    to the more tangible results of applied science while the United
    States had made greater strides in pure science.
        “Soviet space triumphs are due to an early and precise delinea-
    tion of a major national goal in applied science and a most de-
    tailed and deliberate organization of the wherewithal to achieve it.
        “. . . I believe that our [the United States’] undoubted leader-
    ship in pure science will continue to be nurtured by the openness,
     freedom, and free enterprise spirit which characterize our society.
    Our accomplishments in pure science will provide a vast reservoir
                                                                     173
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    of ideas for important achievements in applied science, and our in-
    nate good sense and good mill lead to a voluntary rational measure
    of coordination and control in those areas which are indispensable
    for the achievement of our national objectives in applied science.
    I believe that the Soviet methods of strict supervision and control
    will lead to numerous short-range breakthroughs in applied sci-
    ence but that the momentum will not be sustained unless there
    are also significant advances in their pure science. A great im-
    provement in the quality of these achievements will de end u
    their ability to full establish the conditions of scientiz free$omn
                         9
    which are essentia for highly creative work in pure science.
       “. . . If the Soviet Government comes to realize-and I believe
    that the Russian scientists already do-that scientific and political
    freedom go hand in hand and that it is difficult to guarantee scien-
    tific freedom without a major liberalization of Soviet society in all
    its aspects, there is bound to be a great efflorescenceof pure s5ience
    in the Soviet Union. And if a large measure of political freedom
    is established in the Soviet Union, it is quite likely that we shall
   be sending our American astronauts together with their Russian
    counterparts on joint expeditions to the moon and other celestial
    objects beyond.” (CR,5/27/63,9036-38)
During April: Air Force launched an Atlas F with a Chrysler-built
    nose cone on a 5,000-mile flight from Cape Canaveral to the vicin-
    ity of Ascension Island in a continuation of the Advanced Ballis-
   tic Re-entry System (Abres) test program. The flight, which
    largely duplicated the initial Abres test of Mar. 1, was described
    as “highly successful.” (M&R,       5/6/63,11)
 Dr. Samuel J. Rabinowitz was appointed Deputy Director for Bal-
    listic Missile Defense in WD Advanced Research Project Agency.
    Dr. Rabinowitz was formerly with Columbia Univ. Electronic
    Research Laboratories. (M&R, 4/8/63,10)
 NASA submitted the following written answer to Smnte Cnmmittee
    on Aeronautical and S ace Sciences in response to question raised
                             &
    by Senator Margaret        ase Smith on the contamination problem
    in space exploration :
       “Present plans for lunar spacecraft are to use assembly tech-
    niques in clean rooms and under environmental conditions similar
    to surgical onerating facilities. These procedures will not make
    the spacecraft sterile but are expected to reduce the total popula-
    tion of viable organisms by orders of magnitude below otherwise
    expected quantitites. As stated earlier, the natural environment
    of the Moon is believed suitably hostile to the propagation of
    Earth-like organisms to such an extent that, any contamination
    will be contained in very local areas.” (Committee Hearings,
   NASA Authorization for Fiscal Year 196‘4-Part I, 598)
                             MAY 1963
M a y I : Testifyin before House Subcommittee on Manned Space
     Flight, NASA %eputy Associate Administrator and Director of
     Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes said that “the present
     Gemini is a different program than the one with which we
     started. It had two fundamental purposes originally which we
     have not given up and which we still consider to be of paramount
     importance-to gain experience in prolonged weightlessness and
     to gain experience in rendezvous before Apollo . . . .
        “However, as we developed the Gemini program, we found it
     was not wise to have only an updated Mercury spacecraft. W e .
     found as we developed the subsystems for Gemini that it was
     much wiser to incorporate technology known today-not some-
     thing that was early developmental technology of the past. This
     concept would lead us step by step toward Apollo, and we would
     reap tremendous benefits from it. I n addition . . . it became
     quite apparent to us that this would be a very useful Earth
     orbitalspacecraft . . . .
        “In developing the Gemini subsystems, we find that they are
     better and more sophisticated than initially conceived and the
     spacecraft is much more sophisticated than anticipated. There-
     fore, the costs tend to be higher and the time scales longer . . . .
        “We had planned to have the first manned Gemini flight the
     second flight, during the first quarter of 1964. Our present plan
     is that the first manned flight in the series would not be until
      the fourth quarter of 1964. Our current plan grew in part from
     the advisability of having more sophisticated subsystems, which
     required more time, and in part from a reorientation of the pro-
        am to include a second unmanned flight before the manned
     Ksht . . . .
         . . . the Titan I1 . . . has had some developmental problems
     over and above what we had anticipated. However, the problems
      are always encountered in a developmental program. I n our
     o inion it will be safer to use the Titan I1 for manned flights
     P
     i we have two structural missions. We will have more time to
     eliminate the developmental problems . . . .
        “We are planning an unmanned flight at the end of this year
     and about the middle of next year. We plan to have a manned
     flight in the last quarter of 1964 . . . .” (Transcript)
  Senator Russell Long (D.-La.) introduced bill (S. 1436) “to pre-
     scribe with greater particularity the conditions under which pro-
      prietary interests of the United States in inventions may be
      waived pursuant to section 305 of the National Aeronautics and
      Space Act of 1958.” Rill was referred to Senate Committee on
     the Judiciary. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/64)
       174
                                                                    175
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

May 1 :NASA Launch Operations Center reorganization announced.
   Operating under interim organization since it became operational
   J u l 1962, LOC now had 14 offices and divisions reporting directly
   to d fc of the Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, and a Deputy Di-
         fi a
   rector and four Assistant Directors. (LOG SpacepoTt News,
   5/1/63)
 NASA Ames Research Center announced award of contract to Thiokol
                                            test device,” to be part of
                                             nom under construction at
                                              test, and deliver the mind
                                          light gas gun to test designs
   tunnel structure, to be u&ith
   for manned orbiting s acecraft, vehicles returning from moon
                             P
   and planets, and ssib y vehicles entering atmospheres of other
   planets. (Ames &ease 63-20; NASA Release 63-89)
                                                          Affairs, Walter
 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Indust
   L. Lin le, Jr., reviewed NASA procurement pzcies before Na-
           8
   tional apitol Section of American Institute of Aeronautics and
   AsQonautics (A IAA) : “It is our objective in NASA to have one
   overriding objective in all of our procurement policies; and that
   is so to make our contracts that we will achieve the hi hest stand-
   ards in reliability and systems performance . . . .,’ (5ext)
 Dr. Eugene B. Koneoci, NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human
   Research, said in Los Angeles pres interview that NASA planned
   to use balloons to float men for 30 days or more in sealed capsules
   at 100,000-ft.+altitudes. Such experiments would tast life sup-
   port systems for future manned spacecraft. (AP, Wash. Eve.
   Star, 5/1/63)
 NASA-sponsored meeting with repr€!x?ntatires from labor and man-
   agement held in Gulfport, Miss., with more than 100 men repre-
   senting 30 organizations a t the session t o work o u t advance agree-
   ments on wages, hours, and working conditions for workers
   involved in construction of NASA Misskippi Twt.Fncility. Meet-
    ing was “ i s such conference ever sponsored by the Federal
                frt
   government in advance of the award of a construction contract.”
    (N.Y. Eer& T d . , 4/28/63)
 New York Times reported Australian scientists had established
   charred metal sphere found in western New South Wales had
   come from “a space vehicle of some sort.” Australian Gov-
   ernment was trying to determine original owner of the object,
    about 15-in. in diameter and 10-lb. in weight. ( N P T , 5/1/63,6)
 Titan I ICBM exploded durin attempted launching at Vandenberg
           USAF spokesman s a i f n o one was injured and damage to
   AFB.
   silo launch facility appeared slight. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/2/63;
   DOD Release 624-63)
 A. M. Nowitsky, Director of Spacecraft Sterilization, Lockheed Mis-
    siles & Space Co., said in speech before Aerospace Medical Asso-
   ciation m:eting in Los Angeles that sterilization of lunar space-
   craft \.i-ns essential to prevent contamination of moon and to detect
    any organisms on the moon : “For millions of years the moon has
   been a rulnerabls target in the path o extraterrestrial debris,
                                                f
    possibly organic, bacterial and living-possibly disease-causing
176                                                1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    and preserved in a state highly acclimated to unfavorable en-
    vironmental extremes.
       “If such forms do exist and are in any way dangerous or de-
    structive, their early detection-would prove vital to man’s future
    planetary exploration and the protection of earth from mutual
    contamination.” (Miles, L A . Times,   5/2/63)
May 1: France’s General Jean Thiry announced France would build
    nuclear test center on Mururoa Atoll, in Pacific Ocean near Tahiti.
    (Middleton, NYT, 5/2/63)
 International Association of Machinists (IAM) postponed scheduled
    nationwide strike against Boeing Co. after receiving telegram
    from President Kennedy and revised contract proposal from Boe-
    ing. Union set vote on new proposal for May 10. (AP, NYT,
    5/3/63, 14)
 Dr. William M. Helvey, Chief of Space Environment and Life Sci-
    ences Laboratory, Republic Aviation Cor told American Medi-
                                              P”
    cal Association in Los An eles that test vo unteers exposed to pure
                              %
    oxygen in altitude cham er during four two-week periods had
    developed anemia but remained otherwise healthy. [Science
    Service, Wash. Dail New.s,5/1/63)
 Brig. Gen. Samuel C. shillips (USAF) ,Director of Minuteman Pro-
    gram, said at Norton AFB that the U.S. ICBM had “achieved more
    than was asked in all respects, including range and payload.’’
     (Dighton, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/1/63)
 A F Weapons Laboratory at Kirtland AFB, N.M., was assigned to
    AFSC’S Research and Technology Div. (RTD), Bolling AFR, Va.
     (AFSC Operational Highlights, 11)
 I n address at dedication of General R.H . Arnold advanced range
     instrumentation ship (ARIS) , Cape Canaveral, General B. A.
     Schriever (USAF) said :
        “Instrumentation is a key element of technology in the Space
     Age. It plays a crucial role in the rapid progress of our research
     and development efforts, through the provision of more complete
    and accurate information on test results. As a result. far fewer
    tests are required than was formerly the case . . . .” Comparing
    the 2,500 test firings of V-2 to the less than 50 of Thor IRRM, he
    said: “Better instrumentation is a major factor in this dramatic
    reduction.”
       He recalled General Arnold’s foresight “demonstrated as far
     back as 1917,” when he and Charles Kettering worked on devel-
     opment of “The Bug” pilotless guided airplane-in many ways
    “25 years aheadof its time . . . .9 ,
       “Throughout his career ‘Hap’ Arnold was a pioneer of new
    ideas . . . .” I n 1938 he predicted development of variable-wing
    aircraft. I n 1944 he organized Army Air Forces Scientific Ad-
     visory Group under Dr. Theodore von KBrmBn, charging these
                 ‘’
     scientists to ‘think about supersonic speed airplanes, airplanes
     that would move and operate without crews, improvements in
     bombs . . .; communications systems . . . television, weather,
     medical research ; atomic energy, and any other phase of aviation
     which might affect the development and employment of the air
                         .’
     power to come . . . ” (Text, A F s c Release 35-R-36)
                                                                      177
                                                      1 9 6 3 ,‘
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

May 1 : Ground-breaking ceremony for new astrophysics and space
   research laboratory in Chicago, part of Enrico Fermi Institute
   for Nuclear Studies, Univ. of Chicago announced. (Chic. Trib.,
     4/28/63)
  The astronauts making the United States’ first two-man Gemini
     endurance space fLight next year would be aired for sound as
     never before-to a pair of small magnetic tape recorders regis-
     tering their physical and mental reactions second by second
     throughout the flight. (Space News Roundu 1/8/64, 2)
iKuy 2 -X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Joseph A. Galker to 209,400-
       .
     ft. altitude at speeds up to 3,488 mph (mach 4.73), in nine-minute
     flight from Mud Lake, Nev. Instrumentation mounted on air-
     craft’s tail measured radiation in ultraviolet and infrared s ctra.
     Secondary purpose of flight was evaluation of air flow over g - 1 5 ’ ~
     surface conducted at high angles of attack. ( m c Release)
  US. and Brazil announced signin of memorandum of under-
     standin for cooperation in satelfte studies of the ionosphere.
            %
     Signed y Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, and
     Aldo Vieira da Rosa, of Brazilian Commission for Space Activ-
     ities, agreement provided for establishment of three radio-
     receiving stations straddling geomagnetic equator-at Belem, San
     Jose dos Campos, and Natal. Initial project would involve read-
     out of telemetry data from S a 6 ionospheric satellite, to be
     launched by NASA in 1963. Under agreement, Brazil would build,
     equip, and operate stations with NASA lending scientific equip-
     ment. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/3/63)
  I n meeting of legal subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful
     Uses of Outer Space, Soviet delegate. Roland M.Timerbaev de-
     clared that it would be “delusion” to report to the Committee
     that any progress had been made during 28-nation subcommittee’s
     three-week session. Business before subcommittee had b e         en
                                                                      2nd
     & ~ ~ f ~ i n r rjeg-1
                 nf            CCX,T~~&CI %nom= nv@:ro,ticz z&&&
                                      6 r--” 7
     wnside&g of proposals concerning liability for space vehicle
     accidents and return of astronauts and spacecraft after emergencx
     landings in foreign territory. ( N Y T , 5/3/63,3)
  Three-stage solid-fueled We& German rocket launched from Cux-
     haven, Germany, reached =-mi. altitude and returned to earth
     by newly developed parachute technique. Rocket was designed
     by and launched under direction of Berthold Seliger, who called
     test “a partial su.ccess-I meant the thing to hit 93 miles high.”
     Seliger, Tho helped develop Germany’s V-1 and V-2 rockets, said
     new rocket vias developed from V-2. First ma’or German rocket
     launched since World War 1 :it would be used in space research
                                     1
     and possibly in development of antimissile missile. (UPI, Wash.
     Post, 5/3/63)
  Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Director of Advanced Research
     and Technology, said at Univ. of Minnesota Engineers’ Day Con-
     vocation that %I1 too often” the scientist “gets the credit for the
     work done by the engineer.” I n the space program, “the bound-
     ary line between science and engineering is often so fine as to be
     indistinguishable . . . .” (Text)
               178                                                1963
                              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

               May ?J: NASA Director of Procurement Ernest W. Brackett, testifying
                  before Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data
                  Acquisition of HOLW     Committee on Science and Astronautics,
                     said : “During fiscal year 1962, approximately 90% of funds ap-
                     propriated by the Congress were spent by contracts as compared
                     to 64% in fiscal year 1960. I n fiscal year 1964, the percentage
                     of funds going to contractors may increase further . . . . ,   9



               Speaking be ore a dinner of the ,Qmerican Association for Contam-
om i   t   s eT(
                   ination Control in Boston, Mass., Franklyn W. Philli S, director
                                                                          K
                   of NASA NEO, spoke of the proposed electronics r m r c center :
                      “We have seen nothing to date that would alter our original
                   proposal to place the [electronics] center in the greater Boston
                   area. The reasons we made the choice in the first place are as
                   valid now as they were then.
                      “Greater Boston represents the greatest concentration of elec-
                   tronics know-how in the country and is the logical place for this
                   center.” (Boston Herald, 5/3/63)
               President of Boeing Co. William M. Allen testified in closed hear-
                   ings before Senate Investi ations Subcommittee that Boeing’s
                   bid to build 23 TFX aircrafg was $148,000,000 less than that of
                                                 t
                   General Dynamics Corp., “yet we were downgraded by reason
                   of our lower rice. It was most disillusioning and discouraging
                                  R
                   to discover t at one of the principal reasons Boeing lost the
                   award was because our fixed-price bid was too low . . . . It has
                   been stated that our cost estimates were unrealistic, demonstrating
                   that we did not appreciate the complexities of develo ing the
                                                                              P
                   TFX . . . .” H e said Boeing developed its bid on basis o careful
                   calculations and was fully prepared to fulfill contract commit-
                   ments at quoted price of $482,000,000. (AP, N Y T , 5/3/63,1,14)
              M a y 3 : First drop test of Project Apollo earth landing system suc-
                    cessfully accomplished by Northrop Corp. for NASA Manned
                    Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft com-
                    mand module was released from modified G 1 3 3 cargo plane
                    and safely landed by cluster of three Northrop Ventura ringsail
                    parachutes. ( x s c Relwse 63- 85)
                Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in address
                    before State Convention of New Jersey Society of Professional
                    Engineers: “. . . activities in space itself, and in the complex
                    of supporting work that goes forward here on earth, draw upon
                    almost every branch of science and technology. I n the proc-
                    ess, the needs and interests of engineers and scientists are draw-
                    ing closer together, and the lines of cleavage between the various
                    disci lines are becoming less and less distinct . . . .
                      d o r e than ever before, engineering has become the full and
                    active partner of science in the exploration of this newest
                    frontier . . . .” (Text)
                NASA requested contractor proposals for lunar base concept study,
                    initiating 18-month broad lunar base study program to provide
                    detailed technical data to determine feasibility of a manned
                    lunar base. (NASA Release 63-91)
                                                                       179
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

M n y 3: Senator J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) said in Tufts Univ.
     William L. Clayton Lecture that Project Apollo should be aban-
     doned and money thus saved spent on down-to-earth causes such
     as education : “This allocation of priorities is a recipe for disaster,
     an unrecognized and poFerful endorsement of the wrong side of
     the race between education and catastrophe (Boston Globe,
   5/3/63,18)
 Revolutionary new helicopter, called XH-51A, was described in
   paper by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. engineers W. H. Statler, R. R.
   Heppe, and E. S. Cruz delivered at meeting of American Heli-
   copter Society, Washin&on. Built for Army and Navy, experi-
   mental craft was said t o be first helico ter t o fly with ease and
                                                f
   stability of an airplane b e c a b it emp oyed rigid mounting of
   rotor blades to shaft and three-armed gyroscopes linking pilot
   control sticks with rotor. (NPT,5/4/63,38)
 Dr. Eberhard Wahl, AWC scientist, announced development of Photo-
   type Optical Surveillance System-electro-optical telescope capa-
   ble of tracking spacecraft more than 3,000 mi. away. Telescope’s
   three main components: 27-in. optic for gathering light, electro-
   optical device for measuring light, and computer-command sys-
   tem for controlling tracking of satellites. (AP, NPT, 5/4/63,
   26)
May 4: I n space studies symposium at Argonne, Ill., Bernard I.
    Spinrad, Argonne National Laboratory scientist, redicted : “On
   the basis of techniques which in general we now l now, I believe
                                                        ?
   that the larger scale exploration of the solar system will in fact be
   undertaken from a base on the moon.” (AP, Newport News
    Times-Eerald, 5/4/63)
 National Academy of Engineering was being formed as an affiliate
   of National Acadgmy of Sciences, President of Engineers Joint
   Council Dr. Eric Walker announced. (Finney, NPT, 5/5/63,
   60)
May 5:        v ceased transmitting photographs after record 10%
         TIROS
   months of operation. Through orbit 4,579 on May 4, TIROS v had
   sent more than 57,857 cloud-cover pictures, 80% of which were
   usable for meteorological purposes. (NASA Release 63-93)
 Estimated 200 German scientists and technicians were working
   in Military Factory 333, Egyptian rocket center outside Cairo,
   according to Wmhington P o d s magazine Parade. (Parade,
   5/5/63)
May 6: JPL Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (DSIF) at Gold-
   stone, Calif., succeeded in bouncing radar signals off planet Mer-
   cury 60,500,000 mi. from earth. Travelin at speed of light, sig-
                                                    f
   nals took 1 min. to make trip from Go1 stone to Mercury and
               1
   back to Goldstone. Preliminary analysis of echo patterns indi-
   cated Mercury has rougher surface than Venus or Mars but same
   surface reflectivity as that of moon. Mercury experiment was to
   be conducted 12 hrs. per day May 6-29, at which time planet
   would move out of antenna’s range. (JPL TWX, 5/29/63 ;Narshall
   Star, 6/5/63, 5)
 NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced eight NASA astronauts
   were working with manned space flight simulator at Ling-Temco-
180                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,

     Vought, Dallas, evaluating manual control and instrument dis-
     play should the Apollo lunar excursion module’s primary p i d -
     ance system fail during descent to the moon. (MSC Release 63-81)
N a y 6: Interplanetary space simulation was achieved in a 6-ft.-wide,
     10-ft.-high-space tank at the NASA Lewis Research Center. This
     included solar simulation and vacuum of              torr. (Lewis
     Chronology, 3)
  USAF announced it would attempt second Project West Ford orbiting
     belt of 400 million copper filaments “in the near future.” First
     such attempt, Oct. 21, 1961, was unsuccessful because container
     failed to eject the needles. MIT Lincoln Laboratory, conducting
     experiment for USAF, said in fact sheet that “no other communica-
     tion method suggested to date, by satellite or otherwise, offers
     comparable reliability, in terms of global coverage with virtually
     complete invulnerability to destruction or jamming . . . .” (DOD
     Release 637-63; Finney, N Y T , 5/7/63, 29; Laurence, N Y T ,
     5/12/63, E9)
  Brig. Gen. Charles H. Roadman (USAF) , NASA Director of Aerospace
     Medicine, testified before House Committee on Science and Astro-
     nautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. Replying to
     press criticism of NASA plans to use pure oxygen in Project Gemini
     spacecraft, General Roadman said: “. . . in our investigations
     to date we have no physiological information that would permit,
     us to say that 100% oxygen from a physiological standpoint is
     contraindicated in a two-week mission. This is not to say that
     there are not many physiologists who would like more information
     concerning 100% oxygen over a time period, which we thoroughly
     support . . . .” (Transcript)
May 6-9: Third National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space
     held in Chicago.
        NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in keynote address May 6,
     cited recommendation by Iowa Summer Study that one or more
     scientists be included in Project Apollo lunar flights: “TOthose
     who have the responsibility for success in reaching the moon, it
     has appeared that the nature of the Apollo effort requires the
     training of astronauts who have substantial experience as test
     pilots in high speed jet aircraft, and to the extent possible engi-
     neering training as well.
        “Meanwhile, it is apparent that the view of the scientists that
     trained scientific personnel should participate is valid. and that
     at the earliest appropriate stage in the program scientists will
     be included on Apollo missions. So far as we can now tell we are
     oblignted to utilize astronauts with the maximum of test-flight
     experience and highly conditioned reflexes on the first flight of
     the most difficult of all undertakings. Should training and ex-
     perience in intermediate flights indicate otherwise we will, of
     course, take this into consideration in determining the stage of
     development in manned space flight at which a scientist-astronaut
     will directly articipate.
                8
        “In its e ort to insure maximum scientific benefit from the
     manned space flight program NASA is doing several things:
                                                                  181
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63,

   “First, manned space flights are being used to take scientific
measurements in order that they will provide results beyond crew
training and technological experience.
   “Second, efforts have already begun to provide scientific t n
                                                                 ininf
for the present group of astronauts including geological fie1
trips to enhance their capacity for scientific observation.
   “Third, a manned space science n-orking group has been estab-

            .’‘
lished [within NASA] . . . . This group is already at work in
the plannin of a program for training scientists for space
flight . . .           (Text)
   Dr. Darid H. Stoddard, Assistant Director of Medical Opera-
tions in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed human
factors in manned space flight and said “we are confident that
the biomedical needs of our currently approved manned space
flight program can be met from within the scope of our existing
technology.” (Text)
   Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems in NASA Office
of Manned Space Flight, reviewed US. manned space flight
program. Describing Project Gemini, he said: “. . . the Gemini
is more than an experimental spacecraft. At the end of its sched-
uled developmental flight rogram, i t will be available for mis-
sions ranging from scienti& and engineering experiments to the
ferrying of astronauts to and from a permanent space laboratory.
The end goal of Gemini is, therefore, an o erational spacecraft
                                               B
which can be launched by relatively small oosters. W e expect
Gemini to be a useful space vehicle for several years . . . . The
Gemini spacecraft will reach operational status by 1966 . . . .9,
 (Text)
   Capt. Robert F. Freita (USN), Director of Launch Vehicles
and Propulsion in NASA 0%Manned Space Flight, said :
                                    ce of i
   UThe nation’s program to achieve pre-eminence in space and
to i n w r e t h n t t h p T-lnitd States ownpies first place among the
nations of this world in science, in technology and in conquest
of space is critically dependent on the power of the rocket.
   “You may have heard much about the ‘booster gap’ and the
effect this situation has had on our position vis-a-vis the Soviet
Union. The Soviet ‘C’nion started well ahead of us in the develop-
ment of large rockets, so necessary for manned flight. The Soviets
h a w been ahead of us, and are still ahead of us in their ability tn
launch reliably large masses to Earth orbit.
   “However, with the acceleration of our o m progress and by
the establishment of our program on a sound engineering basis
we can, we believe. surDass the Soviets in time and clearly establish
and demonstrate ’Unhed States pre-eminence in marked space
flight. . . .” (Text)
   Reviewing NASA smce momam. Director of NASA O5ce of
Programs D”. D. W G t t s&d:‘%n its broadest context the NASA
program can be classified into three complementary parts. First,
we hare those phases of the program which are aimed at the
exploration of the very nature of space . . . .
   “The second major element of our program is aimed at the
earliest practical utilization of space for the benefit of man-
      ....
kmd
182             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

          “Complementing our programs to understand and define space
      is a third major program element aimed a t developing and improv-
      ing the highly complex technolo ies which will enhance our future
      capabilities in space . . . .” ( f e x t )
         John E. Naugle, Director of NASA Geophysics and Astronomy
      Programs, said: “. . . the scientific program which we have in
      NASA is a logical extension of the research work which has been
      underway in laboratories on the earth since the time of Galileo.
      Just as astronomers once carried their telescopes to the top of a
      mountain to see better, now we carry telescopes beyond the earth
      on rockets and satellites. By doing this we see entirely new
      phenomena and enable scientists to broaden their studies in cer-
      tain scientific disicplines . . . .” He then discussed scientific re-
      sults from each of the six scientific satellites launched by NASA
      since beginning of 1962 (os0 I, EXPLORER XIV, EXPLORER xv, ALOU-
      ETTE I, ARIEL, and EXPLORER XVII) . (Text)
          NASA Director of International Programs Arnold W. F r d k i n
      said in May 7 address delivered by J. H. Barnes, NASA Chief of
      Cooperative Progams, Office of International Programs : “What
      other nations are doing in space and in particular, what they
      are doing together, is in fact small when compared with the
      resources going directly into national programs in the US and
      the USSR. Yet, what has been accomplished provides substantial
      evidence of the feasibility, the benefits, and the promise of joint
      action by the nations in this new field . . . .” (Text)
          Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of NASA Office of Space
      Sciences, described scientific spacecraft now under development,
      and said: “We must continually assess our progress . . . . The
      flight erformance of our spacecraft has been increasing dra-
            P
      matica ly . . . . The useful life of unmanned spacecraft launched
      in 1962 has exceed six months and is sti77 rising because most of
      those intended for long life are still operating successfully.
          “Our progress with launch vehicles has been equally gratifying.
      I n 1962, 82% of all major NASA lnunchings were successful. This
      performance has been paced by the remarkable Thor-Delta which
      has successfully launched 16 out of 17 spacecraft. I n addition,
      the huge Saturn has scored 4 out of 4 perfect flights. During this
      time period, both the Thor-Delta and the Scout payloads were
      increased over 60% at no increase in their $2.5 million and $1
      million price tags. These dramatic increases in performance, life,
      and reliability of spacecraft and launch vehicles represent by
      f a r the most effective way to achieve economy in the space pro-
      gram . . . .” (Text)
          NASA Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Ray-
      mond L. Bisplinghoff said : “There are four principal areas where
      a continuing and driving program of advanced research is re-
      quired if this nation is to achieve pre-eminence in aeronautical
      and space activities in the decades to come. These are energy
      conversion and propulsion ; materials and structures ; control,
      guidance and communications: and space sciences and the environ-
      ment of space.” (Text)
                                                                  183
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

     Louis €3. C. Fong. Director of NASA Office of Technology Utili-
   zation, said on May 8 that the “basic objectives of the [NASA]
   Technology Utilization Program are:
        Identification of innovations
        Cataloging
        Dissemination
      “. . . I want to make i t very explicit that NASA’s  Technology
   IJtilization Program is separate and distinct from our manned
   space flight and space science efforts. The space exploration
   program stands on its own merits; our nation must occupy a posi-
   tion of pre-eminence. The benefits from industrial applications
   are not now-and never will be-the justification for the high costs
   ofthismajoreffort . . . .” (Text)
      Harold B. Finger, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Pro-
   pulsion Office and Director of NASA Nuclear Systems, described
   on May 9 XASA research in and lans for nuclear propulsion:
                                       R
   “. . . the door that was opened ere in Chicago in December
   1942 has in less than 20 years led us to concepts and hardware
   for the utilization of that new energy source in space missions that
   could not be generally anticipated at that time. As a result
   of that dramatic scientific effort, we have established major goals
   aimed at the early and practical utilization of nuclear energy in
   space. We are convinced that a substantial effort is justified by
   the otential performance advantages and the many applications
        R
   of t ese systems for difficult space missions. This work will lead
   us not only to the development of particular hardware items, but
   will open new fields of rocket, propulsion and power to permit
   us to travel freely in space.” (Text)
May 6: Former Chairman of tho AEC (1946-50), David E. Lilienthal,
   suggested a comparison of the “purple cliches about the space age,
   current successor to the atomic new world“ with the early years
   of the atomic age, in Stafford Little lecture at Princeton Univer-
   sity printed in-the Congressional Record: “In the 1940’s it was
   reasonable to join in General Groves’ and Senator McMahon’s
   view of the possibility of a ‘new world’ that peaceful applications
   of atomic energy might bring. Responsible men spoke of atomic
   power so cheap it wouldn’t pay to meter it. Most of us were less
   exuberant by far. Yet even those with a less euphoric outlook
   had ample grounds to believe that the expectations of the 1940’s
   and the early 1950’s should be given a hard try, and that such a  n
   effort had a good chance of paying . . . .
      “What then is the record? . . . For the wuntry a a whole,
                                                            s
   except where the costs of producing electricity from other s o u m
   of h a t are high, atomic power is not cheaper but costlier than
   conventional fuel . . . .” (CR, 5/6/63, 7321-30)
 Remarks by Charles H. Wilson on X-21A research aircraft appeared
   in Congressional Record. I n experimental test program con-
   ducted by Norair Div. of Northrop Corp. for AFSC, two X-21A
   aircraft were “designed to test the feasibility of a suction system
   to maintain laminar air flow over the wings . . . . X-21A flight
   ta?.~. expected to prove thak up to 80 percent of airplane
          are
   friction drag can be eliminated with a corresponding increase
184           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   in range, endurance or payload of more than 50 percent . . . . .”
    (OR,  5/6/63,7399)
May 6: Press conference with Lt. Col. K. B. Cooper of ARPA was re-
      orted in Missiles and Rockets. Colonel Cooper predicted Project
   befender would provide in three years 95% of knowledge required
   to understand and interpret re-entry physics phenomena.
    (M&R, 5/6/63,21)
 Speaking at American Institute of Chemical Engineers meeting
   in Buffalo, N.Y., engineers of Linde Co. described new process for
   making liquid hydrogen that would reduce its cost from $2 per
   pound to 35 or 40 cents per pound. (AP, NYT, 5/7/63, 11)
 USN announced Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory facilities destroyed
   by fire in April would be rebuilt “to provide support for current
   rocket motor development programs and those already planned
    for the next year.” (AP,Wash. Post, 5/7/63)
May 7: TELSTAR 11 communications satellite placed in elliptical orbit
    (6,717-mi. apogee, 604-mi. perigee, 225.3-min. period, 42.7” in-
   clination to equator). Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Ca e
   Canaveral boosted the satellite into orbit for its 17th straig t Yl
    success, an unmatched record for U.S. satellite-launching vehicles.
   TELSTAR 11 included design changes aimed at protecting it from
    radiation damage which affected lifetime of its predecessor,
   TELSTAR I. With apogee nearly twice that O TELSTAR I, it would
                                                  f
    provide longer periods of communications between U.S. and
   Western Europe than did TELSTAR I. Like its predecessor, TELSTAR
   11 was designed and built by AT&T’S Bell Telephone Laboratories
    at AT&T expense, launched by NASA with AT&T reimbursing NASA
    for Delta vehicle, launching, and tracking services. Initial com-
   munications test, T V transmission from Andover, Me., to Goon-
    hilly Downs, England, via the mtellits on its fourth orbit, was
    successful. (NASA Relewe 63-83 ; NASA TELSTAR 11 Prog. Rpt.
    No. 2 ;AP, Wasli. Eve. Star, 5/7/63)
 Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carried 153-lb. instrumented payload
    to 139-mi. altitude in experiment from Wallops Island to study
    spectral emission lines in upper atmosphere and measure their
    intensity as function of altitude, thus determining distribution
    of certain molecular and atomic species in upper atmosphere.
    Experiment was designed by The Johns Hopkins Univ. under
    NASA research grant administered by Goddard Space Flight Cen-
    ter. (Wallops Release 6346)
 NASA Ames Research Center announced award of contracts to NAA
    Space and Information Div. and Space Technology Laboratories
     (STL) for studies of manned Mars landing-and-return missions.
    Each contract called for nine-month studies to determine require-
    ments for possible Mars missions and to decide what research
    would be required during next several years to implement such a
    flight program. Other studies of manned Mars misqions were
    being managed by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and
    Manned Spacecraft Center, emphasizing use of L4pollo-class
    booster and spacecraft ; Ames-managed studies emphasized Mars-
    landing mission with no restrictions as to type of vehicle and
    spacecraft. (Ames Release 63-21 )
                                                                      185
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

May 7: Dr. Theodore von KBrmgn, distinguished U S . hysicist, died
                                                           t
   in Aachen, Germany. four days before his 82nd irthday. As
   early as 1906, Dr. von KBrmin established basic principles that led
   to design of light and efficient aircraft structures. Among his
   important scientific contributions were studies of air turbulence,
   which influenced early aircraft design, and the0
                                                          7     Of boundary
   layers, which led to pioneer construction of win tunnels. He
   was responsible for many scientific theories leadi to develop-
                                                           %
   ment of supersonic jet aircraft and rocket engines. r. von K6r-
   m6n in 1930 became Director of Cal T c ‘ Guggenheim  ehs
   Laboratory, which in 1944 became J e t Propulsion Laboratory.
   As JPL Director he pioneered in U.S. rocket propulsion, led devel-
   opment of Jato. Chairman of NATO’s            Advisory Group for Aero-
   nautical Research and Development ( A ~ A R D ) since 1951, he was
   recipient of more than 20 honorary doctorate degrees and was
   in 1963 first recipient of National Medal of Science, which cited
   him “for leadership in the science and engineering basic to aero’-
   nautics, for distinguished counsel to the armed services and for
    promoting international cooperation in science and engineering.”
    Dr. von Ktirm6n was born in Budapest, became US. citizen in
    1936. (NYT, 5/8/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/8/63, B5)
 Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Sta-
                                                                      a
    tion, England, announced his opposition to USAF’S orbitin
    400,000,000 copper needles (Project West Ford) and said :“T ere       Of
    is grave danger that projects of this sort may eventually bring
    the present rate of progress in astronomical research to an end.”
     (AP, NPT, 5/8/63,3)
 At Third International Conference on Atmospheric and Space Elec-
    tricity, held at Montreux, Switzerland, Elden C. Whip le, Jr., of
                                                                  P
    NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Planetary                   onosphere
    Branch proposed that rocket be fired through thunderstorm to
    rlnknrmir?e effect, if ‘-“j., ef S 2 C h sfv=r=?sc:: ezrth’s imesphm.
     (Goddard Release)
 Rep. Ben F. Jensen (R.-Iowa) inserted in Congressional Record a
    WashilLgton Post article which said that majority opinion ex-
    pressed by 25 U.S. Nobel Prize Winners criticized “waste” and
    “inefficiency” in America’s “crash program” to land man on moon
    by 1970. (Eisele, Wash. Post, in CR, 5/7/63,7424)
  Washington Post editorial said of U.S. manned lunar program:
    “We may not get to the moon first, or we may not get to it a t all-
                                                              z
    but that will not mean all has been in vain. I n tr ing to reach
    such a spectacular goal, we are developing the roc ets that will
     place us in the forefront of the space age, and in developing the
    scientific and engineering skills required to achieve this purpose
    we are enormously expanding the count ’s capacity to achieve
     scientific goals as yet unspecified. The s k z s and talents nurtured
     at NASA will be making their contribution to the knowledge, the
    comfort, the convenience and the survival of the United States
     long after moon landings have been accepted as a commonplace
    or abandoned as an impossibility. The world was altered by the
     voyages of Columbus, even though they failed of their planned
     objectives. And the world is being altered before our very eyes
      741-623 -
              1
              3
186           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

   by a new struggle to master man’s environment. Enter rises such
                                                            f
   as this are not to be judged b the ordinary criteria o scientists,
   economists or sociologists. $hey are not to be weighed on the
   balance against some other more practical and .more appropriate
   or more feasible endeavor. Such heroic enterprises move by their
   own laws, abide by their own rules and set their own recedents
                                                            f
   and when they are over, leave humanity with .its know edge mul-
   tiplied, its future expanded, its horizons widened, its outlook
   sharpened and its hopes u lifted by a new sense of man’s unend-
                               E
   ing and unlimited p s i ilities.” (Wash. Post, 5/7/63 ; CR,
   5/8/63,7491)
May 7: Col. Charles Yeager, Chief of USAF Aerospace Research Pilot
   School, Edwards AFB, Calif., visited US. Capitol and was honored
   in tributes by Congressmen on House floor. (CR,          5/7/63, 7406-
   09)
Mny 8: Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper flew simulated launch count-
   down and aspects of MA-9 Project Mercury space flight at Cape
   Canaveral. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/8/63)
 Three-minute portion of 7T.S. color television program received in
   France via TELSTAR 1 communications satellite. NBC transmitted
                          1
   the program, Bell Telephone Hour, from New York to the satel-
   lite through Andover, Me., ground station. (AP, Wash. Post,
   5/9/63)
 Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va.,
   carried 63-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in test to
   measure ion concentration and composition in upper atmosphere.
   Flight was joint project of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and
                                              (Wallops Release 6347)
   NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
 D. Brainard Holmes, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and
   Director of Manned Space Flight, said before Electronic Compo-
   nents Conference in U’ashington: “Today, the people of the
   United States are reappraising the commitment made in 1961.
   These discussions are natural and healthy. One of the funda-
   mental elements of the strength of the American system is the
   forum of public debate. However, those of us who understand
   the long-term nature of major research and development pro-
   grams have a duty to warn of the pitfalls involved in making
   frequent, drastic revisions in such propams unless it is demon-
   strated after thorough study that such changes are necessary.
   Such a course always results in excessive delays and increased costs.
   There is an efficient pace at which a program should proceed. To
   reduce this pace substantially or to pull out all stops and operate
   on a crash basis would result in increases in the total program costs
   in manpower and dollars. . . .” (Text)
 NASA Medal for Exceptional Bravery presented by Associate
   Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., to six men who risked
   their lives during rescue operations following X-15 accident
   Nov. 9, 1962; Capt. Paul J . Ralfe (CSAF), heliconter pilot;
   John A. Gordon, NASA rocket technician: Airman 3/C Larry J .
   Hough, USAF physiological training snecialist : Curtis C. Lyon,
   USAF civilian firefighter crew chief: T/Sgt. Charles L. Manes,
   USAF helicopter crew chief; and Dr. Lynn €3. Rowe (Capt., USAF),
   flight surgeon. (NASA Release 63-92 ; FRC Release 9-63)
                                                                 187
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

May 8: 16th annual McGraw-Hill Survey of Business Plans for New
   Plants and Equipment-1.96346 was cited in CqressionaZ Rec-
   ord by Senator Carl T. Curtis (R.-Neb.). Surve showed that
                                                     1
   25% of manufacturers’ 1962 sales were in new pro ucts not made
   10 years ago; manufacturers expect that by 1966 13% of their sales
   will be in new products not now known. (OR,        5/8/63, 7630)
 Aetna Life Insurance Co. issued first individual life insurance poli-
   cies to seven Project Mercury astronauts, astronauts’ legal adviser
   C. Leo DeOrsey announced in Washington. (Goodman, Wash.
   Post, 5/9/63)
 Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human
   Research, Office of Advnnced Research and Technology, speaking
   before The Harvard Business Club at Syracqe, New York, said :
   “today space communism versus space democracy goes deeper than
   the mere competition of dumping material into orbit or the plan-
   ning of landing men on the moon, or dreaming of traveling to the
   planets. It involves the very survival of our American way of
   life. The eyes of the world are upon the space race, and the
   Soviets using our own brand of Fifth Avenue public relations have
   gained a psychological advantage. Our national space objective
   is pre-eminence in space and not just landing a man on the moon.
   Although desirable and psychologically reassuring, the over-
   riding issue is not who put the first man in orbit or who will put
   the first man on the moon, but which nation has been able t o develop
   the overall research, technology, and manufacturing capability to
   not only explore but exploit space. . . .
      “The curtain of ignorance is thicker and more dangerous than
   the iron curtain.” (Text)
 Editorial in New Ym?c Tz’ntes said: “Like its predecessor, the new
    [Project West Ford launchJ attempt is to be made in the face of
   protests by many scientists both here and abroad. The military
   h o p that this experim~nt~i!! 1e.d t~ E !cxI~-Tz>~! ~ ~ ~ ~
                                                           ~               >   ~   c   R
   tion system invulnerable to destruction or jamming 1s appare?tly
    considered more important than the objections these scientists
   have raised. We disagree.
      “There is no United States right unilaterally to make changes
    in the s ace environment of this planet . . . .
           K
       “SUCunilateral decisions on our part invite the day when some
    unilateral Soviet act in space will make us rue the precedents we
    are now establishing. Politically, moreover, the .plan to proceed
    with West Ford conflicts with our announced policy of seeking to
    foster international cooperation in space and to make space a zone
   of peace. Are the military advantages obtainable here reall?
    worth the damage being inflicted on our political posture? Thls
    issue deserves much more public debate than it has had.” (NYT,
    5/8/63,34)
 General R. A. Schriever (AFSC) said in address to seminar partici-
    pants at National Science Fair, Albuquerque :“The most challeng-
    ing scientific enterprise we have today is the exploration of space.
    There are several reasons why this new region is of great im-
    portance to us. First of all, it is an unknown and unexplored
    medium, which is certain to contain many surprises. Second, it
188           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     is a tempting region for a nation that is bent on aggression.
     Soviet leaders have shown a keen awareness of both the psychologi-
     cal and military aspects of space exploration. They have boasted
     repeatedly that they could use their space technology for aggres-
     sive purposes. We cannot afford to leave our space frontier
     unguarded.
           Space exploration is also important for another reason. It
     greatly stimulates the advance of science by serving as a natural
     focus for intensive research in virtually every area of science and
     technology . . . .
         “Today’s methods of taking scientific measurements are far more
     accurate than those of the past, and they are improving all the
     time. For example, a year and a half ago we wer3 able to measure
     speeds on our Holloman sled track to an accuracy of about one part
     in 40,000. Today that accuracy has been increased to about one
     partin150,OOO . . . .” (Text)
,Uay 8: Minuteman ICBM successfully launched from underground
      silo, Vandenberg A F B , ~SAC crew, seventh of series of Minuteman
                                 ~
      launchings down Pacific Missile Range. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
      5/9/63)
X a y 9: 207-lb. instrumented payload carried 125 mi. high by Aerobee
      150A sounding rocket launched at Wallops Island, Va., by NASA
      and Australian scientists. Designed and built by Australian Com-
      monwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, ex-
                      r
      periment was desi ed to measure VLF radio noise above E region
      of ionosphere an was similar to ex riment conducted under
                                           p”
      nighttime conditions April 12. (Wa lops Release 6348; NASA
      Release 63-99)
  Titan I1 ICBM launched from Cape Canaveral by USAF, falling short
      of 5,500-mi. target because of premature second-stage engine cut-
                                     NY 5/10/63,14)
      off. (DOD Release 663-63 ;u p ~ , T,
  Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) and NASA Administra-
      tor James E. Webb were co-hosts at luncheon at Senate for
      three women accorded national recognition for space age accom-
      plishments-Marcia S. Miner, student at American Univ. and
      winner of National Rocket Club’s 1963 Goddard Memorial Schol-
      arship Award; Dr. Nancy C. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and
      Solar Physics in NASA Geophysics and Astronomy Pro ram and
                                                            8
       1962 winner of Federal Women’s Award; and Eleanor Pressly,
       Head of Vehicles Section, Sounding Rocket Branch, in NASA God-
      dard Space Flight Center’s Spacecraft Integration and Sound-
      ing Rocket Div., and 1963 winner of Federal Women’s Award.
       (NASA Release 63-94)
  L/Gen. Thomas P. G. Gerrity (USAF) ,DC/S for Systems and Logis-
       tics, told American Ordnance Association in Washington that
       “the worst blot on the Air Force-Industry image is inaccurate es-
      timatin of costs and schedules. In these areas we simply have
            %
       to do a etter job at the outset of each program and we have to
       conduct accurate and timely reviews to be sure that program
          owth and cost overruns are anticipated and separately identi-
      g d . . . .” (A-N-AF Journal & Reg&er, 5/18/63, 38)
  Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight
      Center, said in interview that plans for 360-ton, four-man space-
                                                                  189
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,       19 63

   craft to fly from earth to Mars were in “quite an advanced stage.”
   Emphasizin that execution of such plans was not yet approved
                %
   and funded y NASA, he described nuclear-electric powered space-
   craft and said it was “projected for beyond the 1970 s.”
May 9: A technical services contract was awarded by the Manned
   Spacecraft Center to Lockheed Electronics Company to provide
            support for Apollo. The contract involves vehicle instru-
   R~ED
   mentation and communication systems to be used in the early
   flight phases of the program. (MSC Fact Sheet #96)
 Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling, AFSC Deputy Chief of Staff for Pro-
   duction and Procurement, said in address to American Ordnance
   Association meeting in Washin on :
        “The fact that we will buy &r USAF] more than eight billion
   dollars worth of wmpon systems, supplies, and services this fiscal
   year and will administer approximately 70,000 contracts for gov-
   ernment purchases, which are administered by 57 field organiza-
   tions, provides some idea of the sheer magnitude of AFSC’S pro-
   curement management task.
        “A large majority of our funds is involved in weapon system
   acquisition contracts . . . . For the past two years the Air Force
   has undertaken a program of surveymg certain selected contrac-
   tors and related weapon systems. Two types of surveys are con-
   ducted. One type-called the Industrial Management Assistance
   Survey-looks at a particular contractor‘s internal organization,
   management and operatin practices as they affect all the Air
                                4
   Force contracts bemg pe ormed. Nine of these surve s have
                                                             i
   now been completed. The second type is called the ystems
   Pro ram Management Survey and looks a t all aspects of a par-
        f
   ticu a r aerospace system at a given point in time, including an
   examination, as appropriate, of the prime, associate prime and
   major subcontractors involved. We have now completed 20 of
            ,,,,..a
                                   J .*..
                         -0
   C:
    L,          Cy---   -.n
                         .- -
    W l L J JDC.vllU b p VI 3Ul v G
                      y
        “Altogether, we have identified some 37 prominent deficiencies
   in major areas of contractor management . . . .
                                                          ‘Te*d
                                          1 w s tested from An over,
May 9-10; During this night, =TAR          1a          ”
   Maine, and Pleumeur-Bodou, France, ground stations. (NASA
    TELSTAR II Pmg. Rpt. No. 4)
May 1 : Astronaut Leroy Gordon C o e (Maj., USAF) and Project
                                        opr
        0
   Mercury launch crews conducted simulated MA-9 h a 1 countdown
   and launching. (AP, NPT,5/11/63,4)
 Flight of X-15 No. 3 piloted by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF)
   canceled less than 10 min. before release from E 5 2 mother ship
   because of malfunctioning hydraulic system. (m,Wmh. Post,
   5/11/63)
 USAF announced launching of unidentified satellite using Atlas-
   Agena booster launched from Pt. Arguello, Calif. (UPI, Wash.
   Post, 5/11/63)
 USAF placed into orbit two 1.5-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellites
    (TRS), and a 50-lb. Project West Ford satellite, launched picka-
   back aboard an unidentified satellite using an Atlas-Agena
   B booster. TRS’S were to measure solar cell radiation damage.
   West Ford satellite was ejected on the same day of its launch.
190                                                1963
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   The satellite was to place a ring of metal fibers in a belt around
   the earth for passive communications experiments ; experiments
   were successful and effect of 400 million copper filament belt on
   radioastronomy was found to be negligible. Natural decay of
   belt expected as planned. (UPI, Wash. Post, 5/11/63; Press Rpt.
   on Space, 1963’,1/27/64)
May 10: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gil-
   ruth announced revision of management responsibilities, dividing
   o erational from developmental activities within MSC projects.
   $alter C.. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements
   and Flight Operations, would develop mission plans and rules,
   crew training, ground support and mission control complexes,
   and would manage all MSC flight o erations; concurrently,
                                            8
   Williams would be Director of Flight perations in NASA Office
   of Manned Space Flight, with complete mission authority dur-
   ing flight tests of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. James C. Elms,
   Deputy Director for Development and Programs, would manage
   all MSC manned space flight projects, including total project
   planning, and would plan, organize, and direct MSC administra-
   tive and technical support activities. ( MSC Release 63-88)
 NASA announced Flight Research Center had             urchased three
                                                     &.
   F-104 ‘et aircraft from Lockheed California             The F-104’s
           be
   would      modified for NASA use in many research programs, in-
   cluding simulated landing of X-15 rocket research aircraft. (FRC
   Release 10-63 ; NASA Release 63-98)
 Senate Republican Policy Committee made public its report ques-
   tioning priority of U.S. manned lunar program. “The question
   is not . . . whether man will ultimately reach the moon and
   beyond. The question is, rather, how shall it be done, and
   whether other aspects of human needs should be bypassed or
   overlooked in one spasmodic effort to achieve a lunar landing at
   once . . . .
      “A decision must be made as to whether Project Apollo is vital
   to our national security or merely an excursion, however interest-
   ing, into space research.
      “If our vital security is not at stake, a less ambitious program
   mag be logical and desirable.” (CR,      5/14/63,7916 ; Toth, N Y T ,
   5/11/63,1,6)
 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned
    Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes, addressing Tenth Annual Con-
   ference for Engineers and Architects, Ohio State Univ., said:
   “The nation has a pool of about 1,400,000 scientists and engineers,
   which is expected to grow tq 1,900,000 by 1970. At present, be-
   tween 250,000 and 300,000 of these are employed in the aerospace
   industry. NASA employs more than 9,200 of these on its own staff
   and, through contract, accounts for the employment of about
   32,800 others. Thus the space program occupies something over
   3% of the national pool of scientists and engineers. We expect
   that this proportion will rise gradually, to a little more than 674
   in 1968.
      “There is no evidence that this growth of the manpower require-
   ments for space is interfering with consumer research and develop-
                                                                   191
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 6 3

   ment. Nevertheless, as a consumer of scientific and technical
   manpower, we feel a responsibility to do our part to maintain and
   increase the supply.
      “Because of this responsibility, NASA is . . . providing about
   35 million dollars to universities for research projects, and 10
   million dollars have been granted for university facilities. Under
            duate training grant program, 88 universities have funds
        T
   the 96 fellowshi s. It is expected that this number will in-
   for
   crease. . . . (&Xq
                 ”
Mag 10: In column discussing hostility of some leading US. scien-
   tists t~ the “rotarian character” of the spam program, Joseph
   Kraft pointed out the inherent stimulation of science: “To be sure
   there is something seedy about using the space program as a cover
   for serious scientific inquiry. Still the atmosphere of the affluent
   society offers only rare openings to direct public energies and
   resources to purposes that are not vain. For the most eminent
   scientists to overlook the powerful grip of space on the public
   imagination would be to forego an almost unique opportunity for
   the advancement of science. Which of them would have forgiven
   Galileo had he turned his back on the heavens because a donor
   whose heart was impure held out the telescope?” (Wash. Eve.
   Star, 5/10/63, A9)
 President Kennedy, in discussion following his address to trustees
   of Committee for Economic Development, said he expected
   U.S.S.R. “to make additional spectacular efforts” in s ace within
                                                             AI
   next few months. (AP, Wash. Ewe. Star, 5/10/63, 6)
 In letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.) ,Chairman of Com-
   mittee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Sen. Margaret Chase
   Smith (R.-Me.) , ranking minorit member, recommended the
                                     u.J
   committee carefully re-examine          space activities and resource
   allocations “because I think the priority given the manned lunar
   pi-ugmm is 11iu1-euL ai issue IIOW iiiarr ii was 2 years ago . . . .
                          ;
      “It is interesting to note that criticisms expressed concerning
   the allocation of funds within the space budget, and the amount
   of the total budget, are coming from members of both political
   parties as well as from some scientists and engineers who are not
   identified with either party.
      “I do not, therefore, re ard NASA’s    budget for fiscal 1964 as a
   partisan matter . . . . btter, 5/10/63, rn OR, 5/13/63,7803)
                            ”
 D-558-11 Skyrocket dedicated in ceremony a t Antelope Valley
   College, Lancaster, Calif., where it would be on permanent dis-
                                                     co.
   play. Designed and built by Douglas Aircraft           with coopera-
   tion of USN and NACA, research aircraft was first to fly twice speed
   of sound (mach 2.01, on Nov. 20, 1953). Antelope’s Skyrocket
   was third model; first two were on display a t Smithsonian Insti-
   tution and Claremont, Calif., Air Museum, respectively. (Dedi-
   cation Program)
 Dr. Raymond H. Wilson, Jr., Chief of Applied Mathematics in
   Research Directorate, NASA Ofc of Advanced Research and Tech-
                                 fie
   nology, received $200 NASA award for invention of method for
   magnetic steering of spacecraft by controlled spin-damping.
    (NASA Release 63-100)
192           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

May 10: Establishment of Div. of Space Sciences and Applied Physics
     in Catholic University’s School of Engineering and Architecture
     was announced by Rt. Rev. William J. McDonald, Rector of the
     Univ. (Wash. Post, 5/11/63)
 Nike-Zeus antimissile missile flew off course during flight test at
     White Sands Missile Range and had to be destroyed by range
     safety officer. (Space Bus. Daily, 5/13/63,607)
  Soviet destroyer reported to be sailing in waters south of Bermuda,
     in position to observe re-entry of R D F ~ payload to be launched
     from Wallops Island, Va. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/63)
M a y I1 : Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper began series of preflight med-
     ical tests at Cape Cannveral in preparation for Project Mercury
     MA-9 flight scheduled for May 14. With other Project Mercury
     officials he conducted intensive review of prelaunching activities.
      (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/63; Witkin, N Y T , 5/12/63, 1)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced first drop test to qualify
     parachute-recovery system for two-man Gemini spacecraft was
     successfully completed at El Centro, Calif. Test series was
     scheduled for completion in 1964. (MSC Release 63-86)
  Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, speaking before American
     Editorial Cartoonists’ meeting in Washington, referred to
     complaints that excessive costs of Project Apollo and other US.
     efforts would “undermine the dollar . . . . But we are not told
     what would happen to the dollar-or to America-if space were
      defaulted to the Communist , . . . 9,

        “The question is which kind of philosophy, democratic or
      Communist, will dominate outer space?
        “I, for one, don’t want to go to bed by the light of a Corn-
      munist moon.” (Wash. Poot, 5/12/63; AP, Wash. Sun. Star,
     5/12/63)
  Secretary of the Interior Stewart L. Udal1 announced U.S. Geo-
     logical Survey had completed second in series of geological maps
     of the moon. Map was prepared by C. H. Marshall, astrogeolo-
     gist of Flagstaff, Ariz., Observatory. (AP, NYT, 5/12/63, 64)
  Soviet news agency Tass announced test program of “improved
     types of rocket carriers for spacecraft” would be conducted May
      15-July 15 in specified regions of the Pacific. (Tass, Kramaya
     Zvezda, 5/12/63,1, A F S S ~Trans.)
  Soviet Prof. S. Zonshayn wrote in “The Velocities that are Possible
     in the Universe” that only major obstacle to “relativistic space
     travel” was production of engine capable of approaching speed
     of light: “The way to the coFmos has been opened . . . . The
     present level of science already gives us reason to suppose that
     passing beyond the limits of the stars are problems which
     can be solved . . . .’’ (Literature Gazette, 5/11/63, in MSFC
     SIN, 5/63,13)
May 12: Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj. USAF) flew simu-
     lated Project Mercury launch in FAITH 7 at Cape Canaveral in
      preparation for MA-9 flight scheduled for May 14. (Simons,
      Wash. Post, 5/13/63)
  Radar contact with cupper dipoles launched in USAF Project West
      Ford confirmed they were successfully ejected into orbit from
                                                                  193
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    unidentified usm satellite, MIT Lincoln Laborstory announced.
    Fibers were still in compact cloud circling earth every 166 min.
    in near-polar orbit, some 2,000 mi. high and at approximately
    87” to equator; on May 13 dipoles had begun to spread in elon-
    gated cloud. Fibers were expected to spread along circular or-
    bital peth, some 40,000 mi. in circumference, to form ring around
    earth. Orbital ring would be used in bouncing radio signals back
    t o earth over long distances. (DOD Release 666-63; NYT, 5/13/63,
    1;AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 5/13/63, A3 ;Sullivan, NPT, 5/14/63,18)
May 12; Zzve.ytia reported about 400 spectrograms of Mars had been
    taken this year a t observatory of Astrophysics Institute, Kazakh-
    stan Academy of Sciences, in project to investigate properties of
    blue haze concealing details of Martian surface. (Zzvestia,
                        Trans.)
    5/12/63,6,A F S ~ T
 US. aviatrix Betty Miller landed in Brisbane, Australia, after solo
    7,100-mi. flight in twin-engine airplane from Oakland, Calif.
    Mrs. Miller was first woman to solo across Pacific Ocean from
    California. (UPI, Wash. Post, 5/13/63)
May IS: House Committee on Science and Astronautics, considering
    NASA budget authorization for F Y 1964, began meeting in execu-
    tive session. From March 4 to May 10, Committee had held 60
    hearings with 170 appearances by NASA witnesses. (NASA A c ,
    “Status of Leg.,” 5/17/63)
 USAF seleded General Electric Co. and Philco Corp. with Space
    Technology Laboratories (jointly) to compete for development
    of DOD medium-altitude communications satellite. Under two-
    month contracts, each contractor would propose technical a p
    proach, refine cost estimates, and develop internal management
    structures. Then,.should DOD decide to proceed with such a com-
    sat system employing 20-30 satellites, one of the contractors would
    be selected to conduct development phase of USAF portion. (DOD
    Reiease 674483
 Plans for modular Mars spacecraft as resented by D. M. Ham-
    mock, Assistant Chief of Spacemaf? Technology Div., NASA
    Manned Spacecraft Center, were described in MikSiles and
    Rockets. Six-man crew would undertake 400-day expedition to
    Mars in three-module spacecraft-Mars mission moduIe, Mars
    excursion module, and earth entry module. Hammock said NASA
    was evaluating merits of manned s stations, permanent lunar
                                        pv
    bases, and Mars expedition as follow-on to Project Apollo, and
    that technolo needed for Mars spacecraft would be simpler in
                 f?
    many ways t an that required for lunar base or space station.
     (M&R,5/13/63,34)
*usm Titan I1 s u m f u l l y launched from silo at Vandenberg AFB
    in test flight down PMR. (M&R,5/20/63,16)
 I n Barnon’s N a t w d Bu8ims and Financial Weekly, article en-
    titled “Trackless Void: The U.S. Space Program Had Better
    Come Down to Earth”, said:
       “. . . Like Columbus, we have been told time and a in, the
    United S a e today lives in an age of discovery. Like c olumbus,
                                                             ?
               tts
    the United States must pot fail to seize its moment of greatness.
       “While popular and plausible, the comparison strikes Barron’s
194                                                19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   as unfortunate. To begin with, in contrast to the National
   Aeronautics and Space Administration, Columbus raised the
   funds for his epoch-making voyage at least partly from private
   sources. Far from setting out to discover America, moreover,
   the admiral and his financial backers merely sought to find a
   shorter-hence more profitableroute to the Indies ;their primary
   aim was to make money, not history. Finally, though Washington
   has chosen to i ore the inconvenient fact, the conquest of the
                    C
                    Y
   new world yiel ed Spain, after a short-lived fling at glory, four
   centuries of economic and political decay.
      “The parallel to Columbus can be ushed too far, not only by
                                          B
   friends of the space program but also y its foes. Nonetheless, the
                   s
   l=ons of the ast, coupled with some contemporary widsom on
   the subject, un erscore the need for a sweeping reappraisal of the
   current U.S. space program. For example, lawmakers now SUS-
   pect that NABA’S skyrocketing budget (from which, according
   to the administration, not 1cent can be cut without courting dis-
   aster) is designed to serve political as well as scientific ends. I n
   turn, scientists, who know how to weigh altenlatives, have grown
   increasingly skeptical of the overwhelming emphasis which Wash-
   ington has placed upon landing a man on the moon. Thereby,
   they claim, the United States has ignored far less*costlyand more
   fruitful avenues o lunar exploration, while neglecting other
                        f
   promising ventures in space. The time has come, we submit, to
   ask ‘Is this trip necessary?’ ” (CR, 5/28/63, A3428-3429)
May 13: W. C. Mentzer, United Air Lines Vice President, told Wings
   Club in New York that projected British-French supersonic air-
   liner was a challenge to U.S. I f this country accepts challenge, it
   must be prepared to accept “two specific obligations . . . :First,
   to develop an intelligent long-term program of subsidy, and sec-
   ond, to encourage an economic environment in which the super-
   sonic transport eventually may thrive.” ( N Y T , 5/14/63)
 Informed Nationalist Chinese sources re ortsd by UPI to have con-
                                           .p
   firmed Tokyo reports that Chinat pi ots were still flying U-2
   reconnaissance flights over Communist China. (UPI, Wash. Post,
   5/14/63)
May 14: Project Mercury flight MA-9 p t p n e d at T-13 in launch
   countdown because of technical failure in computer converter at
   Bermuda tracking station. Earlier, a t T-60, countdown was
   halted for 129 min. to repair faulty fuel pump in gantry’s diesel
   engine, which had failed to start.
      Eight-min. reca itulation of prelaunch activities for Project
                       Ai
   Mercury flight M -9, Cape Canaveral, was telecast to European
   viewers via RELAY I communications satellite shortly after flight
   was postponed. (NABA Release 63-104; N Y T , 5/15/63)
 Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) flew X-15 No. 3 to 95,600-ft. alti-
    tude and 3,600-mph speed (mach 5.20) in test to record tempera-
    ture increase rates with more than 600 sensolls on X-15’s skin.
    During the flight, Major Rushworth rolled aircraft into 90” bank
    to obtain the necsssary data. Aircraft’s exterior reached tempera-
   t u r a of 900° F. (FRCRelease; m~,.Chkago     T&, 5/15/63)
                                                                        195
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

May 14: First flight test of inflatable meteoroid probe ( araglider) ,
                                                              I;
           Aerbbee 150 launch vehicle, was conducted rom White
    YiT
     an s Missile Range. Objective of experiment was to develop
   technique for determining penetration ra.tM in thin structural
   materials. Preliminary results indicated Aerobea 150 followed
   nominal flight trajecto but paraglider did not accomplish flight
   because camster in w h i z i t was contained failed to e’ect. ~ x p e r i -
   ment was joint project of NASA Lan ley Reseamh k n t e r ( ara-
   glider) and Goddard S ma Fli ht entar (vehicle) under &rec-
                              $
   tion of NASA Office of A vanced d r c h and Technology. (NASA
   Release 63-102 ;NASA oAwr/Levine)
 William S. White, editorializing in the Washington Evemhq Star,
   May 14,1963, pointed out that :
      “There are reformist politicianswho would never agree with
   the conservatives on anything else vhtever-who don’t want this
   money [for s p m exploration] s ent simply ibecause in their opin-
                                       P
   ion not enough is being done or projects like ‘urban renewal.’
   Such men no doubt would have screechingly stopped development
   o the airplane a lifetime ago if, in the meantime, the street cars
    f
   in New York were in any way inadequate and the slums in Chi-
   cago or Philadelphia had not been totally replaud by public
   housing.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/14/63)
 Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on
   The Peaceful Uses of Outer Space convened in Geneva. (NYT,
   5/3/63)
Muy 15-16: Successful MA-9 Project Mercury flight, longest U.S.
   manned space flight to date (22 orbits; 34 hrs. 20 min.) :
      Mercury spacecraft FAITH 7, with Astronaut Leroy Gordon
   Cooper (Maj., USAF) as pilot, lifted off Pad 14, Cape Canaveral,
   at 8:04 a.m. EST. Atlas launch vehicle placed spacecraft in ini-
   tial orbit of 166-mi, apogee, 100-mi. r i p , 88.7-min. period,
                                   ?7,5@-mpYqxpd Besides partici-
   32-50 inclingtien trr qr?a_t_nr,
   pation in flight procedures, astronaut ate, slept, and conducted
   scientific experiments. Because automatic control system (a*=)
   failed during 19th orbit, spacecraft was oriented manually d u r q
   22nd orbit, retrorockets were fired manually, and re-entry phase
   was conducted without acs. FAITH 7 landed two miles from
   U.S.S. Kearaarge near Midway Island in Pacific. Value of
   trained pilot’s presence in spacecraft was underscored by success-
   ful mission achievement des ite acs failure.
                                     !
                                     i
      MA-9 provided biomedical ata confirming man can survive and
   function during prolonged space flight with no ill effects. Ex-
   periments durin fli ht included: ejecting from spacecraft in
   third orbit a 103b. ffashing-beacon sphere (testing visibility of
   objects in space in preparation for future rendezvous maneuvers),
   which Cooper sighted during fifth and sixth orbits; photographs
   of zodiacal light nighttime airglow layer ; horizon definition
   experiment, using colored filters in 70-mm. camera; radiation
   measurement experiment, using Geiger counters mounted on space-
   craft exterior and detectors inside spacecraft and inside astro-
   naut’s space suit; tethered balloon experiment (to measure
   atmospheric drag) which Cooper attempted in sixth orbit but bal-
196           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   loon did not deploy; infrared photography for meteorolo ical
   purposes ; television photography, which achieved historic ‘&st”
   in U.S. manned space flight with direct transmission of TV pic-
   tures to tracking stations ; cabin environmental temperature study,
   another historic “first” with cabin coolant valve and fan turned
   off from orbit #5 until about two hours before re-entry, astronaut
   relying on space suit for cooling while cabin temperature stabilized
   at around 96” F; HF antenna tests, another “first”, involving
   transmissions with antenna horizontally polarized and verti-
   cally polarized ; ground light experiment, with astronaut observ-
   ing three-million-candlepower xenon light at Bloemfontein, Re-
   public of South Africa ; window attenuation experiment, with
   astronaut viewing calibrated standard light source and stars to
   evaluate transmission of light through spacecraft window ; and
   white paint patch measurements, investigating changes in paint
   pigments during re-entry heating.
      Cooper’s historic flight covered estimated 593,885 mi. in 34 hrs.
   20 min. Nearly 36 years before, Charles Lindbergh’s historic
   flight from New York to Paris covered 3,610 mi. in 33 hrs. 30 min.
   (NASA MA-9 Press Kit; N Y T , 5/15/63; N Y T , 5/16/63; N Y T ,
   5/17/63 ;Press Conf. Transcript, N Y T , 5/20/63 ;Aerospace Year-
   book, 1960)
May 15: Millions of Americans heard and watched MA-9 launch-
   ing and subsequent flight activities on commercial radio and tele-
   vision. Estimated 8,000 pwple watched launching on Grand
   Central Station, New York, 12-by-16-ft. television screen. At-
   tempt to telecast launching to European viewers via RELAY I com-
   munications satellite was unsuccessful because “an error on the
   part of the broadcast company programmers . . . resulted in the
   transmission of live TV monitors a t Cape Canaveral which con-
   sisted of a hodgepodge of random pictures and sounds that was
   virtually meaningless.” Videotape of launch activities and of
   first TV pictures from Astronaut Cooper was successfully trans-
   mitted via RELAY I later in the day. Beginning at 6:55 p.m. EDT,
   the three U.S. TV networks received via RELAY I a three-minute
   program on European reaction to Astronaut Cooper’s flight.
    ( N Y T , 5/16/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/16/63; NASA Release
   63-106)
 Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s FAITH 7 Mercury spacecraft was
   clearly visible to unaided eye to observers in Johannesburg, South
   Africa. (UPI, N Y T , 5/16/63,19)
 Radio Moscow wished Astronaut Cooper good luck on his space
   flight and said: “The Soviet people, who were pioneers in s ace,
                                                                 P
   are hoping that this scientific experiment works out success ully.
   We sincerely hope that its results will serve the development of
   peaceful cooperation and above all cooperation between the So-
   viet Union and the United States in the study of the laws of the
   universe.” (UPI, W a d . Post, 5/16/63)
 X-15 No. 1 piloted by John B. McKay (NASA) reached 3,856-mph
   speed (mach 5.57) and 124,200-ft. altitude, 156 mph faster and
   26,200 ft. higher than planned because of one-degree error in
   flight angle. Aircbrilft was equipped with traversing probe, de-
                                                                   197
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

   vice that extends itself about three inches from X-15 surface
   every four seconds, to measure air flow. (WRelease; NPT,
    5/17/63,19)
May 15: NASA announced from Cape Canaveral that recruiting 9-12
   new astronauts would begin next month. (Simons, Wash. Post,
   5/16/63)
 NASA announced a m r d of $10,687,000 contract to Chance Vought
   Corp. for 23 Scout launch vehicles. (NASA Release 63-105)
 Chief of NASA Future Applications Satellites Ca t. Alton B. Moody
    (USNR), addressing graduating class of U . 8 Naval Academy,
   described nonmilitary navigation satellite system being studied by
   NASA. One such system could provide position determination, air
   traffic control, ship surveillance, search and rescue, fleet monitor-
   ing, and weather routing services. (Text)
 International Associntion of Machinists announced ratification of
   new three-year contract with Boeing Co. Agreement ended aero-
   space industry-labor negotiations begun last September. (NPT,
   5/16/63,33)
 U.K. and France were calling conference of European Postal and
   Telecommunications Administrations to discuss possibilit
                                                                 %
                                                                 :
   European communications satellite system, U.K. Foreign
   spokesman said. U.K. had abandoned any plan to develop its
   own system. Conference participants would be Austria, Belgium,
   Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the
   Netherlands, Norway, S ain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom,
                            R
   and West Germany. ( Y T , 5/16/63,19)
                 r
 Soviet news a       cy Tass reported radioastronomers a t Pulkovo
   Observatory ad discovered radiation belt around planet Jupiter.
    (UPI, Wash. Daily News, 5/15/63)
May 15-17: Second Annual Xational Flight Forum Symposium held
   a t Hartford, Conn., with more than 300 representatives of busi-
   ness,. industry, education, government, and mliitary services at-
   tendmg. Symposium was sponsored by Connecticut General Life
   Insurance Co. (NASA Release 63-101)
      Addressin the Forum, NASA Administrator James E. Webb
   reviewed eary histo? of U.S. develo ment in aeronautics, noting
                                          P
   U.S. was far &hind in aircrafa deve opment in 1915, when NACA
   was formed : “The wisdom of its [NACA’S] establishment was am-
   ply demonstrated over the ensuing years, and led ultimately to
                                                                     .
   United States supremacy in civil and military aviation . . . 77
   He not& U.S. was behind in 1957 when U.S.S.R. orbited SPUTNIK
   I, then cited formation of NASA in 1958 and President Kennedy’s
   recommendation in 1961 of accelerated program “to give the nation
   a clmrly leading role in the conquest of space.
      “I review this history because it is necessary occasionall
                                                                  f”
   remind ourselves of the past if we are to have a clear view o !he
     resent. With a warning clearly sounded in space, the nation
   getembed, for the first time, that it would seize the opportunities
   offered by man’s new ability to explore space, and that it would
   not be content merely with catching up with somebody else. In-
   stead we set our sights on the most challenging goal within our
   reach, which could be achieved within a time scale competitive with
198           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   the ability of others to do the same, and determined that we would
   explore the moon with men within this decade.
      “Nothing in recent history suggests that we have reason now to
   changeourcourse . . . .
      “Those who view the lunar program simply as a propaganda
   effort fail to grasp that not only our prestige, but our capacity
   for constructive international leadership, our economic and mili-
   tary capacity for technological improvement, depend upon our
   ability to achieve acknowledged superiority in science and tech-
   nology, and to use this capability in our own behalf and that of
   our allies . . . .” (Text)
      Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Director of NASA Office of Ad-
   vanced Research and Technology, described ~ A S Aresearch in
   supersonic transport and in V/STOL aircraft and said: “Aero-
   nautioal and space research serves as a sharp cutting edge to
   advance man’s knowledge in practically every technology which
   is fundamental to transportation devices. Although it is impos-
   sible IN predict quantitatively the impact on transportation of
   current aeronautical and space research, past experience has shown
   that we may predict with confidence that it will be consider-
   able . . . .” (Text)
      Najeeb E. Halaby, FAA Administrator, said on May 16 that
   u
     there are areas-such as in pure research-where it is impossible
   for private industry to bear the full economic burden. For exam-
   ple, clearly it is up to the Governmen,tto play a role in the develop-
   ment of a supersonic transport, if this Nation is to provide such
   an aircraft . . . .
      “I believe the government should act only in areas where the
   people ‘cannot so well do for themselves’ even in this increasingly
   complex and technical world, and that we who are charged with
   making decisions affecting the public must be convinced beyond
   any reasonable doubt that there is a need for the Federal Govern-
   ment to conduct the activity at all . . . . (Text)
                                              ”
May 16: President Kennedy telephoned Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper
    aboard carrier Kearsarge, saying, “Ijust want to con atulate you.
                                                          !
                                                          ?
    That was a great flight . . . . We are very proud o you.” (UPI,
   NYT, 5/1’7/63,1)
 Senate Resolution 143 resolved that “the Senate of the United States
   extends its profound congrakulations to Major Cooper on his
   heroic accomplishment, and expresses its gratification to his family
   and to all those who have contributed t~ the success of his mission.”
    (CR,5/16/63,8364-65)
 Former President Harry S. Truman said flight of L. Gordon Cooper
   was “one of our greatest” moments in history. . . . “Iwas exceed-
   ingly happy when he got down all right. That’s what I was
   worried about.
      “He made a great flight.” (UPI, L.A. Times, 5/17/63)
 U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations on space cooperation resumed in Geneva
   with NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Soviet
   space expert A. A. Blagonravov heading respective teams. At-
   tempt would be made to reach agreement on cooperative use of
   satellites to study earth’s ningnetic field. Discussion also would
                                                                  199
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196&

    center on implementing agreement reached in principle last March
    concerning exchange of information furnished by meteorological
    satellites and coordinated experiments with communications satel-
    lites. (NYT, 5/17/63, 18; Mamhester Guardian, Wash. PO&,
    5/17/63)
Mary 16: Prime Minister Harold Maemillan told House of Commons
    that British scientific criticisms of Project West Ford’s orbiting
    copper filaments had been forwarded to U.S. Government, but
    he defended the project, saying it could have ”very, very great
    significance in the whole system of deterrent defense.” He also
    rejected Laborite Arthur Henderson’s demand that he urge Presi-
    dent Kennedy to submit plans for experimental projects to an
     international scientific committee. Henderson cited re rt by
    special committee of British scientists on effects of U.$high-
     altitude nuclear explosion last July, report calling for inter-
    national agency to control space experiments. (Lewis, Wash.
    Post, 5/17/63)
 T s reported Soviet scientists had lost contact with XARS I inter-
  as
      lanetary probe on March 21, when it was about 66,000,000 mi.
    !&om earth. Probe was continuing on its flight toward Vicinity
    of Mars but telemetry data indicated difficulty in orientation
    system had misaligned its radio antennas. Tass said MARS I
    had recorded considerable change in boundaries o radiation belts
                                                           f
    around earth ; “sphere of maximum intensity” in innermost belt
    was farther out than previously noted. Intensity of cosmic rays
    had almost doubled m last four years, T s said. Important
                                                   as
    findings were made concerning stability and ener of interplane-
                                                     Y
    tary and solar plasma, and MARS I made possib e first scientific
    observation of junction of earth’s ionized gas envelope with outer-
    most belt of charged particles. Other data on intensity of mag-
    netic fields in space and distribution of meteoric particles were
        -”.       ( B a k sm,
    -----dcd.                5/1?/53; A T . WTC., 5/2?/tt,s, 2%)
    1


 D. Brainerd Holmes, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and
    Director of Manned Space Flight, said in address to American
    Ordnance Association, Washington :“The Department of Defense
    has not fully defined the role man should play in its space activi-
   ties. However, under an agreement between Secretary McNamara
    and Mr. Webb, reached in Januar 1963, NASA will manage the
                                       i
    Gemini program to assure the ful llment of both DOD and NASA
    r uirements, and the WD will contribute funding, in an amount
        7
    to edeterminedlater . . . .
              a
       “Althou h manned flight is more expensive than unmanned
    flight in t e development phase, the increased reliability of a
    manned vehicle will ultimately enable us to carry out complex
    tasks in space more effectively and, very possibly, at less expense
   than with automatic equipment.
       “Thirteen years ago, the late William Faulkner made a com-
   ment that may apply to the present discussion:
       “ ‘I believe that man will not merely endme; he will prevail.
    He is immortal . . . because he hIis J soul, a spirit capable of
   compassion and sacrifice and endurance.
       “In exploring the moon and planets, I am convincrd with Faulk-
   ner that man will prevail.” (Text, CR, 5/21/63, ,43220)
200           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

Nay 16: U.S.S.R. announced reorganization of its Academy of
   Sciences, designed to recentralize all basic research in physical and
   social sciences and to reflect trend toward specialized differentia-
   tion in the sciences. (Shabad, N Y T , 5/18/63, l, 9)
May 17: NASA Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell told
   Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on
   Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in Geneva that orbiting of USAF
   Project West Ford copper filaments would “create no significant
   interference with any other scientific activity.” Dr. Newell said
   criticism of project by radioastronomers seemed to have been based
   on assumption that experiment, if successful, would be followed
   by similar one on much larger scale. He assured subcommittee
   that no further launchings would be planned until scientific find-
   ings of first experiment had been “anal zed and evaluated” and
   “adequate safeguards against harmfuY interference with any
   branch of scientific endeavor” had been developed. ( N Y T ,
   5/18/63,9)
 Tass published Soviet Government statement declarin that U.S.
                                                           P
   was “flouting all rules of international law” and “un olding pre-
   parations for a nuclear war” with its Project West Ford experi-
   ment. ( N Y T , 5/18/63,9)
 Mercury Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, of NASA
   Manned Spacecraft Center, told reporters at Cape Canaveral that
   “there’s a lot to be gained from flying another [Mercury] mission.
   We have a 92-orbit capability. But we will have to analyze the
   data from this flight [MA-91 to determine whether another is
   justified.” ( CTPS, Chicago T + , 5/18/63)
                                  i.
 Secretary of Defense Robert S . McNamara sent telegram of con-
   gratulations to Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (USAF) :
      “Your Air Force leaders, Secretary Zuckert and General
   LeMay, and the entire Defense Department, join me in congratu-
   lating you on your record breaking achievement in behalf of our
   national space effort.
       “The scientific data that you have obtained will add tremen-
    dously to our store of knowledge about space.
       “You have e~rned highest esteem of all Americans for your
                          the
   historic exploit.” (DOD Release 71043)
 Former President Eisenhower in Rochester, N.Y., hailed Astronaut
   L. Gordon Coo er’s 22-orbit space flight as 4‘a great step forward
                   8
   i the United tabs’ space program.” (AP, N Y T , 5/18/63,9)
     n
 Life editorial said: L ‘ Nthe United States can be foremost in an-
                               ~~
   other and greater adventure [than Columbus’]--or abdicate its
   own national greatness by not doing enough. Unfortunately the
   argument about whether space is worth it has been muddied by an
   increasing popular tendency to talk only about the race to the
   moon. . . .
       “The issue is much bigger than a moon race, although of course
    we plan to land on the moon. The U.S. commitment t space    d
   seems a natural undertaking for the American people, who are
   a venturesome lot. Indeed it makes sense for military, tmh-
   nology, and prestige reasons. . . .” (Life,5/17/63, CR,5/20/63,
   A3160)
                                                                       201
                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

May 1 : u s 0 launched Blue Scout, Jr., probe from Pt. Arguello with
     7
   undisclosed mission. ( N P T , 5/18/63; M&R, 5/27/63,10)
 USAF OAR announced three USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories
   meteorological research groups were participating with Weather
   Bureau and military services’ support in 1963 National Severe
   Storms Project to learn more about structure, development, and
   possible forecasting of severe storms. (OAR Release 5-634)
 USN test-fired Polaris A 3 missile from Cape Canaveral in SUCCBSS-
   ful1,600-mi. fli ht. (UPI, NPT, 5/18/63,8)
Muy 18: President %ennedy visited Nashville, Tenn., Muscle Shoals,
   Ala., and Huntsville, Ala. At Muscle Shoals, in address com-
   memorating 30th anniversary of TVA, he said: “Only a national
   effort can explore the m steries of outer space, harvest the prod-
   ucts of ocean de ths an$mobilize the human, natural and mate-
                               P
   rial r e s o u m o our land. I cite these exam les-not to show
   the growth of federal activity, for it is still sma5 compared to the
   Nation’ebut tD show the positive side of Federal-State coopera-
   tion of which TVA is an outstandin symbol . . . .” A t Red-
   stone Arsenal he spoke briefly before L a r d i n g his plane to return
   to Washington:
      “I know there are lots of people now who say, ‘Why go any
   further in space?’ When Columbus was halfway through his
   voyage, the same people said, ‘Why go on any further?’ ‘What
   will he possibly find?’ ‘What good will it be?’ And they want
   to stop now.
      “I believe the United States of America is committed in this
   decade to be first in s ace, and the only way we are going to be
                                   f:
   first in space is to mor as hard as we can here and all across the
   country, and support not only Major Cooper, but all those who
   come after him.’ (Wmh. Post, 5/19/63, A8 ; MnmhnJk Star,
     5/22//63)
                                          le %=lei Pi&%iit, E i - i h ~ a r
                           Ei;e&ii Pest
         u uaL...w r w ~ j i
  T1 1
  1,     Q .,
           -.

     wrote :
        “Let us turn to the space exploration
     have called downright spongy. Row
     tive spirit of the Amencan people
     called space race. But. let us step back for a moment from
     emotion and be objective. This is what m scientific advisers and
                                                     9b
     I tried to do when we started space work ack in 1955 and there-
     after enlarged it into a comprehensive program. We didn’t and
     don’t want to be a second-best nation, not in an important field,
                                                           5
     and certainly not in total accomplishment.          u t can we best
     maintain oiir ~ ~ e r aleadership by launching wildly i t crash
                              ll                                no
     programs an many fronts? This is where we seem to have got
     out of focus.
        “Let me make it perfectly clear that we should have an aggres-
     sive program of research and exploration, so broadly based that in
     the long run there will be no question of our space leadership;
     but we should pursue it in an orderly, step-by-step way to enlarge
     systematically our knowledge of the scientific, military, and indus-
     trial potentials in space. This sort of a program would be a
     strong, steady push from the known into the unknowns of space
         R41-623 -
                 1
                 4
202           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     science, accumulating along the way the techniques and skills to
     put our astronauts on the moon, among other developments. The
     annual cost would not include money for stunts and unnecessary
     contests.
        “Most of the scientists who advised me on space matters-all
     men of great knowledge and integrity-believed in this step-by-
     step program as most effective for the long pull, pointing out that
     the thin we need to learn in space are almost as endless as space
     itself. - E o u d a we may be of our astronauts and, our Venus
                        s
     probe and other accomplishments in space, this racing to the
     Moon, unavoidably wasting vast sums and deepening our debt, is
     the wrong way to go about it, as I see it. Because it has been
     fitated that the country’s prestige is at stake in this race. the
     average citizen may be loath to question the huge sums now being
     requested. But he should . . . . (Sat. Eve. Post, 5/18/63, 15-
                                       ”
     19 ; CR,  5/15/63,8111)
M a y 18: General B. A. Scltriever (AFSC), addressing Armed Forces
     Dinner in Louisville, KJ., : “I am convinced that we must . . .
                                 said
     investigate the military potential of space systems. We simply
     cannot afford to leave the space frontier unguarded. Satellite
     systems promise to strengthen our present defenses in a number
     of ways. For example, they show definite potential for improved
     warning, communications, and navigation systems.
         “We may also need to develop the ability to defend ourselves
     against space-borne weapons. The Soviets have threatened many
     times to use their space technology for military purposes. Until
      we know for sure that they will not carry out these threats, it
      is logical to pursue the development of ways to identify, inspect
     and rendezvous with a non-cooperative object in space . . . .     97

      (Text, AFSC Release 35-R41)
  U.S.S.R. launched improved models of carrier rockets for spacecraft
     on 7,500 mi. flight into Central Pacific. ( N Y T , 5/29/63,3)
  USAF Minuteman ICBM launched a t Cape Canaveral fell short of in-
      tended range but most test objectives were achieved. (DOD Re-
      lease 722-63)
  DOD launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle.
       (Pres.Rept. o n #pace, 1963,1/27/64)
M a y 1 9 : Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, accompanied by NASA Asso-
      ciate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Manned
      Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, and MSC Dep-
      ut,y Director for Flight Operations Walter C. Williams, held
      press conference at Cape Canaveral carried on nation-wide TV.
      Major Cooper presented orbit-by-orbit account of his MA-9 space
      flight. Asked about possibility of MA-10 flight, Dr. Seamans
      said: “It is quite unlikely that we will have another Mercury
      flight,” but final decision on MA-10 would be made “within a
      week or so.” ( N Y T , 5/20/63, 24; New Y o & Herald Trib.,
      5/20/63)
  Presidential Boeing 707 jet airliner flew nonstop from Washington
      to Moscow in 8 hours 38 minutes and 42 seconds, claiming 15
      speed records. Piloted by Col. James B. Swindal (USAF), air-
      plane brought AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg and his party
                                                                     203
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 6 3

   to Moscow to conclude nuclear cooperation agreement with So-
   viet officials. ( N Y T , 5/20/63, l, 3)
May 19: With publication of first NAEA Applications Note (“Welding
   Tips”), NABA inaugurated new phase of its technology utilization
   program-disseminating information on results of NASA techno-
   logical research in Applications Notes (containin innovations not
                                                       7
   thoroughly documented and evaluated) and App ications Reports
    ( resenting com rehensive descriptions of q l e developments
                     b,
    o f significant in ustrial potential). (NASA Release 63-103)
 Atlantic Research Co announced development of solid rocket pro-
   pellants containiq%ryllium to provide increased thrust. Stud-
    ies leading to this development were sponsored by DOD. ( N Y T ,
   5/20/63,46)
 Tass reported Soviet scientists had synthetically produced isotope
   with atomic number 256. Produced by irradiating uranium-238
    with beam of accelerated neon-22 ions. isotme had half-life of
    eight seconds, “many tens of times” greakr than expected.
    (Reuters, N Y T , 5/21/63,3)
Mav 20: Vice President Lvndon B. Johnson said at Jefferson-Jackson
  -Day Dinner, OklahoG City: “Space . . . has gained the lion’s
    share of publicity-and justifiably so.
       “When we talk of space and s am research,there are those who
    raise the question that our ef Forts cost too much. Certainly
    American leadership in space is not cheap. We are now spending
    20 cents per week per capita on our national space program.
       “Other Americans ask if our space efforts are worthwhile.
       “I can answer in terms we can all understand. While the space
    age is not yet 5 years old, more than 5,000 companies and research
    or nizations have been or are now involved in our s ace effort.
                                                              OB
    W?have produced more than 3,200 space-related pr ucts, many
    of which are already being put t we.
                                       o
       I-
        ,

       “Jsut, many prominent Repubiicans are questiomg the value
    of the program. A former Republican President has referred to
    our moon project as a ‘stunt.’
       “I can answer that simply : I do not believe that this generation
    of Americans is willing to resign itself to goin to bed each night
   by the light of a Communist moon . . . . (fext, OR,5/23/63,
                                               ”
    A3243-44)
 DOD announced first flight test of X-21A “slitwing” aircraft, built by
    Northrop Carp. for USAF, was successfully conducted at Edwards
           Inhalation of air through hundreds of t>iny   slits in aircraft
    AFB.
    wings showed marked reduction of drag on the plane. This was
    first time such laminar flow control has been attempted on air-
    craft wing approximating size of those of jet transports. (WD
    Release 628-63)
 Two-stage sounding rocket instrumented to observe ionosphere was
    successfully launched to 215-mi. altitude by Japan- scientists
    near Kagoshima., Japan. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/21/63)
 Italy launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket to 126-mi. altitude
    for atmospheric studies. h u n c h i n g was first from island of
    Sardinia. (UPI, N Y T , 5/22/63,34)
 NASA ,4mes Research Center announced award of contract to West-
    inghouse Electric Corp. Astronuclear Laboratory to study potan-
204           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   tial physiological radiation dam e in space. One-year study
                                      T
   would “attempt to understand the asic phenomena of biological
   response to cosmic radiation, and to develop the means of pre-
             man’s well-being and insure his survival during long
      “““‘Y
   perio s of exploration in deep space. . . .” (Ames Release 63-
   22 ;NASA Release 63-107)
May 24; A. M. Nowitzky, Head of Spacecraft Sterilization Systems,
   Lockheed Missiles and S ace Co., said in letter to Aviation Week
                             P
   and Space T e c h h g y : ‘Since all known tests indicate that gas-
   eous surface sterilization does not affect reliability, Ranger prob-
   lems were definitely not due to sterilization but, instead, were
   ordinary design problems unrelated to the incbsion of this re-
   quirement. It is, therefore, gross1 unrealistic to blame steriliza-
   tion for the Ranger failures. . . .” ( A s . Wk., 5/20/63, 150)
 Dr. John R. Dunning, Dean of Columbia Univ. Faculty of Engineer-
   ing, said in address before Design Engineering Conference. of
   American Society of Mechanical Engineers, NYC, that “if the
   engineers do not aggressively claim the positions of leadership” in
    space effort and in exploitation of atomic energy, “this nation will
   pay an intolerable price for amateur improvisation.” Today’s
    engineers need knowledge of conventional engineering techniques
    as well as current developments in science, and some engineering
    schools are graduating “imitation physicists” and “disguised
    mathematicians” instead of men trained in the “great art” of
    systems design. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/63,35)
 Robert Hotz wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology
    editorial :
       “It is an inevitable historic trend that as new technology is
    transformed from the spectacular experimental stage to reliable
    operational use, peripheral public interest lags almost in pro-
    portion to the increase in technical significance. For example,
    the world press could write about little else for months after
    Charles Lindbergh made the first solo transatlantic aircraft flight
    from New York to Paris just 36 ears ago this month. Last year
                                     9
    more than two million people fo lowed his trail across the trans-
    atlantic airway-most of them in jet transports taking about
    one-fourth the time of Lindbergh’s flight. Yet only a few ob-
    scure statistical paragraphs in the daily press recorded this
    tremendously significant perspective on the trail Lindbergh
    blazed.
       “And so it is likely to be with manned space flight, as it passes
    from the experimental fli ht-test phase into reliable operational
    performance. . . . [MA-8 is less exciting than the first breath-
    less attempt of man simply to survive short-duration space flight.
    But it is the type of foundation on which future capability can be
    built solidly. . . .
       “Mercury must go down in history as one of the most successful
    technical programs this nation has ever had. . . .” (Av. Wk.,
     5/20/63, 21)
May .%’O-.%’f:NASA Hq. conducted two one-day training courses dealing
     with conflict of interest and standards of conduct for selected Hq.
     personnel. (NASA Announcement 63-108)
                                                                         205
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 63

May 20-24: Third European Spaceflight Symposium in Stuttgart,
   sponsored by British Interplanetary Societ French Astronautics
                                                   8
   Society, and German Society for Rocket echnology and Space-
   flight. (M&R, 5/27/63,14-15)
Muy 21: On 36th anniversa of Lindbergh’s histuric transatlantic
   flight, Astronaut L. Golfabn Coo r was presented NASA Distin-
                                          8“
   guished Service Medal by Presi ent Kennedy in White House
   ceremony. Also presented were NASA Medals for Outstanding
   Leadership to: G. Merritt Preston, Manager of Project Mercury
   Operations at NASA Launch Operations Center; Floyd L. Thomp-
   son, Director, NASA Langley Research Center ; Kenneth S. Klein-
   knecht, Mana er of Project Mercu OEce, NASA Manned Space-
   craft Center; Fhristopher C. Kraftf%irector of Flight Operations
   Div. of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; and Maj. Gen. Lei hton
   I. Davis, commander of AFMTC, Cape Canaveral. NASA &roup
   Achievement Awards xere presented to :DOD Recovery Forces ;and
   Air Force Space Systems Div.
      Following ceremony, Astronaut C o e was hailed by thou-
                                            opr
   sands in motorcade to the Capitol, where he addressed special
                                  .
   joint session of Congress :&‘. . I don’t think I have ever been with
   a team that was more dedicated, or striving harder, or was mom
   completely sold on their product than the total space effort and
   particularly the manned flight effort in which I am involved . . . .
      “I named my spacecraft FAITH 7 for three reasons: First, be-
   cause I believe in God and country; second, because of the loyalt
                                                                            5;
   to organization, to the two organizations, actually, to w h c h
   belong; and, third because of the confidence in the entire space
   team.. . .
      “I think of all things that I am constantly amazed a t is the
   public’s response to this program . . . it is tremendous1 impres-
                                                                   %
   sive.” The parades and activities following each flig t “show
                                        ------
                           tc ovnrOca thoir foolinm and their c ~ n f i d p ~ c e
   tE& j-rr,ericn=s           --r*--
   that we . . . can conduct peaceful ~ & & ~ p & p m s ; that we
   can conduct them openly, and under the surveillance of every
   man, woman and child in the entire world.” (Space Newa Round-
   up, 1/8/64,2 ;CR,    5/28/63, A3420-21)
 At the State Department luncheon honoring Astronaut Gordon
   Cooper, Vice President Johnson remarked :
      “In 1942, President Roosevelt called together our wartime lead-
   ers for the final decision on continuing or abandoning the Man-
   hattan project which produced the atomic bomb. One of the most
   eminent leaders present heard presentation from all sides. Then,
   he solemnly gave President Roosevelt his verdict :‘The bomb will
   never go off-I speak, of course, Mr. President, as an expert on
   explosives.’
      “In that first, uncertain spring of the space age 5 years ago, some
   conscientious experts took the same attitude toward Project Mer-
   cury. History has roved them grossly wrong. . . .
      “Hitler once pregcted the Nazis would wring England’s neck
   like a chicken. After the Battle of Britain, Winston Churchill
   said to Commons, ‘Some chicken. Some neck.’ We have heard
   some say recently that the civilian space program is only ‘leaf-
206                                                 1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   raking.’ Considering Major Cooper--considering the vast tech-
   nological coo eration which made his mission a success-I would
   say today, ‘!!jome leaf. Some rake.’” (Text, CR, 5/23/63,
   A3299)
May 91 :U.S. and U.S.S.R. signed three-year         eement for c
   tive rogram in nuclear studias. Signed i n % m w by Dry:;
   T. Zdborg, Chairman of AEC, and Andronik M. Petrosyants,
   Ohief of State Board for Peotceful Uses of Atomic Energy, agree-
   ment provided for ex&an as of scientific delegations and un-
                                P
   classified documents as we1 as joint conferences and visits by
   research specialists in fields of controlled thermonuclear fusion,
   reactor techniques, and physics of high-energy particles.
    (Shabad, N Y T , 5/22/63,4)
 Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada,
   carrymg experiments (1) to determine upper atmospheric winds
   and diffusion d c i e n t s by m a s of triangulation photography
                                   en
   of sodium vapor trail, and (2) to determine atmospheric temper-
   ature from photoelectric measurement of emission line width.
   The flight was part of an international effort to measure winds
   at widely separated geographical locations. (NASA Rpt. of S.
   Rkt. Launching, 6/14/63)
 Presidential Boeing 707 jet airliner flew nonstop from Moscow to
                                                                  R““d
   Washington in 9 hours 53 minutes 52 seconds, claiming 15 s
   records, the same number it had claimed for the outibound ight
   over the same route on May 19. (AP, N Y T , 5/22/63,18)
 Dr. L. R. Shepherd, President of British Interplanetary Society,
   urged European Space Research Organization ( ESRO) and Euro-
   pean Launaher Development Organization ( ELDO) combine to
    form a European space agency to “develop the technology and
   logistics of an economically viable space transportation system.”
   Suggesting it would be wasting time and money for Europe to
   attempt to duplicate U.S. communications satellite systems, he
   said European agency should concentrate on advancement of
    transportation bhniqu-including          construction of opbital sta-
   tions and establishment of lunar base capable of constructing
    and supplying space vehicles. (Wilcke, N Y T , 5/22/63, 37;
   M d R , 5/27/63,14-15)
May 91-94: Aviation/Space Writers Association met in Dallas, Tex.,
   more ehan 500 writers from throughout U.S. and Canada. (MSC
   Space News Roundup, 5/16/63,1)
       Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau, Special Assistant for Space, DOD
    DDME, said : “None of us harbors any illusions a b u t the expense
    of developing and o erating military space systems. Any and all
                         K
    military efforts in t is field will be costly. Of the two, develop-
    ment costs may well prove t o be the relatively minor one. Build-
                    rting an operational military spam force may in-
      9       =??
    vo ve costs ar out-distancing the investment in its research and
         and
    development. Military mission oapdbilities in space will not ipso
    facto evolve merely ‘becausewe are able to attain an experimental
    ca ability in the medium. The fundamental point here is that
       .p
    mi itary needs, by definition, require the capacity to conduct re-
    liable repetitive space operations . . . .
                                                                    207
                                                    19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

                                                             Gemini agree-
      “One of the important aspects of the [NASA-]
   ment is the stipulation that neither agency will initiate any major
   new programs or projects in the field of n w - e a r t h orbit manned
   space flight wibhout the wnsent of the other. That pamgmph
   was inserted for a specific purpose. The mnmpt of a Manned
   Orbital Space Station, Manned Orbital Development System, or
   similar names by which such a facility h w ;been called has been
   proposed and considered in the Department of Defense for at
   least five years . . . a limited space station project need not
   represent a national commitment as far-reaching and as large in
   scope as the manned lunar landing program. It should, neverthe
   lass, require a national, rather khan a single agency decision, to
   get it under way. There is no question bhat, if a decision is made
   to proceed, the Department of Defense should ‘be a full partner
   in this enterprise all the way, and may even quahfy for manage-
   ment of the national project to satisfy ‘both NASA and DOD needs.
   T i ,of m u m , requires a Presidential decision if and when the
     hs
   project is approved.” (Text, DOD Release 718-63)
      Col. James W. Little, Director of Pilot Training, USAF Air
   Training Command, said: “We envision that the basic prepara-
   tion for space fli h t taught now by the Edwards AFB Aerospace
                      f
   Research Test Pi ot Course will be taught eventually to all ilot
                                                                   P
   trainees in the Air Training Command. Student training wi 1be
   conducted into the suborbital area above 200,000 feet instead of
   below 50,000 feet as it is a t present . . . .” (A-N-AP Jozlmz &
   Re 6/1/63,2)
      a l l i a m Littlewood, American Airlines vice president, said
                                                                       td
    “The United States is woefully deficient in funds and efforts
   solve the essential research roblems, to gain the ba6c knowledge,
                                f
   to develop the potentials o atmospheric flight, as to safety, com-
    fort and efficiency, or to compete successfully and for long with
   the, fcnreigE T l r R I l t R g e s i” this field . . . .
      “Whereas all efforts and expenditures of NACA were devoted to
   aeronautic research, including large assignments in safety and
   reliability, we now f h d aeronautic research relegated t a fifth
                                                                 o
   echelon level in NASA and reduced to a negligible portion of the
   total budget and to a fraction of the former NACA effort.” (AP,
   NPT, 5/22/63,65)
May 21: Rep. A. J. Multer (D.-N.Y.) said at Briefing Conference on
    National Patent Policies and Practices, Washington : “Among the
    many subjects around which differing opinions swirl is that of
    Government patent policy,. particularly as respects ownership
   of patent rights on inventions resulting from governmentally
   financedresearch . . . .
      “I have introduced in the 88th Congress two bills of major im-
    portance in this field, H.R. 701 and H.R. 2349. Both bills were
   also introduced in the last, the 87th Congress.
      “The purpose of H.R. 701 is to attempt to bring some order out
   of chaotic and conflicting Government patent policies to the end
   that a uniform practice as respects ownership of patents derived
    from Federal contracts, and grants, research, and otherwise, would
   be carried out by executive agencies.
208           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,        1963

       “This bill has been referred to Subcommittee No. 3 of the House
   Judiciary Committee . . . .
       “The second bill, H.R. 2349, would amend the existing patent
   code to permit patent holders to bring civil actions against Govern-
   ment contractors who infringe their patents while carrying out
   Government contracts.
       “This bill i also in the Judiciary Committee but not yet re-
                   s
   ferred to a subcommittee . . . .” (Text, CR, 5/23/63,8743)
May 21 : Scientists and engineers from major NASA centers convened
   a t Lewis Research Center to discuss future manned planetary
   missions. (LRC Release 63-30, Lewis Chronology, 4)
May 22: New York City honored Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper with
   tickertape parade. At city luncheon honoring Major Cooper,
   NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and the entire Project Mer-
   cury team, Mayor Robert Wagner presented Major Coo er and
                                                              P
   Mr. Webb with city’s Medal of Honor and scroll acc Riming
   MA-9 space flight. Mayor Wagner said: “. . . It is remarkable
   how such a feat not only unites our own country in prideful pleas-
   ure, but also gives satisfaction to the rest of the world-to friend
    and foe alike. This is not man against man, but man against the
   elements, man against the forces of nature, man armed with the
   power of knowledge . . . .” ( N Y T , 5/23/63; CR, 5/29/63,
   A3487)
 At regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “Did
   the astronauts raise with you . . . their desire for another Mer-
   cury flight? Do you have any opinion yourself, tentative or
    otherwise, as to the desirability of another Mercury flight?”
       President Kennedy replied: “I think they feel that it’s worth-
    while. I haven’t discussed it with Mr. Webb. NASA should make
    the judgment and will make the judgment, and I would not inter-
    vene. But they do feel that a flight is useful and that the experi-
   ence of Major Cooper has indicated that the time between the
    last Gemini flight ‘as scheduled-the Mercury flight and the new
    Gemini flight, which is a period of almost 18 months-they feel
    may represent a gap which could be filled very usefully by another
    Mercury flight.
       “This will be a matter which I think they’re going to be talk-
    ing about this week with Mr. Webb and which I will discuss with
   him next week. But the final judgment must be NASA’s.”        (Tran-
    script, NYT, 5/23/63,18)
 NASA launched Scout rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with RFD-I
     (re-entry flight demonstration-1) payload for AEC. 480-lb.
    mockup nuclear reactor traveled 800-mi. suborbital trajectory
    and reentered southwest of Bermuda, but initial recovery attempts
    were not successful. Purpose of flight was to obtain data for de-
    signing space nuclear mactors that. disintegrate upon atmospheric
    re-entry. This was first of series of AEC flight tests to evaluate
    safety of aerospace nuclear power systems in operation. (Wallops
    Release 6 3 4 9 ; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/23/63)
 Two Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched from Ft. Churchill,
    Canada. The flights were part of a series of experiments to meas-
    ure winds and temperatures of the upper atmosphere. (NASA
    Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 6/14/63)
                                                                 209
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

May 22; Maj. Robert S. Sowers (USAF), Capt. Robert MacDonald
     USAF), and Capt. John T. Walton (us-) named by General
    &urtis E. LeMay (USAF) as reci ients of 1962 MacKay Tro-
                                       K
    phy “for the most meritorious flig t of the year.” The fliers es-
    tablished new transcontinental speed records on March 5,1962, in
    B 5 Hustler. (DOD Release 724-63)
      -8
 COSMOS XVII launched into orbit by U.S.S.R. (apogee, 488 mi.;
    perigee, 161 mi.; period, 94.82 min.; inclination, 49”02’ to equa-
    t r . As with previous Cosmos satellites, Tass said scientific
     o)
    equipment “intended for continuin the stud of interplanetary
    space . . . was mounted on board.’‘ (Tass, ?k?8t&z, 5/23/63,1,
    AFSS-T Trans.)
 FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby announced at Aviation/Space
    Writers Association meeting in Dallas that he had submitted
   recommendation to President Kem’edy on U.S. prospects for
    supersonic transport aircraft development. (Jackson, L A . Her-
    ald-Examh e r , 6/22/63)
May 23; Arcas rocket instrumented to measure electrical characteris-
   tics of lower ionosphere launched from Birdling’s Flat on the
   Canterbury Plains, New Zealand. First sounding rocket launched
   in cooperative U.S.-New Zealand program, Arcas with its launch-
   er was supplied by NASA ; payload was designed and built by Univ.
   of Caeterbury staff; rocket was assembled and launched by Royal
   New Zealand S i r Force. Two more Arcas rockets would be
   launched in the joint Univ. of Canterbury-Nasa project, sponsored
   by National Space Research Committee of the Royal Society of
   New Zealand. (NASA       Release 6.3-110)
 Sodium-vapor experiment to measure high-altitude winds and dif-
   fusion rates was launched on Nike-Apache sounding rocket from
   Wallops Island, Va. Sodium vapor trail, ejected from 27 to 127-
   mi. altitudes, was visible for several hundred miles from launch
   site. (W’aiio s Release 63-;ii j A?, TU&. Pusi, 5,’%/6Z)
 Astronaut, L. &ordon Cooper greeted by crowds of thousands in
   Houston as he returned home for first time since his 22-orbit
   MA-9 space flight. (OPI, NYT, 5/24/63)
 NASA announced plans to award contracts for support services in
   Launch Operations Center Merritt Island Launch Area (MILA)
   in four broad categories: base services; launch support v+ e ;
                                                             rcs
   administrative and management services; and communications.
    (NASA Release 63-111)
 Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman, Senate Com-
   mittee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking on the Sen-
   ate floor stated:
      “The decision to try to land a man on the moon by 1970 does
   not constitute a crash program . . . . Failure to decide on a
   schedule for attempting to reach the moon is uivalent to set-
                                                    ”B
   ting no deadline a t all. Work is done best-even y the technical
   community-which is not exempt from the laws of human na-
   t,ure-when a specific goal is set. An objective of landing on
   the moon in the 1960’s . . . permits us to work at a challenging
   pace; yet, does not absorb a greater percentage of the nation’s
   resources than our country can afford. This is only one percent
   of the gross national product at current rate . . . .
210                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

      “Project Apollo does not fit the description of a crash pm-
   gram: The wartime Manhattan project was a crash program.
   We used all the resources we could to develop the atomic bomb
   in the shortest period of time, regardless of cost. We maiii-
   tained duplicating operations over a 3-year period in the hope
   that one would work-and one did, in time to help win a war.
   Apollo is no such project. I f it were, we would not have had
   the controversy over whether earth-orbiting rendezvous, lunar-
   orbiting rendezvous, or a direct landing was the best way t o get
   a man to the moon. A crash project would have gone into opera-
   tional stages of all three alternatives to a moon landing . . . .
      “The shorta e of scientific manpower has not been aggravated
                  f
   in a measurab e way by Apollo. Those critics who fear that it
   has, have not established their case. For example, in 1970, it is
   predicted that U.S. scientists arid engineers will total 1,995,000,
   of which only 114,’700 or less than 6 percent, will work for NASA
   and its contractors. It should be noted that a substantial or-
                                                                   7
   tion of those are merely moving over from research and deve op-
   ment work on aeronautics and missiles . . . NASA is enlarging
    its efforts to increase the national supply of scientific and engi-
   neering personnel. Last fiscal year, the agency provided grad-
   uate science and engineering fellowships to 100 students at 10
   universities. I n its budget pro sal for fiscal 1964, NASA requests
                                    PP
   authorization for 1,250 fellows ips covering 110 universities.
      “Additionally, the agenc has provided funds for 150,000 square
    feet of research space at l v e universities; it is asking for funds
   to provide 400,000 square feet of laboratory space at 11 universi
   ties.” (OR,    5/23/63,8961-66)
May 23: Dr. George L. Simpson, NASA Assistant Administrator for
   Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, testified before
   Foreign Operations and Government Information Subcommittee
   of House Committee on Government Operations, appearing at
   Committee’s invitation to “discuss NASA’s       responsibilities with
   respect to the Satellite Situation Report and related procedures
   andreports . . . .
       “NASA has been publishing the Satellite Situation Reporl
   since . . . [Feb. 17,19611. It has included all unclassified infor-
   mation made available to it by NORAD except for a period from Jan-
   uary to April 1963 when it was thought that each agency, NASA
   and DOD, would handle its own reporting. NASA has resumed pub-
   lishing all unclassified information received from NORAD . . . .
      “In summar , NASA was never assigned the responsibility for
                   P
   reporting sate lite tracking information but did agree at DOD’S
   request, when the DOD’S Space Tracking effort became operational,
   to disseminate all unclassified information on satellites to the
   scientific community using the information made available to it
   by NORAD.
      “There apparently has been some variation in the type and
   scope of the lnformation which Defense has made available to us.
   We have released all unclassified material received from NORAD
   without modification . . . . Under recent NASA-DOD agreement,
                                 9,
           Satellite Situation Report lists information on Soviet satel-
   NASA’s
   lites when such information is: (1) cleared for release by Assist-
                                                                   211
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    ant Secretaq of Defense for Public Affairs, (2 oficially reported
                                                     k,
    to U.N. Regstry and confirmed by NORAD trac        data, and (3)
    publicly announced by Soviet government an confirmed by
    NORAD.
       Subcommittee members joined (=hairman John E. Moss (D.-
    Calif.) in accusing NASA of “unjustified subservience” to DOD
              Chairman Moss said that “official space information has
      wlndled to the point where a true rspective of where we stand,
                                        p“
    in relation to the Russians, scarce y exists so far as the general
    public is concerned . . . . [DOD policy] clearly has resulted in the
    withholding of information vital to public understanding of
    United States and Russian space activities” Asked if an Soviet
                                                              6.S.
    space failures in recent months had been kept secret by          au-
    thorities, Dr. Simpson replied that his answer could be given only
    in executive session. (Testimony ;Transcript)
May 23.- Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Director of International Pro-
    grams, outlined progress in XASA international programs before
    Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart, and said :
    “I believe that the essential meaning of this brief review of our
    own programs is that international pooling of efforts in the space
    field can be highly successfuI if it is rigidly directed to solid
    scientific and technical ob’ectives of mutual interest, requirin
                                                                     f
                                k
    significant rather than to en contributions by both sides an
    thoughtful planning. Perhaps even more important is the clear
    evidence that these successes engender growing interest and
    greatly expand the basis for succeeding coo rative enterprises.
                                                f?
       “We are quite aware of our peat inde tedness to European
    science and technology. We believe that the freest possible asso-
    ciation of our respective programs, where they complement and
    support each other, is the soundest way to proceed if we are to
    continue to benefit in this way and if we are to reciplbcate gen-
    erousiy. I beiieve that in the iong run cooperation between NASA
    for the United States and ESRO and ELDO f o r Europe affords
    the best means to expand the hard core of cooperation in space
    research, and that such collaboration will have the greatest po-
    tential for further extension to forward-looking nations every-
                          .
    where in the world . . .” (Text)
 I n paper presented a t Lunar Surface Materials Conference,
    Boston, NASA scientists Curtis W. McCracken (GSFC)and Maurice
    Dubin (Hq.) asserted moon is covered with dust from four inches
    to three feet dee . Basing estimate on data gained from space-
    craft and grounx observations of interplanetary dust particles,
    McCracken and Dubin said articles traveling a t hypervelocities
                                    K
    impact moon at such speed t at both article and its impact polnt
    are destroyed, creating lunar dust. h e y supported theory that
    dust layer is porous cobweb-like structure. (NASA Release
    63-109)
 Warren Rayle, Lewis Research Center engineer, described work he
     is doing in watching for “ball” lightning, a phenomenon occur-
    ring during thunderstorms and appearing as a round, glowing
     object which may move slowly or hang in the air. Lewls scien-
     tists engaged in research with plasma propulsion devices think ball
212           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,       1963

   li htning may be much like the plasmas they work with in the
      %
   la oratory. (LRC Release 63-31, Lewis Chronology, 4)
May $33; Senator John L. McClellan D.-Ark.) inserted in Congres-
                                     nd
           Record editorial from Z ustrial Research regarding s.
   si&
   816, bill to establish Commission on Science and Technology :“We
   simply doubt that it would be possible to pull together all Federal
   scientific activities under a single roof; and failure to do so would
   mean that the agency or de artment would be little or no improve-
                               8
   ment over the existing 0 ce of Science and Technology. It is
   hi hly unlikely that the National Bureau of Standards could be
      E
   ta en from the Department of Commerce; the National Institutes
   of Health from the Department of Health, Education, and Wel-
   fare; the Bureau of Mines from the Department of the Interior;
   the research and engineering activities from the Department of
   Defense; the nuclear laboratories from the Atomic Energy Com-
   mission ;etc., without impairing the effectiveness of these overn-
   mental bodies. However, we are willing to be convincef. But
   there is not much chance of change unless someone-such as the
   pro osed Commission-takes a good, hard look at the ongoin
       cf
   F e era1 science programs.” (ZR,5/63, in CR, 5/23/63,8786-877
 Heinz Koelle, Director of MSFC Future Projects Office, was awarded
    Hermann Oberth Medal at third annual European Space Vehicle
    Congress, Stuttgart. (Marsha22Star, 5/29/63,1)
May 2.4; Sodium-vapor experiment launched on Nike-Apache sound-
    ing rocket from Wallops Island, Va., ejected sodium-vapor trail
    from 26- to 122-mi. altitudes. Pink and reddish vapor clouds
    were visible for several hundred miles from launch site. This
    was last experiment in current sodium-vapor series, which in-
    cluded similar experiment May 23 and unsuccessful attempt earlier
    May 24 (pa load failed to operate properly and no sodium vapor
    was ejectear.
       Data from these tests would be correlated with information
    obtained from similar experiments conducted from other sites
    around the world. Eight countries (Algeria, France, Italy,
    Canada, Pakistan, Argentina, Japan, and the United States) were
    now participating in the international sodium program for ob-
    taining high altitude wind measurements and diffusion. (NASA
    Release No. 63-51, Wallops Releases 63-51 and 63-52)
 Soviet press agency Tass announced C O S M ~    XVIII satellite had been
    placed in orbit (apogee, 187 mi. ; perigee, 130 mi. ; period, 89.44
    min. ; inclination, 65O01’ to the equator). Onboard equipment
    was functioning normally. (Tass, Komsmnolskaya Pravda,
    5/25/63,1, AFSS-T Trans.)
 Dr. H u h L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Anatoli
    A. Bfagonravov of Soviet Academy of Sciences announced U.S.
    and U.S.S.R. had reached agreement on coordinated launching
    of satellites for measuring earth’s magnetic field. Agreement
    was subject to h a 1 approval by NASA and Soviet Academy of
    Sciences; a reement was expected to be approved in about a
    month. (A?&“, 5/25/63,25)
 USAF announced all radio experiments conducted with orbiting Proj-
    ect West Ford needles were successful. Tests included
                                                               213
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,       1 9 63

   coast-to-coast radio tests in which signals were bounced off2,000-
   mi.-high cloud. Needles were now stretched over 11,000-mi.
   section of polar orbit, lengthening at rate of 1,000 mi. per day.
   Scientists expected in six weeks cloud would lengthen to form
   closed path about 4,000 mi. in circumference. (Toth, N P T ,
   5/25/63,6)
Hay 24: Titan I1 ICBM launched from Cape Canaveral successfully
   placed re-entry payload in target area more than 6,500-mi. down
         third such success for Titan 1 . This was the 1,400th mis-
                                          1
   A=,
   sile to be launched from the cape. (DOD Release 755-63; CR,
   1/8/64,2910)
 NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of contract to
   Westinghouse Electric Corp. for design and delivery of main
   drive system of flight acceleration facility. Main drive motor
   will provide power to rotate 50-ft. arm, to end of which gondolas
   would be affixed for men or equipment. ( MSC Release 63-91)
 Chief of NASA Recruiting and Examining Programs Madison B.
   Smith said at meeting of Federal Personnel Associations of New
   York and New Jersey, Massena, N.Y., that recent study of 3,348
   scientists and engineers hired by NASA over 15-month period
   showed about one third of group came from industry. Bulk of
   those hired from industry were from.firms with personnel cut-
   backs. Another third of new scientists and engineers came from
   other Government agencies. “The rest of the 3,348 were mainly
   new college graduates. About 30, or less than one percent, were
    from faculties.” (NASA Release 63-113)
 Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Leo D. Welch and Pmi-
   dent Joseph V. Charyk left Washington, D.C., for 1 0 days of dis-
   cussions with Canadian and European communications officials.
    (Wash. Post, 5/24/63)
 Development of new helium isotope, Helium 2, was reported b Dr.
                                                             deb-
    6. M. Bi!aniuk Gf Tviiir. G f E?och&i=rZZd I)r. Eedc?!!fcJ.
   drian of Argentine Atomic Energy Commission. Finding
   opened “whole new vistas for the possibility of holdin other ex-
    periments of this kind,” Dr. Bilaniuk said. (AP, NYf’, 5/16/63,
    18)
 New York Journal-American reported as many as five Soviet cos-
    monauts had died in unsuccessful space flights Newspaper
     uoted informed Congressional and s ace authorities. (N.Y.
   Q o u ~ - ~ m e r i e a n , Balt. Sun,5/25&3)
                         AP,
 USAF Minuteman ICBM launched from Vandenberg AFB silo in suc-
    cessful flight. (DOD Release 767-63)
May 25: Panel of scientists, headed by Dr. Norman F. Ramsey and
   convened by President’s Science Advisor Committee and AEC’S
                                            B
   General Advisory Committee, recommen ed U.S. build atom ac-
   celerators with much greater energies than those now being used.
    For a “deeper understanding of the fundamental nature of
   matter,” panel proposed : construction of proton accelerator with
    approximately 200-bev ener         at Lawrence Radiation Labora-
    tory; beginning design stu?I es at Bmkhaven Laboratory on
    proton accelerator with proton energies from 600 to 1,600 bev;
    construction of “storage rings” to be used with existing Brook-
   haven accelerator. (Finney, N Y T , 5/26/63, 1, 45)
214           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

May 25: Award of patent for manned orbital spacecraft designed to
   glide into land or water landing was reported in New Yo&
   T i m s . Patent was obtained for NASA by Alan B. Kehlet, Den-
   nis F. Hasson, and William W. Petynia. ( N Y T , 5/25/63,13,18)
 West German scientists outlined plans for German space program
   at Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart. Pro-
   gram in,cludes: communications satellite to be placed in polar
   onbit ; high-energy rocket propulsion stage ; space transport sys-
   tem; space robe rocket with paraglider landing system to allow
                !
                i
   recovery an reuse. (Wilcke, N Y T , 5/26/63,13)
 U.S.S.R. launched improved models of carrier rockets for spacecraft
   on 7,500-mi. fli ht into Central Pacific. (Tass; NYT, 5/29/63,3)
May 26: Eight U.E. scientists issued statement supporting U.S. pru-
   gram to land men on moon and .countering recent criticism that
   instruments would be more valuable than men in lunar explora-
   tion. “This criticism raises im rtant issue5 which underlie the
   United States space effort.” gatement cited “overwhelming”
    Congressional approval of President Kennedy’s proposal for a
   manned lunar landing within this decade, presented on May 25,
    1961.
      “Was this support tendered for scientific reasons primarily, or
    was it motivated by a broader concern with national interests and
   national goals?” Project Apollo cannot be assessed on scientific
    merits alone, but even if it could be, “situations are bound to arise
   in which the human performance is indispensible.” Further-
    more, “the momentum and significance of the lunar program
    are derived from its place in long-range United States plans for
   exploration of the solar system,” at heart of which is role to be
    played by man. The eight scientists were: Dr. W. Maurice
                                                              Dr. Robert
    Ewing, Director of Lamont Geological Observato
    Jastrow, Director of NASA Goddard Institute for ,!$ace Studies;
    Dr. Joshua Lederbere, Chairman of Genetics Dept., Stanford
   Univ. School of Medicine; Dr. Willard F. Libby, Director of
   UCLA Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics ; Dr. Gordon
    J. F. MacDonald of UCLA Institute; Dr. Lyman Spitzer, Jr., Di-
    rector of Prinpton Univ. Observatory; Dr. Harold C. Urey,
    Prof. of Chemistry, Univ. of Calif. ; and Dr. James A. Van Allen,
    Chairman of State Univ. of Iowa Physics Dept. (Sullivan,
    N Y T , 5/27/63,1,13)
 D. D. Wyatt, Director of NASA Office of Programs, received honor-
    a v doctorate in engineering from Univ. of Missouri School of
    Mines and Metallurgy. I n commencement address, he told grad-
    uating class : “If you think you can rest on what you have already
    learned you will find yourself overtaken and pushed aside by the
    eager young graduates of tomorrow. Engineering, the applica-
    tion of the sciences, is no more static than the sciences themselves,
    and they are bursting at the seams of discovery . . . .
       “No area of human activity better focuses and dramatizes the
    meaning of today than does this boldest, most challenging arena
    of space . . . .” (Text)
 Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight
    Center, was awarded 1963 American Citizenship Award at 11th
                                                                  215
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

   annual German-American Day festival, North Bergen, N.J.
    (Marshall Star, 5/29/63,7)
May 96: Reported that Russian trawlers and other Soviet vessels
   regularly appeared off of NASA’s   Wall0 s Station to observe rocket
   launchings. (Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 5&6/63)
     97: Senator Clinton Anderson (D.-N.M.) replying on the
   floor of the Senate to Senate Republican Policy Committee’s criti-
   cism of Project Apollo (May l o ) , cited buildup of U.S. scientific
   and technological base: “. . . insofar as our national security i   s
   concerned, the development of this basic structure for space power,
   and the scientific knowledge and technical skill required to enable
   men safely to explore the moon is probably of greater consequence
   than the lunar landing itself . . . .
      “The decision to try to land a man on the moon by 1970 does not
   constitute a crash program. The decision-making process does
   not allow for’vacuums; failure to decide on a schedule for attempt-
   ing to reach the moon is equivalent to setting no deadline at all.
   Work is done best-even by the technical community-which is
   not exempt from the laws of human n a t u r e w h e n a specific goal
   is set. An objective of landing on the moon in the 1960’s waq
   chosen as the one that would permit us to work for a lunar landing
   in a rapid, yet efficient manner. This permits us to work at a chal-
   lenging pace; yet, does not absorb a greater percentage of the
   Nation’s resources than our country can afford. This is only 1
    percent of the gross national product at current rate.
      “Once having been made-in 1961-the decision i subject to F-
                                                          s
   view and modification every year at budget time and can be m d -
   fied within limits . . . . NASA is not immune from congressional
   appropriations review . . . .
      “Administrator Webb has announced that NASA, in this decade,
   will accomplish all the programs now planned, including lunar
                                                      tmn-third~ the
                                     This &      th~n             nf
   Innding for iln&r $35 &l_ji~n.
   budget requested by the Department of Defense for fiscal year
   1964 alone-a small price for the experience, technology, indus-
   trial base, and facilities which may be required for national
   security . . . .
      “Mr. President, there is ample room in the current debate on the
   space program for divergent views and criticism and for con-
   structive suggestions. But are we to believe that if we cancel the
   Project Apollo, the savings will be so translated into new hospitals,
   modern classrooms, and better diets for the ill nourished? . . . .
      “We are not faced with an ‘either-or’ pro sition. We can af-
                                          success^
   ford to have an effective, logical, and           space program and
   we can afford these other efforts to improve well-being here on
   earth. Mr. President, we cannot afford not to go to the moon . . . .
      “Any slowdown in our Nation’s space programs would certainly
   afford great. comfort to our enemies and spread dismay among our
   friends overseas. To slacken the space effort after having accepted
   publicly on a national basis the Soviet challenge would open us to
   accusations of lack of firmness and resolution regarding national
   goals. . . .
      “In 1958, President Eisenhower declared :
216           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

      “ ‘There is the factor of national prestige. To be strong and
   bold in space technology will enhance the prestige of the United
   States among the peoples of the world and create added confidence
   in our scientific, techno1 ‘cal, industrial, and military strength.’ ”
    (CR, 5/27/63,8961-896T
Muy H: First USAF F4C high-speed tactical fighter plane test-flown
   at Lambert Field, Missouri. F4C was modified USN Phantom I1
   aircraft. (DOD Belease 159-63)
 Proposed XASA-USN program of high-altitude, long-duration balloon
   flights was outlined rn M&tdes anuE Rockets. Pending DOD ap-
   proval, program would be conducted by NASA o m and USN
   BuWeps and would call for three types of &ghts: three-man,
   three-day flight using basic gondola and existing blloon of 10-
   million-cu.-ft. class; 14-day flight,     ibly with larger crew and
                                        ;ti““
   expanded equipment; and 30-day lghts with six- or seven-man
   crew. Program objectives: to check out space station equipment
   and components and to study biomedical and psychological fac-
   tors. (M&R,5/2?/63,18)
 Washington Evenkg S ~ U T     proposed appointment of “a devil’s ad-
   vocate” for US. space program. He would be “a member of
   Government, well qualified in science and engineering and well
   advised on the doings of lawyers and publicists . . .charged with
   building the strongest possible case against every space proposal-
   before it becomes sanctified as a line item in the Federal
   budget. . . .
      “This functionary . . .might well save the country a good deal
   of money and enhance the progress of the space program at the
   same time . . . .” (Editorial, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/27/63, A l 2 )
 New Pork: Times reported USAF was conducting Project Forecast-
   a series of self-analysis studies “designed to assure the integration
   of available scientific knowledge with the Air Force requirements
   for new systems to support future national security posture.”
   official sources said USAF was ‘%tepping p its continuing efforts
                                                u
   in 8 series of intensive studies” because of “accelerated rate of
   technological progress.” Ordered A4pril 17 by Secretary of the
   Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert and USAF C / S General Curtis E.
   LeMay, studies were overall res onsibilit of General Bernard A.
   Schriever, AFSC Commander. &aymon$ N P T , 5/27/63,1)
 Wade St. Clair of Welch, W. Va., joined NASA Hq. to develop the
   agency’s educational mdio programing. (NASA Release 63-96)
 Westinghouse Electric Corp. said its scientists had developed
   method for lubricating uipment i space. Dry lubricant,
                                             n
                               3
   tungsten disenlenide, 5 s he1 in tiny microscopic pockets through-
   out a matrix of silver or copper . . . . T h e d lubricant con-
   tinuously transfers to the metal surfaces over x c h the bearing
   metal rubs.” (AP, Balt. S o , 6/5/63)
                                zn
May 98: Letter from David Sarnoff, RGA Board Chairman, to Leo D.
   Welch, Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman, was disclosed
   by Drew Pearson in Washington Post. Referrin to new tech-
                                                        #
   nology of transoceanic transistorized cables, Sarno said :
      “In my view, the transistorized cable does not alter the funda-
   mental premise that early development of an operational com-
                                                                     217
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3

   munications satellite system is vital to our national prestige and
   to continued US. leadership in both communications and space
   technology.
      “Nevertheless, a second premise-that the facilities of a global
   satellite system will be needed to meet the expected growth of
   commercial demand for oversea communications services beyond
   1965-now needs careful reevaluation i terms of the possible
                                               n
   effects upon the [Communications] Satellite Corporation of this
   latest technological breakthrough. . . .
      “One transistorized cable, laid across the North Atlantic, could
   connect areas possessing nearly 90 percent of all the world’s
   present telephones . . . .
      “One new transistorized cable will have a capacity almost
   double that of all existing transoceanic cables. . . .
      “We should now consider an amendment to the present law
   which would enable the satellite corporation to acquire through
   purchase the international telephone and telegraph facilities and
   operations, both resent and planned, of all American carriers.
                       P
      “Unification o all the Nation’s international communication
   facilities and operations-satellites, cables, and radio-would
   in my opinion assure the satellite corporation’s commercial suc-
   cess, best serve our overall national interests, provide the most
   flexible and economical service to the public, and maintain
   America’s leadership in world communications . . . . (Wash. ”
   Post, 5/28/63 ; Letter, 4/2/63, in CR, 5/28/63,9207-09)
May 38: Eric Sevareid, in Washington Evening Star column titled “If
   Columbus Had Never Sailed,” discussed the debate on landing
   men on the moon :
      “It was two years ago this week end that President Kennedy
   sent his special message to the Congress in which he said that he
   himself believed we ‘should go to the moon.’ It has taken two
   years to develop the beginnings of a national debate on the ques-
   tion, among Congressmen, scientists and editoriahsts.
      ‘LI the beginnings of a debate because, on its public plane
          say
   at least, the argument has not yet come into its true focus. The
   true question is not whether we should try to land men on the
   moon-the nature of this political world as vel1 as the nature of
   men’s curiosity and the unquenchable spirit of science make it
   inevitable that we try-but how we go about it . . . .
      “This is only the beginning. Anyone has only t let out his
                                                             o
   imagination a short notch to see the ultimate possibilities-to see
   humanity’s push into space transforming this society, dominating
   its intellectual pursuits, absorbing its resources, altering the train-
   ing of its youth and its moral and religious come ts, upsetting
                                                          B!
   the priorities for the its social and humanitarian e orts on terra
   firma.
      ‘Those who scold the worriers say that to cancel the moon
   voyage would be as if Ferdinand and Isabella had cancelled
   Columbus’ voyage which opened the New World. They are more
   often right than they know. What is at stake are not only the
   new marvels to be found, but also the profound transfiguration
   of the source of the search.
     741-623 -
             1
             s
218           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 6 3

      “After the voyage of Columbus the Old World was never the
   same, in political, economic, military, social, religious or intel-
   lectual terms. After the first men walk upon the moon, Old
   Earth will never be the same and the change will begin in the two
   societies, Russia and America, now competing for the cataclysmic
   honor of commencing the alteration.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/28/63,
   A13)
Muy28: Stanford Research Institute report, prepared under Aerospace
   Industries Association grant, criticized “industry-Government
   aerospace relationship” as inefficient, full of overregulation and
   ineffective administration by Government and “over-manage-
   ment” by industry. Report said its findings were of national
   significance because aerospace industry’s output represents three
   per cent of gross national product and even greater share of manu-
   facturing volume and employment. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,
   5/29/63, A4)
 A. Adzhube ,Chief Editor of Izvestia, wrote an open letter to Wil-
   liam R. dearst, Jr., publisher and owner of the New York Jour-
   nal-American, denying the New York newspaper’s report that
   several cosmonauts had died in space fli ht.
      One of the cosmonauts reported dea$ Petr Ivanovich Dolgov,
   “actually did die but not in 1960 as the newspaper claims, but in
   1962, . . . when together with Major Yvgeniy Andreyev, he
   made an unprecedented parachute jump from the stratosphere.”
   Col. Dolgov and Maj. Andreyev received the title “Hero of the
   Soviet Union” for their test jump from the stratosphere balloon
   ‘(Volga.”
      The other L‘Sovietcosmonauts” reported missing by the Jour-
   nal-Amel.ican were: A. Belokonev, I. Kachur, A. Grachev, and
   G. Mikhaylov. These men were not cosmonauts, said Adzhubey,
   but instead technical workers,“who test various kinds of equip-
   ment, instruments, and clothing used both in space fli ht and in
   high-altitude aviation.” None of them made space Rights and
   they are all alive and well. (Zzvatia, 5/28/63,2, ATSS-T Trans.)
Muy 29: X-15 No. 3 flown by Joseph A. Walker ( N A S A ) to maximum
   speed of 3,858 mph (mach 5.52) and maximum altitude of 92,000
   ft. in flight test near NASA Flight Research Center to investigate
   heat rates a t relatively high s eds and low angles of attack. As
                                  l=
   secondary mission, pilot per ormed several maneuvers to check
   control methods while X-15’s automatic damping system was
   turned off. (NASA Release 63-119)
 NASA announced problems with two connectors to electrical amplifier
   in FAITH 7 Mercury spacecraft had caused loss of automatic control
   system during MA-9 space flight, forcing Astronaut L. Gordon
   Cooper to re-enter from orbit with manual control. Premature
   lighting of .05 g anel light during 19th orbit had indicated that
   automatic contro system would be inoperative until spacecraft
   descended to point of feeling .05 g. Then, in final orbit, trouble in
   inverter caused loss of automatic control system altogether. Post-
   flight examination of FAITH 7 circuitry traced .05 g signal and
   inverter failure to independent electrical connectors that failed to
   function due to moisture; in bath cases, electrical insulation of the
                                                                     219
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    connectorsbroke down. Correction of problems for future space-
    craft would include tighter control of moisture and increase of
    insulation of electrical components. (NASA Release 63-118)
May 99: NASA announced award of four-month study contract to RCA
    Astro-Electronics Div. for engineering evaluation of whether
    Tiros meteorological satellite could be modified to increase its
    cloud-cover photography capability. RCA would evaluate Tiros
    “wheel configuration,” calling for two TV cameras mounted in
    satellite to point in opposite directions; satellite would be launched
    into polar orbit spinning on its side, pointed towards earth at all
    times. Such satellite could provide complete earth coverage every
    three days. (NASA Release 63-115)
 Maj. L. Gordon Cooper received USAF pilot-astronaut wings from
    General Curtis E. JieMay, USAF c/s, in ceremony at the Pentagon.
     ( m s ,Chic. Trib.,5/30/63)
 A U.N. space subcommittee addressed a resolution to the United
    Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space empha-
   sizing the “urgency and importance of the problem of preventing
    potentially harmful interference with peaceful uses of outer
   space.’’ The warning was contained in a diluted version of a
    resolution in which the Soviet Union had hoped to see a direct
   criticism of the recent United States launching of millions of
   small copper wires in a communications experiment. Anatoli A.
    Blagonravov, the Soviet delegate, had denounced the experiment
    as a danger to other space studies, including flights by manned
    satellites. This was denied by Dr. Homer E. Newell, the US.
   representative. I n the resolution adopted a t the close of a two-
   meek session, the 28-nation subcommittee said that “certain experi-
   ments conducted in space may affect present or future scientific
   activities.” There was no reference to the U.S. “needles” or to
   any other experiment. (NYT, Wsen Edition, 5/31/63)
                                         etr
 NASA announced award of $97,000 study contract to Sylvania Electric
   Products, Inc., for preparation of plan to use satellites for collec-
   tion of weather and oceanographic data from unmanned weather
   stations, buoys, and balloons. Data collection satellite would in-
   terrogate each station, store information on magnetic tape, then
   transmit it to ground retrieval station upon command. (NASA
   Release 63-116)
 Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., contractor to NASA’s          Manned
   Spacecraft Center to build the lunar landing vehicle in which
   two U.S. astronauts would descend to the moon’s surface, named
   Space Technology Laboratory, a division of Thompson-Ramo-
   Wooldridge Corporation, to develop the lunar descent and landing
   engine. The lunar excursion module (LEX) of Project Apollo
   would detach from the Apollo spacecraft orbiting around the moon
   and slowly descend to the lunar surface. (MSC Release 63-92)
 Titan I1 exploded after about 50 sec. of flight in USAF launch, Chpe
   Canaveral. Cause of explosion was not yet determined. This
   was first Titan I1 explosion in 16 launches from Cape Canaveral,
   9 of which mere completely successful and 6 of which fell short of
   intended range because of second-stage di5culties. (DOD Release
   780-63)
220                                                19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

May 29 : Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully intercepted re-
   entry target vehicle launched by Titan I ICBM in recent tests,DOD
   announced. Nike-Zeus was fired and controlled from Army test
   installation on Kwajalein Island in the Pacific. (DOD Release
   772-63)
 USAF Minuteman flew more than 4,000 mi. in last launch conducted
   by Boeing Co. employees at AFMTC, Florida. Future AMR launch-
   ings would be conducted by USAF personnel. ( DOD Release 780-63)
 U.S. Army announced it was testing flexible-wing gliders for haul-
   ing cargo to troops in field. Built by Ryan Aeronautical Co.,
   gliders were installed on aluminum cargo containers carrying up
   to 1,100 lbs. and towed by helicopters, then released to deliver
   cargo. ( N Y T ,5/29/63,15)
May 30: Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairm’an, said in news confer-
   ence ending 10-day tour of Soviet atomic energy instdlations t h t
   prospects of building joint atomic reactor facility with U.S.S.R.
   would be negotiated under agreement signed in Moscow last week.
   Ohoice of site and cost of projed were among initial problems to
   be solved. Dr. Seaborg and his colleagues were first foreign dele-
   gation to visit new Soviet reactor development and testin center
                                                               8
   at Melekess and 70-bev accelerator under construction at erpuk-
   hov. (Shabad, NYT, 5/31/63, 2)
 Chief of the U.S. 14th G a s i t Guard District in Honolulu, Capt.
   George D. Synon, was quoted as confirming that a U.S. cutter had
   entered the Soviet rocket-test zone “by accident” earlier in the
   month. This was in reply to accusation by the Soviets that the
   U.S. had observed rocket tests on May 18 and 25. Capt. Synon
   stated that Dhe cutter “did not do any observing.” (AP, Wash.
   Post, 5/31/63)
May 31 : Federal Radiation Council reported radiation fallout would
   be higher in 1963 than in 1962 and would deposit twice as much
   strontium-90 as in 1962 and four times as much as in 1961. Fall-
   out would be “far short of figures which would cause concern or
   justify countermeasures,” and would diminish in 1964 and 1965 if
    atmospheric testing was not resumed. (Grigg, Wash. Eve. Star,
   6/1/63)
 Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by Inter-
   national Academy of Astronautics t succeed the late Dr. Theodore
                                         o
   von Krirmrin as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting
   next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Di-
   rector since 1961. (IAA Release No. 14)
During May: P a d D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in NASA Goddard Space
    Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, per-
    manent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would
    “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,”
    replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more
    useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and
   because, being much closer, we can send back information and
    samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space sta-
    tion, the moon has the advanoage of providing a large, stable plat-
    form with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a
    stratigraphic record of its history and of me’tmritic material
                                                                    221
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   which has accumulated on it. These dvantages are in a sense
   a one-way street. We can make many of the observations pro-
   posed for the space station from the moon as well, because the
   moon has essentially a s p environment. But we cannot examine
   the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the
    surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release)
Duri May: NASA awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div.
     7
   o North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of
   F-1 engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which
   had initiated F-1 development. (MdR,       5/6/63,13)
 U.N. Legal Subcommittee of Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
   Outer Space concluded second session of this year. Summary re-
   port described session as “a very useful and constructive exchange
   of views . . .” and recommended subcommittee delegations wn-
    tinue trying to reach agreement before next meeting of full com-
    mittee next fall. Reason for subcommittee’s failure to resolve
   even non-controversial general principles : Western delegations
    could not agree to Soviet demands that Soviet package proposal
    (April 17) be adopted in entirety and that international treaty
    incorporating these principles be drawn up and ratified by in-
   dividual states. (Au. Wh. 5/20/63,129)
 Conclusions on where the armed forces “are going” in the rest of this
   decade were outlined recently by Gen. William F. McKee, u s a
   Vice Chief of Staff.
       ‘‘. . . we must watch our own and the Soviet’s s ce programs
                                                        g.
   carefully. This is probably the area of greatest emand on our
   vision as a nation. For it is here that one of us, probably, will
   find the key to the strategic superiority of the 1970’s. Secretary
   McNamara says, ‘Ithink there is no clear requirement for military
   purposes for manned operations in space as we look at the future
   today.’ However, Mr. McNamara said more: ‘. . . But, should
   CRC $.we!~p it e~fi!d  cexe p” wdden!y in 8 field in which the lead-
   time for the developmental technology is so long that I believe we
   must ant.ici ate that possibility today . . .’.
                R
      “I,t o t ink we must anticipate that today. While this is a
             o,
   national effort, it is also an absolute obligation of those of us re-
   sponsible for our national security.” (Air Force I n f o r m a t h
   Policy Letter, June 1963)
 L n Div. of General Precision, Inc., awarded $9.5-million contract
  ik
   to develop two Apollo mission simulators for training astronauts
   at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and Cape Canaveral. Con-
   tract was awarded by North American Aviation, Inc., prime
   Apollo spacecraft contractors. (Au. Wk.,     5/6/63,25)
 First meeting of NASA Advisory Committee on Biotechnology and
   Human Research held at Ames Research Center. (Au. Wk.,
   5/6/63,103)
 U S . A m y Corps of Engineers officially announced opening of its
   Canaveral District office at Merritt Island, Fla., first district orga-
   nized solely for missile and space construction. (MdR, 5/13/63,
    45)
222           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

Dzvring M a y : X-15 pilot Maj. Robert M. white (USAF) awarded Vil-
    lanova University’s Mendel Medal for scientific achievement in
    honor of his record-breaking flight July 17, 1962. (A-N-AP
    J m m . & Reg., 6/11/63,6)
 Aerospace Medical Association awarded Lyster Award to Maj. Gen.
    M. S. White (USAF), Air Training Command Surgeon at Ran-
    dolph A m , Tex. (A-N-AP J a m . & Reg., 6/1/63,5)
 USAF completed its 30-day test of regenerative atmosphere system
    developed by Boein Airplane Co. Three airmen occupied
                          f
    1,115-cu.-ft. chamber or full duration of test, relying on oxygen-
    recovery system to replenish normal four-hour air supply. ( A s t ~ o -
    mtk and Aerospace Eng?hee&g7 5/63,137)

                                                                   red
 Announced that the Air Force launched six research rockets desi
    to study the structure of the earth’s atmosphere by photograp ing
    chemical trails released by the rockets. The flights, launched from
    Eglin AFB, Florida, on May 15,17 and 21, reached the ionosphere,
    60-90 mi. above the earth. Each rocket was fired between sunset
    and sunrise. Luminescent chemicals were released and photo-
    graphed by ground-based cameras. The high altitude studies
    are being made of turbulence and wind shears. (OAR Release
     #6-63-5)
  Bell Telephone Laboratories received patent for im roved system of
                                                      8
    controlling satellite attitude. Invented by C.        Cutler, system
    operates by two-way radio which receives signals from satellite
    for measuring its alignment ; ground computer analyzes attitude
    data and figures any necessary attitude changes, relays them to
    instruments on satellite which makes corrections in satellite’s posi-
    tion. (Jones, N Y T , 5/11/63,28)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb sent a report to the Congress on
    the construction of facilities for the University of California :
       “. . . the University’s eophysics building is being expanded by
                              kr
    the addition of wings          geology and chemistry laboratories.
    Accordingly, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
    plans to provide funds for the construction of a 62,000 oss square
                                                            P
    foot addition to that building complex in the amount o $2,000,000.
    The addition will be known as the space science building.” (Leg.
    Act. Rpt. 11/84)
 Igor I. Sikorsky International Troph for 1962 awarded to Sikorsky
                                       8o.p.   for flight of Sikorsky S-
    Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft
    61 helicopter Feb. 5, 1962, setting world speed record of 210.6
    mph over 19-km. straight-line course. Lt. Robert W. Crafton
     (USN) and Ca t. Louis K. Keck (USMC) were pilot and co-pilot
                          Wk.,5/13/63,23)
    respectively. PAW.
  Inflight testing of infrared communications between two moving air-
    craft conducted a t AFSC Aeronautical Systems Div., Wright-Pat-
    terson AFB. With communications carried over extremely narrow
    infrared beam, system is difficult to jam, intercept, or detect.
     (AFSC Release 31-105-24)
 Richard N. Thomas, professor of astrophysics and chairman of
    Faculty Committee for Astrophysics of Dept. of P h sics and
                                                             6
    Astrophysics, Univ. of Colorado, was awarded Dept. of ommerce
                                                                 223
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3

    Gold Medal for Exceptional Service. ( A s t r m u t k s and Aero-
    space Engineering, 5/63,9)
During March, A@. am?May: Total of 227 NASA appearances at 70
   hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics,
   involvmg 24.6 hours. T i involved 546 man-hours of primaq
                            hs
    witnesses, not including backup witnesses. (NASA Lag. Act. Rpt.
    11/88)
                             JUNE 1963
Jwne 1: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., returned to U.S. after vaca-
     tioning in Japan with his famil since shortly after MA-9 manned
                                    i
     space flight, during which he ad been stationed aboard Pacific
     tracking ship Coczstal Sentry. Glenn’s candidness and openness
     during visit was said to have “boosted U.S. image” in Japan.
      (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/2/63)
  In address on “Prelude to Independence” a t Williamsburg, Va,
     Barbara Ward of The Economist (London) said : “If the men of
     1776 had attempted the opening up of America with the testy im-
     patience of so many politicians today, they would barely have
     crossed the Adirondacks . . . .
        “Seen in the aspect of not a single decade but of the 50 or 60
     years needed for full modernization, economic assistance to our
     crowded world could seem as challenging as our space ventures
     and far more rewarding. . . .” (Text, Wash. Post, 6/2/63, A8)
   Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D.-W. Va.), addressing Alumni of Concord
     college, said : “Our marvelous technological developments, our
     flights into outer space, have demonstrated that there is virtually
     no limit to the development of the human mind. Today the moon
     is within range, tomorrow the stars-after that, who knows?
     Human knowledge is a pyramid whose topmost point stretches
     into infinity . . . .
         “Who develops the mind of the astronaut, and his co-workers?
     That is the job of the teacher, of education. That pyramid of
     knowledge . . . . restsupon a base of solid, fundamental learnin
                                                                        5
     which makes all of our splendid achievements possible . . . .
      ( T a t , CR,6/6/63, A3655-56)
J m e 2: I n commencement address a t MacMurray College (Jackson-
     ville, Ill.), Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “. . . We
     are more masters of the future than of the past but we allow the
     hand of the past to rest heavily upon us . . . .
        “At toda ’s pace, the sum of human knowledge is being doubled
               J
      every deca e. On a relative basis, the class of 1963 may wcll be
      three centuries of learning ahead of the class of 1933. But we are
      asking a generation capable of going to the moon to live in a world
      ordered and fixed by generations which scarce1 knew the model
      T-and that makes no real sense . . . .” (’dxt, CR, 6/4/63,
      9438-39)
  Japanese newspaper Yomiui reported Japanese Space Development
      Council was preparing to build navigational satellite for launch-
      ing by U.S. w i t h n five years. Plan was to be submitted to Prime
      Minister Hayato Ikeda for approval. ( L A . Times, Wash. Post,
      6/4/63)
      224
                                                                       225
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

Jwne $: NASA Associate Director of Plans and P o r m Evaluation
                                                       rga
     Addison M. Rothrock said in keynote address, Southern States
     Work Conference: “Please educate our youth well. Teach them
     of the power that inevitably comes with knowledge of our universe
     and the people who inhabit it. Teach them sciences so they can
     achieve triumphs in science and engineering. Teach them the
     humanities so they will use these triumphs for man’s betterment.
     And teach them to blend these two great branches of learning
     . . . .” (Text)
Jwrw 3: NASA requested proposals for a broad range of experiments
     applicable to life-support stems for men and equipment i             n
                                   %
     space. Experiments would             conducted by NASA on spacecraft
     in orbit and on aircraft with from 15 sec. to 5 m h . of zero gravity.
     NASA 05% Advanced Research and Technology would evaluate
                     of
     industry and university proposals. (NASA Release 63-117)
  I n commencement address at Univ. of Pittsburgh, NASA Adminis-
     trator James E. Webb said: “In the world you enter today, man
     is no longer rooted to terra firma, to his native land, or even to
     his city block, either in the literal sense or in his understanding
     of the powerful forces of the universe, of which he is such a
     minuscule part. Increasingly man comprehends that the new
     understanding and knowledge that are being unleashed by science
     and technology will alter his existence in more ways and more
     rapidly than he can possibly foresee . . . .
        “Forty years elapsed between the Wright brothers and the first
     supersonic flight. Only 10 years were required to reach 4,000
     miles per hour in the X-15. Applying this knowledge, we now
     see a shrunken and bipolarized world, within which we can travel
     anywhere in a few hours, but cannot solve without force and vio-
     lence man’s relation to man. And all of this was achieved using
     the atmosphere up to twice the height of mountains.
        “By the end of this decade, man will have stood on the moon
     and looked outward to the vast universe and beyond, and learned
     in the process vastly more about the earth itself . . . . (Text,
                                                                 ”
     CR, 6/12/63, A3’792)
  I n Wells a l l e g e (Aurora, N.Y.) commencement address, NASA Di-
     rector of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes said : “How
     about women in space ? The answer is yes, but not immediately.
     A t the moment, however, all of the qualified pilots are men.
        ‘L
           I n a larger sense, of course, women are already in space. The
     astronaut does not fly alone. He relies on the thousands of people
     in his supporting team on the ground. These include women as
     well as men. On the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space
     Administration, there are about 150 women scientists and engi-
     neers. Many more are emplo ed by the contractors throughout
                                     i
     the country who perform the ulk of our work. In this rapidly
     growing program, there are many interesting career opportunities
     for those of you who complete the necessary preparation . . . .      7,

     (.Text)
226            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

Jwne 3: Students in Washington, D.C., area began helping Weather
     Bureau in Project Skywatch-drawing cloud formations, record-
     ing wind speed and direction, temperature and relative humidity
     and precipitation, in project to identify specific cloud formations
     photographed by Tiros meteorological satellites. About 50 stu-
     dents were participating in project. (Commerce Dept. Release
     WB-63-s)
  NAEA Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond
     L. Bisplinghoff said in address before Society of Aerospace
     Material and Process Engineers in Philadelphia: “There is no
     area of technology more important to our space effort than mate-
     rials and their processing. Virtually every device that is em-
     ployed in space is limited in either performance or efficiency by
     its constituent materials. The space program is literally paced
     by our ability to use and process materials . . . .” (Text)
  I n Aviation Week and #pace Technology editorial, Robert Hotz
     said : “The current debate has done much to explain to the public
     and Congress the real aims of the space program, which are the
     development of a broad capability in space technology that
     eventually can be applied to whatever national purpose or need
     that may arise in the future. Gradually, the point that the
     manned lunar landing Apollo program is simply the best possible
     focal point for this effort in its present phase is emerging from
     the verbal pyrotechnics of the current debate. I t is becoming
     more readily apparent that Apollo is not just an ‘over-Niagara-
     Falls-in-a-barrel’ type of dare-devil stunt, but a well-conceived
     program of broad exploration across the whole spectrum of space
     technology as we know it today.
        “The solid technical success of the Mercury program, particu-
     larly in the six- and 22-orbit flights of Cdr. Schirra and Maj.
     Cooper, has done much to make this point clear. It should be
     obvious now that Mercury, Gemini and Apollo spacecraft are
     really the Nina, Pinta and Santa Marias of space exploration, and
     are simply paving the way for whatever useful purposes this
     nation eventually decides to utilize space. . . .” (Au. Wk., 6/3/63,
     17)
  Maj. Robert M. White (USAF) received 1962 General Thomas D.
     White USAF Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M.
     Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace re-
     search through piloting x 1 rocket research aircraft. USAF
                                  -5
     Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic
     Society. (DOD Release 789-63)
          .-
Jwne 3-11 Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation COGPAR (Committee or.
     Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held
     in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter
     and participating through NAS Space Science Board, delivered 70
     papers a t Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in
     conjunction with COSPAR meeting. (NAB Release)
        Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized
     US. space activities from approximately Jan. 1to Dec. 31,1962 :
     more than 100 high-altitude research balloons ; approximately
                                                                227
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from
six North American sites) ; and more than 100 scientific sounding
rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and sci-
ent&-ap lications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report
to ax*ARp
   Head of Soviet dele tion A. A. Blagonravov summarized So-
viet space activities o f ? k 2 : launching of i n k lanetary prdw
                                                  3Il
BEARS I; 71 geophysical and meteorological soun ng rockets; 12
unmanned (Cosnos) satellites; and t w o manned spacecraft,.
Elaborating on XARS I, he said that at 106,pO0,000 kilometers from
the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted i a
                                                                 n
violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth,
making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the
probe.” (NYT, 6/4J63,10)
   Soviet scientist S. V. Vernov reported on June 4 that cosmic-
my bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had
doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than
$000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood,
NPT, 6/5/63)
   On June 5, NAGA Goddard Space Flight G n t e r offered world
scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground tslem-
etry station suitable for ionospheric research. GBFC scientists
Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versa.ti1-
its, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal
tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere
by the international scientific community, especially during the
IQGY [International Year of the Quiet Sun].” (GSFC Release)
   Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, an-
nounced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned
space flights in l S 3 , would launch two unmanned probes toward
Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos
series. (UPI, Wash.Post, 6/6/63)
   Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of NASA Goddard Space Flight Cen-
ter Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion
July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions
Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation par-
t.icles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons
trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most im-
 portant and perplexin problems in radiation belt work for
               .
several years . . [andy for the first time, this past year we have
obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .?7

 (GSFC Release ;AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63)
   U S . and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of
their countries to cooperate in IQSY s ace experiments. Also at
                                       P
COSPAR, Japanese scientists reported p ans to use U.S. Relay com-
munications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games
in Tokyo in 1964. (UPI, Wash. Post, 6/7/63)
   Dr. W. R. Adey of UCLA Brain Research Institute on June 7
challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper%        report that he sighted
smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA-9
orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces
feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to
228             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

      make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on
      judgment are not operative . . . . Unrecognized disorders of
      visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of
      considerable importance in space research.”
          Dr. George T. Hauty of FAA Civil Aeronautics Research Insti-
      tute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of
      sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes
      and even hallucinations. ( N Y T , 6/8/63, 26 ; Electronic News,
      6/10/63)
          B. E. Welch of USAF School of Aerospace Medicine reported that
      results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be
         roblem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space
      i i hts. (NAS Release)
          %r.William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center
      said astronauts under weightlessness u to two weeks could be ex-
                                             %
      pected to lose some calcium from their ones, probably equivalent
      to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks : “For flights
      longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule fli hts of in-
                                                             Y
       definite length, grave questions of the continued norma cy of bone
       structure and bone development arise.” ( N Y T , 6/8/63,26)
           Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered
       with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical ob-
       servations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said
       former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly cov-
       ered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented
       is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was
       made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet
       Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained
       in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood,
       N Y T , 7/9/63,81; A*. Wk.,6/10/63,31)
           Dr. D. E. Graveline of USAF School of Aerospace Medicine re-
          orted provision of artificial ravity in manned spacecraft was
       L i n g considered for prolongei manned space flights. Artificial
       gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of
       weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings-in prolonged
       weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory sys-
       tem to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make
       necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry
        ( N Y T , 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63)
           R. S. Young of NASA Ames Research Center reported June 8 on
       experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms sur-
       vive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experi-
       ment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with
       presence .of water ; further experiments were being conducted to
       determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these
        organisms and to find their shortest growing period. I f experi-
       ments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most
        rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there
        would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization.
                                                     -
        (NAS Release)
           Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatorv said June 9 that
        astronomer on“ Mars, using most advanced eqdpment known to-
        day, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth.
                                                                    229
                                                     19 63
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros
    satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life
    on earth.” (AP, N Y T , 6/10/63)
June 3-6: NASA 16 astronauts received jungle survival training at usm
    Caribbean Air Command Tropic Survival School, Albrook m,
    Canal Zone, includin classroom instruction and three-day field
                          B
    practice in local jung e. (MSC Release 63-96)
J w 4: “First conclusive detection” of water vapor on Mars was an-
    nounced by Cal Tech. Mars’ water supply was found to be mini-
    mal-perhaps as little as half a cu. mi. compared with millions of
    cu. mi. on earth. Findin was made by anal sis of spectrum of
                               cf
    light from Mars gathere by Mt. Wilson a n i M t . Palomar Ob-
    servatories in California. (Hill, NPT, 6/5/63,17)
  Video tape of Pixsident Kennedy’s address before World Food
    Congress in Washington was transmitted to European television
    viewers via RELAY I communications satellite. (NASA Release
    63-121)
  George J. Feldman, a director and incorporator of Communications
    Satellite Corp., said in address before Federal Bar Association in
    Washingtun :
       “The execution of this national rogram [developing a commer-
                                        P
    cial comsat system] and the task aced by the corporation is diE-
    cult, complex, and truly formidable and should be viewed by the
    objective with understandin . This is the uncharted region of
                                    B
    technology, international re ationship and agreements, and na-
    tionalsupport . . . .
       “Up to this int the United States has been the innovator and
                   R”
    leader in this eld, with great benefit to our national prestige, and
    international standing and with the satisfaction of pioneering a
    part of the future. Having taken this pioneering step, we have
    now assumed our share of responsibility and the latter is the
    operative word . . . .” (Text, CR:6/20/63. A3948491
  Pan American World Airwavs President Juan T. Trippe announced
    Pan Am had ordered six Concorde su ersonic a i r h e r s being de-
                                            hrp.
    veloped jointly by British Aviation              and Sud-Aviation of
    France. EOAC also reported ordering six of the 1,500-mph jet-
    liners; Air France was believed to have ordered six, but report
    was unconfirmed. (Carter, NPT, 6/5/63,34)
  Historian Arnold Toynbee, in Washington to address World Food
    Congress, said in news interview that US. and U.S.S.R. together
    controlled 80 per cent of ~ o r l d ’ technical power but both nations
                                          s
    were neglectin humanitarian applications. He cited the “moon
                    f
    race” a examp e of both nations “escapism” from basic problems
            s
                                                     A
    of mankind. (Richmond News Leader, 6/12/63
  Sen. Edward V. Long (D.-Mo.) and 13 other enators proposed
    “freedom of information” bill to require Government agencies to
    publish in Federal Reghter all policy statements, rules, and pro-
    cedures, and to make available for inspection all final opinions,
    statements, and interpretations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/63)
  USAF launched Atlas E ICBM on successful 4,000-mi. test-flight from
    Vandenberg AFB. (WD Release 810-63)
June 5 : NASA awarded contract for designing and fabricating ad-
    vanced four-man, six-month, life-support system to General
230           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 ~ 3

      Dynamics Corp.’s Astronautics Div. (GD/A) . 18-month contract
                             r
      called for research, desi , fabrication, testing, and delivery to
      NABA Langley Research enter of fully operating prototype life-
      support system for space flights. (NASA Releasz 63-126 ; Langley
      RelertSl3)
Jzune 6,:USAF conducted successful test-firing of “second generation”
      Minuteman ICBM from Cape Canaveral, its re-entr vehicle im-
                                                          9
      pacting target area near Ascension Island. (DOD Re ease 820-63)
   NASA announced selection of Boeing Co. and Douglas Aircraft Co.
      for final negotiations leading to manned orbital research labora-
      tory study contracts. NASA Langley R k a r c h Center would nego-
      tiate definitive three-month study contracts with the two com-
      panies. (NASA Release 63-120 ;Langley Release)
   I n Air Force Academy commencement address, President Kennedy
      said: “It is my judgment that this Government should immedi-
      ately commence a new program in partnership with private in-
      dustry to develop at the earliest practical date the prototype of a
      commercially successful supersonic transport superior to that
      being built in any other country of the world . . . . Neither the
      economics nor the politics of international competition permits us
      to stand still in this area.” ( W a h . Post, 6/6/63)
   President Kennedy witnessed successful firings of six Army missiles
      a t white Sands Missile Range: Honest John, Little John, Ser-
      geant, Hawk, Nike-Hercules, and Nike-Zeus. (M&R, 6/10/63,
      12)
   I n commencement address at Mundelein College, Chicago, AEC Chair-
      man Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg said :
         “Today, science has become the dynamic factor in our society.
      There are a p t many intelligent and dedicated men and women
      i the world using their highest talents and intelligence to try to
        n
      solve complex problems about our universe . . . .
         “Answers to these questions will serve not only to satisfy our
      human curiosity, but, of course, will have enormous practical im-
      plications. Curiosity about our universe is part of our human in-
      heritance, and the scientist is, after all, a person with a highly
      skilled and intelli ently directed sense of curiosity . . . .”
                      cf
         Discussing mo ern technology’s solutions to some old problems,
      he said : “Perhaps a lesson to be gained from these accounts is the
       fact that there is a unity of knowledge and knowledge seeking.
      There is a continuum that extends from theories of the origin of
      the universe through the rise of life on earth to the evolution and
      history of man, and on to the completion of the cycle with such
       an abtruse field as high energy particle theory. There is no knowl-
      edge that is isolated from the total fabric . . . .” (Text, CR,
       6/6/63, A3667-68)
   USAF CH-3B helicopter landed at LeBourget Airport near Paris
       after 35-hr., 5-stop flight from Otis AFB, Mass. (UPI, NYT,
      6/6/63,4)
 June 5-6‘: India’s President Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan toured Cape
       Canaveral and witnessed two successful test launchings : USAF
       Minuteman ICBM on June 5 and USN Polaris A-3 missile on June 6.
       (AP, NPT, 6/7/63,2; MdR,        6/17/63,12)
                                                                    231
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

J w 6: U.S. Ambassador to U.N. Adlai E. Stevenson said in letter to
   U.N. Secretary General U Thant that U.S.S.R. had failed to
   register six space vehicles which achieved orbit last Aug. 25,
   Sept. 1and 12, Oct. 24 Nov. 4, and Jan. 4 (1963). Stevenson re-
   peated charges that U.B.S.R. also had concealed four high-altitude
   nuclear tests i autumn 1961. Letter was in response to Soviet
                   n
   Ambasador Nikolai Fedorenko’s askin U.N. Secretary General
   to circulate Tass article criticizing U.S. k o j e c t West Ford, which
   Stevenson defended. ( L A .T k s , Wash.Post, 6/7/63)
 Unnamed NASA spokesman quoted as saying EcHo 1’s orbit was “hold-
   ing up h e ” and could last another year or more. Although par-
   tially crumpled, balloon satellite launched Aug. 12,1960, was still
   visible to naked eye. (mr,Wmh.Post, 6/6/63)
 Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) ,speakin on the Senate floor,
   said Committee on Aeronautical and Space 8ciences would
   vide a forum for [ n o n - ~ ~ s ~ ]
                                      witnesses who are recognLJ%
   experts in their respective fields. They will have an opportunity
   to analyze our space objectives and to air their views, pro and con,
   on the manner in which we are seeking to achieve national
   goals . . . .
      “Why is this particular year [ F Y 19641 of unusual si@-
   cance ?
      “First, there is a tremendous increase in NASA’s t               uest
                                                            bud
   and there Seems to be no ceiling in sight for suc&g%al
   years . . . .
      “Second . . . NASA’s   funds are largely committed to landin a
                                                                     tbs
   man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth d u r i v
   decade. The priority given this project, which has been vanously
                                                                       .
   estimated to cost between $20 billion and $40 billion. raises the
     uestion of adequate funding of other space activihes . . . 9,
   YCR,   6/6/63,969O)
 U.K. 0 5 c e of the Minister for Science announced mntract had
   been awarded to British Aircraft Corp., Ltd., for development
   and construction of UK-3 (S-53) satellite. NASA would launch
   the experimental satellite into orbit in about four years. (AP,
   W m h Post, 6/7/63)
 Scientists at the NASA Lewis Research Center succeeded in driving an
   experimental solid-propellant rocket motor into unstable corn-
   bustion. This new experimental technique makes                  ssible a
                                                              p“
     lanned research investigation of combustion instabi ity prob-
   Erns. (Lewis Chronology,. 5)
 wsN test-fired Polaris A-3 rmssile from land pad a t Cape Canaveral
   in successful flight down Atlantic Missile Range. (M&R,
   6/17/63,12)
 DOD announced two singlqengine Cessna 180 air lanes of USN Arctic
                                                   R
   Research Laboratory made dee t known lig t-plane penetration
                                    ges
   of Arctic Ocean Basin when t ey landed May 24 at North Pole.
   From May 21 to June 2, nine sites were occupied on pack ice
   so that scientists could collect scientific data on gravity and on ice
   conditions. (DOD Release 814-63)
 National Aeronautic Association preyiiient Martin M. Decker an-
   nounced National Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1962 would be
232                                                    1963
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

      awarded to Dr. Merlyn McLaughlin, president of College of
      Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery of Des Moines, Iowa. (NAA
                              on exploration of Mars held in Denver, with
      objectives of assessing effort necessary for manned exploration of
      Mars, reviewing planning for such mission, estimating timetable,
      and defining scientific value. Symposium was sponsored by
      NASA, American Astronomical Society, American Institute of
      Biological Sciences, and American Institute of Aeronautics and
      Astronautics. (MarshallStar,6/5/63,1,8)
          Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Air Force, speaking at
      Symposium on the Exploration of Mars of the American Astro-
      nautical Society, discussed the two-fold task of the Air Force:
         . . . . first, to protect the Nation’s exploration and research in
      (L

      space as effectively as the Air Force contributes to protection of
      our national activities on the Earth’s surface, and second, to act
      as the Department of Defense agency which helps insure the Na-
      tional Space Program’s success through provision of Air Force
      facilities and Services to the overall effort.
          “The question of whether there is a need of an o erational
                                                                R
      capability for United States military forces beyond t e atmos-
      phere may alread have been answered for us in a number of
                         i
      public statements y Soviet military and political leaders . . . .
      Their major new book on MiZitary Strategy . . . says, “Soviet
      military strategy acknowledges the need to study the use of space
      and space vehicles to reinforce the defense of the socialist mun-
      tries. . . . It would be a mistake to allow the imperialist camp to
      gain any superiority in this area.’ ” (Text)
           Speakin at a symposium on the Exploration of Mars in Denver,
                 P
      Colo., Wo fgang E. Moeckel, chief of mc’s Electromagnetic
       Propulsion Division, said: “The potential of electric ropulsion
                                                               P
       for Mars exploration is a great or greater than that o other s p -
                                    s
      tems now under developmen and it becomes even more attractive
                                   I.
      for the exploration of the arther reaches of the solar system.”
       (LRC Release 63-35, Lewis Chronology, 6 5 )
          H i hlights of parellel studies on three classes of Nova launch
           f
      vehic es, conducted by General Dynamics/Astmnautics and
      Martin-Marietta Corp. for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center,
      were presented by Andrew Kalitinsky, GD/A Program Director.
       ( A m Wk.,   6/10/63,34)
           Dr. H. 0.Ruppe of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Future
       Projects Ofc estimated manned Mars mission would require
                    fie
       about $9 billion for interplanetary spacecraft, $5 billion for o -
       erating custs (including procurement of Nova launch vehiclw7,
       and $2 billion for remaining production and procurement costs.
           Dr. Ru pe presented p p e r on “Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit
               8
       to Mars rbit and Return,” discussing results of Project Empire
       (Early Manned Planetary -1nbrplanetary Roundtrip E x p F )
       contract studies b Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Ford o Aero-
                          i
       nutronics Div., an General Dynamics/Astronautics Cow. Re-
       sulk of studies indicated : only marginal capabilities exist for all-
       chemically propelled spaca vehicles; even with nuclear-powered
                                                              233
           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

upper stages, manned roundtrip flight would be difficult t s ;
                                                            a k be-
c w of eccentricity of earth’s orbit, fl’ hts during 1975-80 period
 a
                                      P
may be technically or mnomically un easible; manned Mars pro-
                 uire unusually high degree of coordination within
gram would
             ”t
entire Nationa. space program. (NPT, 6/7/63, 11; Marshau
Star, 6/12/63,1,4)
   Harold B. Fmger, Msnager of N A a A - m s a e Nuclear P o     r-
                                                pc
pulsion Oflice and Dimtor of NASA Nuclear Systems, said:
“[Manned Mars mission] will be a very major undertaking exceed-
ing the Apollo program‘in total cost and difficulty. For that rea-
son, we must realistically recognize that one of the factom de-
terminin the timing of such a mission will be the availability of
        9                                     that we cannot under-
funds an manpower. We must
take such a mission until the A p x o n begins to phase out.
   “If, as will probably be the case,rendezvous in earth orbit and
some orbital assembly or propellant t,ransfer w i l l be required to
perform the Mars landi missions, an earth orbiting space labora-
by will probabl p r e 2 e the accomplishment of theactual plane-
  r
tary missions. $he cost of such a system would also be h q h but
it would probably be a nemsa.ry stepping &ne to the planetary
missions.. . .
   “The unknowns in such a mission wl require the accumulation
                                       il
of a great deal of basic information and . . . substantial develo
                                                                g;,
ment efforts for all of the systems and facilities that would
required in such a mission. I think it is to be e           that the
                                                   x
                                                   -
time required for develo ment of these systems puts the accom-
plishment of a manned g a r s landing mission off until late in the
seventies and mom probably into the early eighties . . . .
   “I ex t that large chemical m k e t booster stages, in combina-
       Y
tion wit nuclear rocket upper stages, will be used to accomplish
                               exr    t also that such vehicles and
the Mars landing mission.
propulsion systems will he I1i.w. to p13nx-m t.he pmliminaro
missions of manned fly-by trips around Mars and trips into or&
around Mars. It is conceivable that such missions could start in
thelatterpartof the7O’s . . . .” (Text)
   A. James Shiner of NASA Man-System Integration delivered
paper prepared by him and Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of
NASA Biotechnology and Human Research: “A manned orbital
research laboratory . . . becomes a distinct      uirement to obtain
                                             7
human d s i requirements for a Mals vehlce system, whether
            E
that system nuclear or chemical. The manned orbital research
                                                       tojzz
laboratory will help answer many of our questions about the
environment, and man’s ability to not only survive, but
useful functions in prolonged ace missions. The mann orbital
                              T
research laboratory under stu y b the Langley Research Cater
will have to operata for p r o 1 0 4 periods of time to obtain the
required human research and biotechnology data needed for de-
sign of advanced space s stems. A manned orbital reseamh lab-
                              used to simulate Martian voyages aa
oratory will eventually
well . . . .” (Text)
   Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert predicted need for
military patrol in space “to determine at all times what is hap-
 741423-
       1
       6
234                                                  19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,

      ening in near-space and to deal with any threat there . . . .
         ace patrol] would provide on-call protection for U.S. space
                both scientific and militar ,in the event of hostile enemy
                 (Rocky Mountain News fDenver ],6/7/63)
       IDr. W. M. Sinton, Lowell Observatory astronomer, said in
    June 7 address that possible vegetation on Mars would probaby
    resemble cactus, especially barrel ,or saguaro cactus. ( AP, Balt.
    Sum, 6/8/63)
       Dr. Gerard de Vaucouleurs of Univ. of Texas described recent
    Mars observations from Pic du Midi In French Pyrenees. Study-
                    atterns of dgrk areas, Pic du Midi found seasonal
                    Martian surface was actually a fillin in of spaces
                                                              f”
                     spots on the planet. Dr. de Vaucou eurs found it
    difficult to reconcile large-scale changes of dark areas with recent
    findings that Mars was extremely dry. (Sullivan, N YT , 6/8/63)
Jwne 7: France’s President Charles de Gaulle opened 25th Interna-
    tional Air Show at LeRourget Airport, visiting U.S. space exhibit
    as well a other exhibits. (NYT,6/8/63,35)
              s
  President’s Science Advisor Dr. Jerome Wiesner announced estab-
    lishment of national standard reference data system, integrating
    data compilation activities of National Bureau of Standards,
    DOD, AEC, NASA, National Science Foundation, and other agencies.
    (CR,   6/12/63, A10127)
  DOD Distinguished Public Service Medal presented by Secretary of
    Defense Robert S. McNamara to John H. Rubel, Deputy Director
    of Defense Research and Engineering. (DOD Release 824-63)
During F r t Week of June: Technical progress reports on super-
          is
    sonic transport study contracts were made by Boeing CP’S        Trans-
    port Div. and Lockheed-California Co. to NASA Langley Research
    Center. Final reports on the nine-month contracts would be made
    in November. (NASA Release 63-129; Lan ley Release
                                                                   2
First Week i June: Dr. Barry Commoner, fiology pro m o r of
                n
    Washington Univ., St. LOUIS,        referred to conclusion of Space
    Science Summer Group that search for extraterrestrial life
    “should be acclaimed as the top-priority scientific goal of our
    space program,” and charged that chances of finding extraterres-
    trial life were so small that they did not justify multibillion dollar
    cost. Dr. Commoner’s criticism came in commencement address
    before Hahnemann Medical College in Philadelphia. (Finney,
    NPT, 6/9/63)
June 8: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said in commencement
    address at IJniv. of Maryland :“We are not reaching for prestige in
    space-we are reachin for peace. And this is considerably more
    urgent than many reafize or others will yet admit . . . .
       “In explorin space, we are exploring the environment of the
    earth itself. T& are finding paths through a new dimension-and
    historically civilizations have stood or fallen according to their
    ability to move through a dimension.
        “We seek to make space an instrument for peace and the de-
    velopment of mankind. But if we abandon the field, space can
    be reempted by others as an instrument for aggression.
       ‘PAnd in a world of competing social systems, we would be naive
    indeed if we failed to recognize how bleak the future would be
                                                                     235
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    if this new dimension became the realm of tyranny. For your
    children, and your children’s children, an iron curtain would be
    drawn across the pathway to the. stars . . . .” (Text, CR,
                           -
    6/18/63, A3867)
Jume 8: Soviet Academician Nikolai Kozvrev of Pulkovo Observatory
    wrote in British magazine Nature describing evidence of volcank
    processes on the moon. Ejection of gases, including molecular
    carbon, was observed from (1) central peak of Alphonsus crater
    on Nov. 3,1958, and Oct. 23,1959; and (2) Aristarchus crater in
    Nov. and Dec. 1961. (Natum,6/8/63,979-80)
June 9 : I n commencement address at Univ. of Delaware, NASA Ad-
    ministrator James E. Webb said: LL. . . For the first time in the
    histo of mankind the op rtunity to leave the earth and ex lore
    the s x a r system is at h a n r Only two nations, the United &ates
    and the Soviet Union, have the resources with which to exploit
    this opportunity. Were we, a the symbol of democratic govern-
                                     s
    ment, to surrender this opportunity to the leading advocate of the
    Communist ideology, we could no longer stand large in our own
    image, or in the image that other nations have of us and of the
    free society we represent.
       “Like it or not, therefore, the hard facts of international life
    leave no doubt that we are in a contest with the Soviet Union.
    Like it or not, it is a fact of international life that space achieve-
    ment is and will be a symbol of national character and national
    stren h . . . .” (Text)
         f?
  Floyd       Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research Center,
    was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree b College of
                                                           B
    William and Mary. On previous day, he was awar ed honorary
    Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Michigan. (L ~ Release,   C
    6/10/63)
  From 1950 to 1960, U.S. professional and technical work-force grew
                                to (?a]umbig LTxiv. & W ~ Z cf *-rr-*--
    by 2 , m , e , ge+&yg                                         Arrnliorl
    Social Research. I n 1950 professionals and technical workers
    made up 8.3% of the total employment, and in 1960,11.3%. In-
    crease was attributed to rapid growth of government activities
    and industries involved in government-sponsored work. (Liss-
    ner, NYT, 6/19/63,75)
2une 10: Demonstration of transatlantic typesetting was conducted
    between Chicago and Gmnhilly Downs, England, via ground
    computer and RELAY I communications satellite. Originating from
    Chicago conference of American Newspaper Publishers Associa-
    tion Research Institute, dispatch was received in final typeset
    form. I n second phase of demonstration, articles were similarly
    sent from London and Rio de Janeiro and were rewived in Chi-
    cago. (Wehrwein, NPT, 6/11/63)
                                                       Laboratories, Inc.,
NASA a n n o u n d selection of Space Technolo
                                                 7
    for negotiation of contract for design and fa rication of four Pio-
    neer interplanetary space probes. First launching in series was
    scheduled for early 1965 with Delta launch vehicle. (NASA Release
    63-131 ;Ames Research 63-24)
  Selection of two new X-15 pilots, Capt. Joe H. Engle (USAF) and
    Milton 0. Thompson (NASA) was announced by Paul F. Bikle,
236            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   Director of NASA Flight Research Center, and Bri
                                                        8
   L. Branch (USAF) ,Commander of AB Flight Test enter. Irving   Pilots
   would fill vacancies left by NASA research pilot Neil Armstrong,
   now a NASA astronaut, and Maj. Robert White (USAF), recently
   assigned other USAF duties. (NASA Release 63-127; FRC Release
   12-63)
J w 10: I n American Univ. commencement address stressing action
   for world peace, President Kennedy said: “. . . Genuine peace
   must be the product of many nations, the sum of many acts. I t
   must be dynamic, not static, changing to meet the challenge of
   each generation. For peace is a process-a way of solving prob-
   lems . . . .” He announced his agreement with Prime Minister
   Macmillan and Chairman Khrushchev that “high-level discussions
   will shortly begin in Moscow looking toward early agreement on
   a comprehensivetest ban treaty,” and declared that U.S. “does not
   propose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as
   other States do not do so. We will not be the first to re-
   sume . . . .” (Text, CR,    6/10/63,9870)
 Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said on House floor :
      “Fulfillment of our diverse programs to which we are already
   committed may be threatened unless strong action is taken to in-
   crease the output from our graduate schools,.particularly of more
   engineers, mathematicians, and physical scientists who combine
   hi h talent and high training.
     ‘For example, in 1950 we turned out 2,000 Ph.D.’s in these 3
   fields; in 1960, we graduated 3,000, an increase of 50 percent. But
   in 1970 we need a minimum of 7,500, an increase in the decade of
   150 percent . . . .
      “The study conducted for the President [by President’s Science
   Advisory Committee] suggests that the manpower requirements
   of this decade can be met only if more students studying science
   and engineering . . . are encouraged to continue on to full-time
   graduate study.
      “The major barrier to such advanced study is financial . . . .
      “Another barrier is limited graduate facilities and fac-
         ....
     u1‘!130th because the Federal Government is a major consumer of
     scientific talent, and because the problem is urgent, the President
     proposes a propam with Federal leadership, but involving a close
     relationship with State and local governments, industry and the
     universities.
        “Fellowship and training grant subventions are proposed in
     budgets especially of the National Science Foundation, Atomic
     Energy Commission, and the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
     ministration, and extension and expansion of the National Defense
     Education Act.
        “These pro osals would represent a deliberate first step whereby
                 B
     the Federal overnment accepts the Nation’s responsibility to as-
     sure adequacy of technical manpower resources to meet its com-
     mitments . . . .” (OR,    6/10/63,9950-54)
  I n hearin on U.S. space program, Senate Committee on Aeronauti-
          $“
     cal an Spce Sciences heard testimony of Dr. Philip Abelson,
                                                                     237
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         1963

     Carnegie Institution of Washington’s Geophysical Laboratory ;
     Dr. C. S. Pittendri h, Princeton Univ. biol         de t.; Dr. Simon
                        fi
     Ramo, Thompson- amo-Wooldridge, Inc.;%. d r o l d C. Urey,
     Univ. of Calif. prof. of chemistry ; and Dr. Polycarp Kusch, Co-
     lumbia Univ. physicist.
        Dr. Abelson charged Project A l o was h*     a      future expan-
                                              l
     sion of scientific knowledge and p“   ‘taking away from our national
     security”; he declared that “manned space exploration has lim-
     ited scientific value and has been accorded an mportanca which
     is uiteunrealistic . . . .77
        %r. Pittendrigh testified he approved of lunar exploration pro-
     gram chiefly because of its d u e toward eventual exploration of
     Mars. He cautioned that manned Mars landing should be made
     only after it is assured there would be no contamination by ter-
     metrial organisms.
        Dr. Ram0 ex ressed his approval of Project Apollo, but advised
     a “calm watch’Pto assure such a project would not begin to “dom-
     inate” U.S. technology and economy.
        Dr. Urey, taking issue with Dr. Abelson’s suggestion thak
     Apollo costs were hmdering U S . science and education, said that
     “if we should decide not to do the spaw program we will prob
     ably do less for education thanwe would otherwise . . . .   Y9

        Dr. Kusch testified he opposed high priority for Pro@, Apollo
     because “we have great national needs that far outwelgh the ex-
     ploration of space.” He cited such necessities a conservation of
                                                         s
     natural resources. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86; Hines, Wash.
     Eve. Star,6/11/63)
J u m ~ USAF decision to recover manned spacecraft at Edwards, Hol-
      10:
     loman, and Wendover Air Force Bases was reported in M&&
     and Rock&.       All mission command and control would be exer-
     cised by Satellite Test Center, Sunnyvale, Calif. Unnamed USAF
     spokesmen said f r t pro-mm operatina under this arrangement
                        is
     would be X-20 (Dyna Soar) in its air-raunched phases. (M&R,
     6/10/63,34)
  USAF proposal that X-15 research aircraft program be extended to
     hypersonic speed ran was re orted in Aviation W e and S ace
                                                           ek
                                                                    P
     Technology. A i r c r a g wouldm modified to attain new goa s of
                                       !
     400,OOO-ft.altitude, 2 , 4 0 0 O F skin temperatures, and 6,000-mph
     speed (about mach 8). (Au. Wk.,        6/10/63,38)
   Quality of Soviet electronic equipment seen by recent US.
     scientific delegation to U.S.S.R. was described by D . Ma- r
     Benedict i Electronic New8 a very good. Very little of it is
                 n                       s
     transistorized, and ‘Lmostof it is similar to what we had five or
     six years ago.” Chairman of AEC General Adviso Committee
                                                            3
     and head of MIT nuclear engineerin dept., Dr. enedict was
                                                 airman Dr. Glenn T. Seit-
     among delegates accompanying AEC
     borg on tour of Soviet scientific facilities May 1930. (Connolly,
     Ekctronic News, 6/10/63)
June 1 : NASA announced granting of three patent waivers to A m p x
        1
     Corp. (for two inventions) and Space Technology Labomtones,
     Inc. Action brought to 46 the total of NASA’s        waivers of U S .
238                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     commercial rights to inventions developed under NASA contracts.
     (NASA Release 63-128)
J m e I1 :Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard
    testimony on U.S. space program from U.S. scientists : Dr. Lloyd
    V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center of the South-
     west; Dr. Lee DuBridge, President, Cal Tech; Dr. H. H. Hess,
     Chairman NAS Space Science Board ; Dr. Martin Schwarzschild,
     Princeton Univ. Dept. of Astronomy; and Dr. Frederick Seitz,
     NAB President.
        Dr. B e r b e r testified: “Men everywhere see in the conquest of
     space the peaceful demonstration of the superiority of one of
     the two competing systems of economic organization-cap!talism
     vs. communism . . . . [The nation gaining space superiority]
     will have won the equivalent of a war in demonstrating the
     superior viability of his system in the eyes of the world . . . .7,
        Dr. DuBridge testified that factors such as national security,
     prestige, and advancement of scientific knowledge all were strong
     reasons for proceeding with Project A p l l o .
        Dr. Hess outlined NAS Space Science Board proposal for “re-
     serve corps” of young scientists t participtte in US. manned
                                           o
     space program. Under proposed plan, NASA would select about
     500 volunteer scientists who would each year “do a period of
     active-duty training, say six to eight wmks, having to do with
     co-pilot activities on a space flight.” A’bout two years before
     projected mission, 20 reservists would begin fulltime training and
     further screening at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. “Maybe
     five would be chosen, and maybe one would fly . . . .
        “Train astronauts to be scientists? I think this would be virtu-
     ally impossible. It would take 10 mrs.” ( NASA Leg. Act. Rpt.
     11/87; Averill, L A . Times, 6/1253; Hines, Wash. Ewe. Star,
     6/12/63)
June 12: Testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and
     Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced
     NASA had decided not to conduct another Project Mercury flight :
     “We will proceed at once to a very careful, thoughtful but vigor-
     ous reorientation and realignment of the NASA organization, to
     move on with Gemini and with Apollo . . . .,’ (Transcript)
  Project Mercury officially ended. Initiated in autumn of 1958,
     Mercury had achieved its goal of placing manned spacecraft in
     orbital flight around earth, investigating man’s survival ability
      and performance capabilities in space, and recovering man and
      spacecraft. Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights paved the way
      toward ultimate goal, with Astronaut Alan B. Shepard becom-
      ing first U.S. man in space in FREEDOM 7 (May 5, 1961), followed
      by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom in LIBERTY BELL 7 (July 21,1961).
      First U.S. manned orbital space flight was achieved with Mer-
      cury-Atlas MA-6 flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn in FRIENDSHIP
      7 (Feb. 20,1962). This three-orbit space flight was followed by :
      MA-7, three-orbit flight of Astronaut M. Scott Ca enter in
     AURORA 7 (May 24, 1962) ; MA-8, six-orbit flight of Tstronaut
     Walter Schirra in SIGMA 7 (Oct. 3, 1962) ; and MA-9, 22-orbit
     space flight of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in FAITH 7 (May
                                                                      239
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

      15-16,1963). Project Mercury 1 T g d 34 orbits of manned spwa
      flight with 52 hrs. 23 min. of fli h t tme.
J    w Id: NASA Manned Spcecrai Center announced award of six-
                                        %
      month study contract to Hamilton Standard Div. of United
      Aircraft Corp. for establishment of environmental control and
      life support requirements for manned earth-orbiting space sta-
      tion. Duration of 24-man station would be from one to five
      years. (JKSC Release 63-100)
    D. Brained Holmes announced his resignation as NASA Deputy
      Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight,
      effective some time next autumn. Holmes had joined NASA autumn
      of 1961, would return to industry “within the period of two years
                                                   EASA
      which was understood to oonstitute his obli tion for government
      service at the time of his appointment.”            R l a e 63-133)
                                                           ees
    Ford Motor Co.’s Aeronutronic Div. was selected by NASA Manned
      Spacecraft Center to investigate requirement for Mars excursion
      module (-)-unit         designed to ferry astronauts between orbit-
      ing spacecraft and surface of Mars. (JKSC Release 63-98)
    Ap ointment of Robert H. Charles as Spekial Assistant to NASA
      &hinistrator was announced. Consultant to Administrator
      since Sepbmber 1962, Mr. Charles would work closely with NASA
      Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs in develop-
      ment and negotiation of NASA-indUStry contractual relationships.
       (NASA Release 63-134)
    At breakfast meeting of Republican Congressmen in Washington,
      Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said that anyone who
      would be willing to spend $44 billion to get to the moon was
      “nuts.” (Finney, NYT, 6/13/63)
    Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (D.-Ill.), speaking on House floor about
      his proposed bill (H.R. 1946) to establish National Research
                          and Information Retrieval Center, said : “I
      Data-Processi
                     ”a
      firmly believe t at the related activities in data storage and re-
      trieval . . . must be carried on very much as it is today by the
      many scientific societies, abstracting societies, and universities.
      But the finished product of this widely dispersed effort must
      ultimately find its way to a central center if we are to recapture
      the full contribution of the world’s technological explosion . . . .
                                                                         9,

       (CR,6/12/63,10127)
    Atlas-Agena B launch vehicle exploded shortly after launch from
      P .Arguello, Calif. (AP, Wash. Pmt, 6/13/63 ;M&R, 6/24/63,
        t
      10)
    USAF launched Thor-Agena D space vehicle with unidentified pay-
      load from PMR; launch occurred several hours after another
      booster exploded. ( r s Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64; NYT,
                              Pe.
      6/12/63)
    USAF conducted routine training launching of Atlas D ICBM from

                                                    2
      Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (DOD Release 844-63
    President’s Award for Distinguished Civilian m i c e presented to :
      Dr. Alain C. Enthoven, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
      for Systems Analysis; David D. Thomas, Director of FAA Air
      Traffic Service; and Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smith-
240           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     sonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory. (Av.Wk., 6/lO/
     63,36)
Junze 12: Friends and associates of the late Dr. Edward R. Sharp,
     former director of Lewis, dedicated the Edward R. Sharp Medi-
     cal Library at Southwest Community Hospital, Berea, Ohio.
     (LRC Release 63-39, Lewis Chronology, 5)
Jwne 13: Responding to former President Eisenhower’s criticism of
     U.S. manned lunar program, Senator Edmondson (D.-Okla.)
     said on floor of the Senate: “We stand in the position of leader
     for the free world as we battle for superiority in this challenging
     field. We cannot afford to do less than we are now doing.
        “The national goals set b the President of the United States
     and ably administered by t i e distinguished James E. Webb de-
     serve the united support of Americans, for it is this program
     which assures this country preeminence in space.”
        Rep. Charles H. Wilson (D.-Calif .) said on floor of the House :
     “Surely the critics of this program do not wish our country to
     be left behind in the space race 1 . . .
        “In our own day and age, brave men are still exploring un-
     charted oceans. I have no doubt that these journeys, too,. will
     be well justified and that once again in time the expense will be
     repaid many times over.
        “I suggest we study history a little more fully to prepare our-
     selves for the future. I regret that General Eisenhower will be
     pictured to our great grandchildren in future textbooks as being
     shortsighted and narrowminded . . . .” ( C R , 6/13/63, 10168,
      ‘““2
  House ommittee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on
    Space Sciences voted to delay NASA proposed electronics research
    canter until NASA provided detailed study justifying need for ten-
    ter and for its location in the Boston area. (Finney, N Y T ,
    6/14/63,12)
  Morton D. Stoller, Director of NASA Office of Applications, died at
    46 in Bethesda, Md. Formerly an en ineer with NACA, Stoller
                                            6
    had been with NASA since its creation ct. 1, 1958. H e received
    NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership in February 1963.
    NASA had previous1 announced appointment of Dr. Robert F.
    Garbarini to succeedy Stoller effective July 1. (NASA Release 63-
    95 ; Wash. Post, 6/14/63)
  Dr. Harold Brown, Director of DOD Research and Engineering, test-
    ified before Senate Committee on Armed Services’ Preparedness
    Subcommittee that past performance-including “questionable”
      erformance on Skybolt missile-of Douglas Aircraft Co. was
    %asisfor DOD’S selection of Bell Aeros stems Co.for development
    of X-22 V/Stol aircraft. (UPI, W a s i Post, 6/14/63)
  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center employee Dave M. McGlathery
    became third Negro registered at Unw. of Alabama, first at
    Huntsville Extension Center. (Smith, N Y T , 6/14/63, 16)
  Lewis Research Center engineers reported on studies involving
    simulated micrometeoroid penetration of future spacecraft.
    Using specially-built .22 caliber rifles that fire at velocities u p
                                                                     241
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 198 3

   to 10 times the speed of normal bullets, engineers were punc-
    turing different types o fuel tanks to duplicste what mi h t hap-
                             f
    pen in space to a spacecraft struck by a micromhmi%. ( m c
   Release 6342,   Lewis Chronology, 5)
June 14-19: Manned orbital flight of VOBTOK v conduded by U.S.S.R.,
    with Lt. Col. Valery F. Bykovsky onboard. Latunehed fmm
    Baikonur, VOSMK v completed 81 earth orbits 119 hrs. 6 I&.;
    initial orbital path 146-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 88.27-mia
                                               . Tass stated objectives
    period, 64’58’ inclination to the
                                        TtO’
    of flight were: to continue studies o influence of various factors of
    space flight on human organism ; to conduct extensive biomedical
    research of conditions of prolonged space flight ;and to make fur-
    ther improvements and adjustments in piloting of spacecraft.
    Cosmonaut Bykovsky landed b y parachute in Republic of
     Kazakhstan, shortly after landing of Cosmonaut Valentina V.
     Tereshkova and VOSTOK VI (see June 16-19). (Tass, Ivvestia,
     6/18/63, 1, AFSS-T Trans.; N Y T , 6/15/63-6/20/63, Iff)
June 14: Television photographs of Lt. Col. Valery F. Byhvsky
     (U.S.S.R.) in orbiting spacecraft were viewed by U.S. itslevision
     audience. Soviet-bloc TV systsm Intervision’s broadcast o           f
     photographs from space was received in Helsinki, where telecast
     was put onto Western Europe TV system Eurovision. Telecast
     was taped and edited in London, then sent t cO0nh;lIy Downs
                                                     o
     for transmission via WTAR        II communications satellite t~ re-
     ceiving station in Andover, Ma ; there it was sent to New York,
     where all three U.S. networks picked it up. (NPT,6/15/63, 35)
  NASA Goddard S ace Flight Center announced series of sounding
     rocket tests ha dp confirmed association of Sporadic-E disturbances
     with presence of wind shears in altitude regions measured Nov. 7     ,
     Nov. 30, and Dec. 5,1962. Under NASA contract, Geophysics Corp.
     of America scientists measured velocity of wind movements
     < &igN;kegpm~,e         Iw.eAm       &,urn                     iGji+
        heric phenomena (using Nike-Cajun with hngmuir probe
     Twtrical equipment) at nearly the same time. Experiments con-
     firmed theory of ,Qustralian scientist J. D. Whitehead that action
     of upper atmosphere wind pulls electrons from above and below
                                            rd
     into thin cloud-like layers, causing S        ic-E layers that often
     interfere with radio signals’ being re ected o f higher F layer of
                                                     f
     ionosphere. (OSFC Release)
  I n letter to Speaker of the House, President Kennedy described his
     proposed program of U.S. supersonic transport develo ment.
     “A successf~l   supersonic transport can be an dcient, prductive
     comercial vehicle which p m d e s swift travel for the passenger
     and shows promise of developing a market which will prove
     profitable to the manufacturer and operator.
        “It will advance the frontiers of technical howl-not          8s a
     byproduct of military procurement, but in the pursuit of com-
     mercial objectives.
        “It will maintain the historic U.S. leadership i aircraft
                                                              n
     development.
242           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

       “It will enable this country to demonstrate the technological
     accomplishments which can be achieved under a democratic, free
     enterprise system.
        “Its manufacture and operation will expand our international
     trade.
        “It will strengthen the U.S. aircraft manufacturing industry-
     a valuable national a s s e t a n d provide employment to thousands
     of Americans . . . .” (Letter, CR, 6/17/63 10304)
                           r
Jwne 14: NASA announced si ing contract with AC Spark Plug Div.
     of General Motors to fa ricate, assemble, and test navigation and
     guidance system for Apollo command module. (NASA        Release 63-
     136)
  De uty Secretay of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric testified before
     Eenate Committee on Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigat-
     ing Subcommittee on X-22A development contract award to Bell
     Aerosystems Co. rather than usN-recommended Douglas Aircraft
     Co. “Imade the best judgment I could in the light of a very long
     experience and knowledge with the aerospace industries . . . . I
     gave adequate consideration to all the factors” before selecting
     Bell because of its “experience and ast performance.” (Ray-
     mond, N Y T , 6/15/63, 1; Au. Wk.,      6&4/63, 36)
  Invention of retrometer, device relaying light beam over which voice
     messages are transmitted, by NASA Langley Research Center sci-
      entist N. E. Thomas was reported in Newport News Tima-Her-
     a2d. (Newport News Times-Herald, 6/14/63)
  NASA announced German Federal Minister for Scientific Research
     Hans Lenz and Director of Ministry’s Space Research Div. Max
     Ma er had concluded two weeks of discussions on space research
       B
     an survey tour of NASA and NASA-contractor facilities. (NASA
     Release 63-135)
  U.S. Army announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully in-
     tercepted re-entry target vehicle launched by Atlas ICBM in recent
     test. Nike-Zeus was fired from Kwajalein Island in the Pacific,
     Atlas from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (DOD Release 858-63)
June 15: Official opening of 1963 hurricane season. TIROS VI meteoro-
     logical satellite, launched September 18, 1962, was still opera-
     tional and U.S. Weather Bureau said additional meteorological
     satellites may be orbited by NASA before end of season, Nov. 15.
      (Commerce Dept. Release WB 637)
  USAF announced launching of unidentified satellite using Blue Scout
     booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. (UPI, Wnsh. Pmt, 6/16,/63:
     M&R,6/24/63,10)
  USAF launched five satellites-~om~ IIA, SOLARAD IV, and three un-
                                      one Thor-Agena D launch vehicle.
     identified satellites-using
     LOFTI IIA was to conduct low frequency communications experi-
      ments and SOLARAD IV was to measure solar radiation. (Pres.
     R p t . on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
  I n May 6 testimony before House Armed Services Committee’s Sub-
     committee on Military Appropriations released today, Director
     of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown said
     USAF Midas satellite program had been reoriented and cut back
     substantially because of technical difficulties. WD recommenda-
                                                                     243
                                                     19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    tion of cut in Midas funding for F Y 1964 was based “on the con-
    clusion that the way the rogram was going it would never
                                 if
    produce a reliable, depen able system.” Midas program had
    cost $423 million through FY 1963. “Of that, I would say about
    half has been wasted. Half has been spent on gaining data which
    are, I think, quite necessary for an system of the kind that we
    may develop in the future . . . .” %luringpast 10 years WD has
    initiated and then terminated 61 projects at cost of more than $6
    billion, he testified. (AP, Wash, Sun. Star, 6/16/63)
Jwne 15 :GSM: SateUite Sittation Report identified three Soviet s ace
                                                                   8
    launching not previously released by either the U.S. or U.S. .R      :
    Sept. 12,1962 (1962 Al ha-Phi l d ) , with fragments re-enbring
    from Sept. 12 through &pt. 17; Nov. 4,1962 (1962 Beta-Xi 1-5),
    with fragments reentering from Nov. 5 through Jan. 19, 1963;
    and Jan. 4,1963 (1963 1A-lC), with f r a en& re-enhring from
                                               P
    Jan. 5 through Jan. 11. (GSFC Sat. S t pt., June 15,1963)
                                           i.
  Following radio broadcast received in London :
        “Attention all transmitiers working on the frequencies be-
    tween 20,OOO kiloc cles and 20,012 kilocycles.
                      14
       “YOU are inte ering with the reception of signals from the
    Vostok V space ship. You are asked to stop working on these
     frequencies.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Stur, 6/15/63)
  In Saturday Evening Post, Sen. Howard W . Cannon (D.-Nev.)
    wrote :
       “A perilous notion grips Washington-that t.hmugh some sort
    of gentleman’s agreement with Russia we can quarantine space,
    can keep it from b m i n g a theater of war. Wishfully the na-
    tion gears its space program to peaceful purposes, blind to the
    fact that the Russians have no such inhibitions. While we
    dream, the Russians bend every effort to develop military space
    systems. Quite openly they are striving for a decisive advantage
                                 ’%’””.
    i_n_ n~,m!n n n n t m t d mAnn
         that        n
        ‘‘ ‘Peaceful purposes,’ the Bdministration admits, means ‘keep-
    ing the peace’ as well as enga * in scientific exploration and m
    commercial activities in spm-resident         Kennedy has said we
    must insure that no other nation gains a position in space that
     would threaten our security. And we are orbiting numerous un-
    manned space vehicles which could have significant military pur-
    poses. But the disturbing fact is that we continue to put over-
     whelming emphasis on nonmilitary space programsand limit,
     military efforts to a small list of defensive possibilities . . . .7,
     (Sat.Eve. Post, 6/15/63,10,12)
  Reported that USAF Vice c/s General William F. McKee had dis-
     patched message to USAF commanders urging “pemnnel attention
     and active support” in recruiting volunteers for forthcoming NASA
     astronaut selections. (A-N-AF down. & Reg., 6/15/63, 4)
  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden received honorary
    Doctor of Science degree from Northwestern Univ. (Letter)
  Henry F. Auter, Chief of Electrical Systems Engineering Branuh of
                                                                       z
     Test Div., NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, appointed Deput
    Manager of MSFC Mississippi Ts Operations (Ezrmtsui2
                                         et
     T h ,6/15/63)
244          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

Jzune 16-19: Flight of            with Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova,
                         VOSTOK VI
  first woman in space, conducted by U.S.S.R. Launched from
   Baikonur, VOSTOK VI completed 48 earth orbits in 70 hrs. 50 min. ;
  initial orbital path was 141-mi. a p o p 112-mi. peri ee, 89.3-min.
          . Shortly after entering orbit, +ass r e p o r t 4 Lt. Teresh-
                     radio communications with Lt. Col. Bykovsky
  K$?!!tdblished
   in VOSTOK v; the two cosmonauts then radioed joint message to
   Premier Khrushchev. Tass stated fli h t o VOSTOK VI was being
                                              f
                                         B
   made “to continue the study of the e ect of various space-flight
   factors on the human organism, including a comparative analysis
   of the impact of these fmtors on the organ;smS of a man and a
   woman; to carry out new mdica.l-biologca1 research and to fur-
   ther improve and perfect the systems of piloted spaceships in con-
   ditions of simultaneous flight.” During initial orbit VOSTOK v and
   VI came within about five Inn. (threa mi.) of each other, appar-
   ently closest distance achieved. Cosmonaut Tereskkova, whom
   Ts described as having never piloted an ‘aircraft,landed b para-
     as
                                                              5
   chute in Kazakhstan. After she and Cosmonaut By ovsky
   landed, Tass issued statement, on flight, results: “New valuable
   data have bean obtained about the influence of different factors of
   a space flight of lon duration on the organisms of man and
                           B
   woman. Rich factua material necessary for further perfection
   of the systems of piloted space ships has been dbtained.” ( a s Ts,
   Zavestia, 6/18/63,1, AFSS-T Trans.; NYT, 6/17/63-6/20/63, Iff)
J m 16: Results of six-year experimental study of 25 generations of
   mice exposed to large radiation doses were reported in New York
   Times. Conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, study
   disclosed lar e doses of radiation over long period of time have
                 7
    an “amazing y small” effect on mice: no evidence of malfonna-

 A F Oambridge
   mylar balloon after 28-day journey across Pacific Ocean.
   Launched May 19 from Chico, Calif., superpressure balloon had
   reached point 500 mi. south of Kamchatka (Siberia) peninsula
   when AFCRL destroyed it by radio command from Chico. This
   was third successful balloon flight in AFCRL series to evaluate su-
   perpressure design. (OAR Research Review, 9/9/63, 2)
J m 17: Aerobee 150 sounding m k e t launched t peak altitude of
                                                  o
   113 mi. from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Purpose was to
   dbtain positive information on gyro drift and general control
   characteristics. The aspect instrumentation on the rocket in-
   cluded tmo cameras, two Adcole digital sun sensors,a fine track-
   ing Ball Brothers System and a Whittaker ehree-axis gyro
   package. All of the instruments worked exceptionally well.
   Good control, stabilization, and maneuver accuracy was demon-
   strated, but the target accuracy was less than expected. ( N A S ~
   Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 7/2/63 & 7/19/63)
 Commenting on Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova’s space
   flight in VOSTOH VI, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronauti-
   cal and Space Sciences Clinton Anderson said: “I’m not sur-
                                                                      245
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,          19 6 3

     prised. Them isn’t any mason why women can’t go up i t              no
     space. . . . 9’

        Chairman of House Committee on Science and Bstronautics
     George P. Miller said: “It doesn’t surprise me that the Russians
     want to ull another spectacular by uttinga woman in space. It
     shouldn P interfere with our scienti c p 1.log.am. I don’t want to
              t
     downgrade their achievement, but i t doesn t mean we have to fol-
     low suit . . . .” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/63)
                                                          C.
J w w 17: NASA Associate Administrator Dr. R~bert Seamans, Jr.,
     testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space
     Sciences, observed Soviet manned spacecraft VOBTOH v and VI were
     traveling in two different orbital planes :LL&  appears unlikely that
     s&cient fuel could be taken aloft by either of these Vostok space-
     craft to effect a rendezvous.” (Transcript)
  U.S. Geological Survey’s lunar mapping project, mapping 8.5 mil-
     lion sq. mi. of moon’s surface, was described in Washington
     Evening Star. Undertaken for NASA, project would provide basic
     geological information needed for placing instruments and men
     on the moon. (Henry,Wash Ewe. Star, 6/17/63)
  Addressing Washington, D.C., meeting of American Red Cross,
     NASA Administrator James E. Webb said :
        ‘‘Project Apollo offers us our greatest opportunity to o v e m e
     the lead in manned space exploration now held by the Soviet
     Unimi. It gives us assurance that if an American is not first on
     the Moon, he certainly will not be f a r behind. And most i -        m
        rtant of all, it demonstrates to all the world that we in the
     f%ited Statea have the capability and the detmmination to carry
     on those things which we have declared seriously that we intend
     to do.” (Text)
  NASA $150 awards to Dr. Karlheinz Thom and Joseph Komood, Jr.,
     for invention of plasma txcelerrttor, were t t n n o ~ n d .Accelerator
     is capable of controlled ignition under very low gas pressures.
      (NASA %lease 63-137)
  USN Polaris A-3 missile fired from U.S.S. O b e e m a t h ISlamd in t set
     said to be first success at sea. ( M&R, 6/24/63,10)
  T m announced postage stamp commemorati VOSTQK v space
    a
                                                     7
     flight had been issued by Soviet Ministry o cbmmunicatiom
      (Reuters, NYT, 6/18/63,10)
J w 17-20: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held
     its summer general meeting in Los Angeles. (Au. Wk. [Space
     Calendar], 5/6/63,9)
        Walter C. Williams, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Associate
     Director and Project Mercury Operations Director, summarized
     Project Mercury, emphasizing that rimary lesson taught by
                                             1;
     the manned space flights was value o attention to detail. Dis-
     cussing biomedical results, he said orthostatic hypotension first
     noted in Astronaut Walter M. Schirra (MA-8, six orbits) was
     more pronounced in Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (MA-9, 22
     orbits). Lowered blood pressure w s believed to be cause of
                                              a
     Cooper’s temporary dizziness when he emerged from Mercury
     spacecraft :‘The effects Seem to be @-flight, and continued from
     18 to 24 hours.” (Av.Wk.,        7/1/63,71)
246            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       Astronauts Walter M. Shirra, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper re-
                                                                      B
    ceived the AIAA Astronautics Award. (Av.Wk.,               7/1/63,31
       Rombus (Reusable Orbital Module-Booster and Utility hut-
    tle) concept described June 18 by Philip Bono, Chief Advance
    Project Engineer of Future Space Systems, Douglas Missile and
    Space Systems Div. Single-stage manned space cargo carrier,
    capable of orbiting many hundreds of tons and reusable at
                                          z                          ::
    least 20-times, could be developed b late 1970’s. Eight stra ped-
    on liquid-propellant tanks would e jettisoned and parac uted
    to earth after providing initial boost ; Rombus would be recovered
    from orbital mission with use of parachutes, main engine retro-
    thrust, and extended landing legs. Bono’s paper was based on
    study performed for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and
    was one of many large vehicle concepts under study by industry
    and government. (DAC Release 63-122)
       Speaking on June 19, Dr. Stanley Deutsch, Chief of Systems
    Research and Analysis in NASA Office of Advanced Research and
    Technology, declared Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper could not
    have sighted houses, boat, and train during his MA-9 orbital
    space flight “because of the visual angle.” Dr. Deutsch specu-
    lated the visual impressions might have involved hallucinations
    or transfer of stored impressions. “We need a great deal of
    study in the area of perception [in the weightless condition].”
    Interviewed at meeting, Astronaut Cooper said : “I’m not chang-
    ing my mind one bit, I know what I saw.” (Av. k. 7/1/63,31)
                                                              W
June 18: X-15 No. 3 flown by Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (USAF) to
    223,700 ft. altitude and 3,539 mph (mach 4.97). Principal re-
    search objective was gathering vertical-tail pressure data. (X-15
    Project Office, NASA Hq.)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced recruitment of astro-
    nauts had been broadened in current recruitment call for volun-
    teers: change in criteria for selection, eliminating need for test
    pilot school certificate ; and soliciting letters of recommendation
    from industries, professional groups, military services, and other
    organizations throughout the country. ( MSC Release 63-102)
  Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASA Director of Biotechnology, said in
    speech before National Rocket Club that Lt. Tereshkova’s orbital
    space flight established feasibility of sending scientists not trained
    a pilots to moon and nearby planets : “Ithink it is significant that
     s
    she is not a pilot. This points to the importance the Soviets
    attach to gathering biomedical information on the effects of
    space flight and may be a preparation for flying scientists who
                                   .”
    are not trained pilots . . .       ( U P I , N Y T , 6/19/63, 3; Av. Wk.,
    6/24/63,33)
  Members of recent U.S. Mt. Everest expedition, William F. Siri,
    Univ. of California physiologist, and Prof. Maynard M. Miller,
    Michigan State Univ. scientist, said in New Delhi interview that
    laboratory study of rock and snow samples from Mt. Everest
    might provide clues to life on Mars. Siri said environment on
    Mars is “just a little bit worse” than on Everest’s peak, citing
    Everest’s thin air, low temperatures, lack of liquid water, and
    intense solar radiation. (AP, Rkhrnrmd News Leader, 6/18/63)
                                                                     247
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 6 3

June 18: ComSatCorp incorporator George J. Feldman said at Con-
   ference on Space Science and S ace Law, Univ. of Oklahoma:
     “The reality of a viable [satellitef communication system remains
     to be accomplished with the accompaniment of hard work, hard
      and yet imaginative intelligence, and cooperation, nationally and
      internationally . . . .
         “The choice of system . . . in turn is of importance to the
      international users. How do they participate? Do they own
      stations? Do they furnish personnel? What about their own
      research and development? And in addition to the economics
      there is the political national interest and national pride in
      participation . . .
         “The communication satellite has arrived of experimental age.
      It will be brought into being as a working system. The United
      States has no monopoly on its creation. There are others who
      are capable of doing it. There is strong worldwide interest. The
      corporation is beginning to tackle the formidable problems in
      earnest enthusiasm, and I may say in the spirit of the kind of
      dedication that accompanies a ioneering effort of responsibility.
                                     \
      The expert group being assem led can make a substantial con-
      tribution of national benefit, as it researches and develops its
                                t
      program. It is time to ve this effort the understanding re-
      quired, for much is a t sta e for all . . . .” (Text, CR,7/2/63,
      A4188-89)
Jzllne 19: TIROS M (A-52) meteorological satellite placed in orbit with
      Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Ini-
      tial orbital data : 405-mi. apogee, 388-mi. perigee, 97-min. period,
      58.2O inclination to equator. On satellite’s first orbit, Command
      and Data Acquisition Station at Wallops Island, Va., obtained
      direct pictures from Camera 2 showing cloud vortex over New-
      foundland and set Camera 1 to read out pictures on next orbit.
      First pictures were transmitted within an hour to Cape Canaveral,
      Fla.; NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.; and
      National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md. In addition
      to two wide-angle TV cameras, TIROS M carried infrared sensors
      and electron temperature probe. Orbiting marked 18th straight
      successful satellite-orbiting by Thor-Delta launch vehicle.
       (NASA Release ;Wallops Release 63-59 ; UPI, NPT, 6/20/63,3)
   Experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen when exposed to
      radiant heating and zero gravity conditions was launched to ap-
      proximately 120-mi. altitude by Aerobee sounding rocket w m
      NASA Wallops Station. Preliminary analysis of telemetry data
      indicated only partial success of the experiment, provided by
      NASA Lewis Research Center. (Wallops Release 63-60)
   Letter from Harold S. Geneen, ITW President, to Sen. Warren G.
      Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Committee, and Rep.
      Oren Harris, Chairman of House Committee on Interstate and
      Foreign Commerce, was made public. Replying to RCA Chair-
      man David Sarnoff’s April 2 letter to Leo D. Welch, Communica-
      tions Satellite Corp. Chairman, and to Former FCCChairman New-
      ton N. Minow’s May 31 letter to President Kennedy, Geneen said
      he “must respectfully disagree with General Sarnoff’ssuggestion
248                                                19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    that the merger [of international communications carriers] should
    be compulsory and include all international communications fa-
    cilities, both voice and record, under the Communications Satellite
    Corporation.” Reasons against such merger : it would run coun-
    ter to historical Government opposition to monopoly in any field;
    ITLT believed that private enterprise should not abandon field to
    which it has made substantial contribution; and ITLT believed that
     ComSatCorp was established as “a private corporation and
    intended . . . to be a carrier’s carrier” rather than competition
    for carriers using its services. “The real problem, as we see it,
    is rather to strengthen competition than abandon it . . . .
        “We have also urged that the international record communica-
    tion carriers be permitted to merge, as a means of offsetting Amer-
    ican Telephone and Telegraph’s dominant position in internation-
    alvoicecommunications . . . .2,
        AT&T also issued statement opposing RCA Chairman Sarnoff’s
     proposal to create single communications company: “. . . The
     present arrangement . . . is a good one. It is based on the
     principles of good service and sound economics and is working
     well. We see no reason to experiment with substitutes of doubtful
     merit . . . .” (Smith, N Y T , 6/20/63)
Jzlne 19: FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby told AIAA meeting in
     Los Angeles : “First, technically, a superior supersonic transport
     is feasible.
        “Second, it is an expensive aircraft to develop, but not fantas-
     tically so, and certainly not beyond the resources of the greatest
     industrialized nation in the world.
        “Third, there is a market for an American transport of perhaps
     200 to 250 first-round orders. I f we do not develop an American
     SST, then the entire market, which could be something like 400
     planes during perhaps a decade of first-round buying, will fall to
     our overseas competitors. Among the purchasers would be the
     airlines of the US., which would be forced to purchase planes
     produced overseas in order to remain competitive.
        “Fourth, in the event that we did not proceed with SST develop-
     ment, the Nation would default its position of preeminence in in-
     ternational commercial aviation-with all that would entail in
     practical terms and in less measurable terms of confidence and
  U.restige . . . .” (Text)
       .S.R. MARS I passed planet Mars, but with its communications
     systems dead as they had been since March 21. All subsequent
     attempts to restore communication had failed. (AP, Wash. Eve.
     Star, 6/26/63)
  NASA announced RCA Service Co. had been selected to negotiate con-
     tract for operation and maintenance of satellite data-acquisition
     stations-two near Rosman, N.C., and two near Fairbanks, Alaska.
     One station at each location would be operational by Sept. 1963;
     other two stations were expected to be operational in 1964. Fa-
     cilities would be first high-capacity data-acquisition stations,
     supporting Oao, Pogo, Ego, and Nimbus satellites. (NASA Release
     63-138).
                                                                     249
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,       19 6 3

J w 19: NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden received inter-
    national aspects of the US. space program at a luncheon meeting
    of the National Capitol Section of the AIAA. Dr. Dryden was
    awarded the First Annual von KBrm&nMemorial Citation and
    a letter from Vice President Johnson was read which said, in
    part: “A few more Hugh Drydens-ap ropriately placed about
                                               9
    the globe-and we would have a world o peace, honor, and prog-
    res.” Preceding Dr. Dryden’s address Mr. Robert F. Packard
    of the State De artment reviewed U.S. policy with regard to
    space. (Letter ;&tat ion ;Text)
  Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling (USAF)said in address before Fifth
    Annual usAF-Industry Conservation Conference : “Department
    of Defense procurement from the aerospace industries for air
    weapon systems, and research and development, is now running
    about$20billionayear . . . .
        “The Air Force share . . . totals $10.6 billion a year, which
    is more than half the DOD total . . . .
        “R7ith expenditures of this magnitude, both the DOD and Air
    Force have reason to be concerned that conservation, cost reduc-
     tion, and value engineering be practiced . . . .” (Text, AFSC
     Release 36-R47)
Jwne 19-Jdy 7: First nationwide display of space research innova-
    tions with possibilities for industrial applications was held a t 1963
     Chicago International Trade Fair. Exhibit was s onsored by
     NASA O5ce of Technology Utilization and p r e s e n d by IllinoB
     Institute of Technology Research Institute ( r i ) (NASA RB-
                                                        rru.
     lease 63-122)
Jzune 2 :Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aero-
       0
     nautics and Space Council, said in speech before Conference on
     Space Science and Space Law at the University of Oklahoma:
        “The impact of the space budget . . . is greater than its size
                                                                       -..-
     wm~]di f i & c ~ t p . F Q pz~zp?, 2 In,sinv nertion ~f it b”’”~ fnr
                                 ~                                W     E

     research and development, with the a&&fant flow oilnew proc-
     esses, new inventions, new products, and new ideas which stimu-
     late many sectors of the economy. So far, during the past six
     years n-e have spent less than $10 billion on all as t of space
                                                                s
                                                          $“
     development and exploration. This has averag less than 20
     cents per capita per week. Contrary to the careless thinking of
     some critics, this money has been spent for materials, jobs, facili-
     ties, etc., right here on earth rather than on the moon or some
     distant planet. I n other words, its stimulating effect has resulted
     in a greater demand for consumers’ goods and greater savings
     and investments.
        'Lit is unrealistic to conclude that, if this money were not going
     into space work, it would necessarily flow i t other essentials
                                                       no
     such as slum clearance, education, and cancer research. The facts
     are that Fe have been spending more for those essentials since
     there has been a space program ;the space program contributes to
     such progress; and it is not likely that the Congress would vote
     more money for such other projects if there were no demand for
     space funds. This is not an either/or proposition . . . .     9,

     ‘141-823 -
              1
              9
250            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       He attributed to the space program major credit for such bene-
    fits as : “com rehensive knowledge and understanding” of earth-
                 R
    sun relations ips, interplanetary space environment, origins of
    solar system and life itself ; improved communications, weather
    forecasting, and navigation ; improvements in metals, alloys, and
    ceramics, and “substantial progress in the whole field of elec-
    tronics . . . .7,
       I n “ eaceful application of space competence to national se-
           P
    curity’ he listed :
       “1. Support of our terrestrial armed forces . . . in communi-
    cations, meteorology, navigation, and mapping ;
       “2. Increase in our alertness against pending dangers and our
    knowledge of potentially hostile territories through early warning
    and observation capabilities ;and
       “3. Competence to examine and neutralize, if necessary, hostile
    and threatening spacecraft.
       “. . . Of even greater importance is the potential impact the
    space program can have on world peace through substituting com-
    petition in space exploration for competition in building nuclear
    striking power. If sanity prevails, the path to the stars can be the
    path to peace.” (Text)
June 20; Dr. Robert L. Barre, Scientist for Social, Economic, and
    Political Studies, NASA, said at University of Okla. Conference
    on Space Science and Space Law :
       “The demands of our space goals require a very great increase
    in functional and intellectual specialization, in both kind and
    degree. The effort to drive scientific knowledge and technologi-
    cal capability ever further into the unknown has the effect of
    differentiating skills and areas of knowledge and of enhancing
    their uniqueness on a scale not previously ex erienced. The ever
                                                 P
    increasing complexity of man-machine prob ems, particularly in
    regard to man‘s daring to venture into the uncharted realm of
    space, produce demands for reliability,. durability, mechanical
    precision, exactness and speed of human interaction which, if un-
    controlled, could be corrosive of the human and social charac-
    teristics this nation has for some time held in high esteem. These
    demands require integrative processes, operating through man,
    his institutions and his tools which allow much narrower toler-
    ances of error of variation than those acceptable to a mass produc-
    tion society.’’ (Text)
  Titan I1 ICBM launched from Vandenberg AFB concrete silo site in
    successful USAF test flight. (AP, Wash.Post, 6/21/63)
  Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with flight test instrumentation dupli-
    catin that intended for installation in the solar-pointed section of
    the 8-17’ satellite spacecraft (Oso-B) launched to 119.2 mi.
    from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Results undetermined
    until recovery of payload effected. (NASA Rpt. of S. Rkt.
    Launching, 6/24/63)
  Sir Charles (C.P.) Snow, British scientist and author, said in New
    York interview that pace of U.S. lunar program was “probably
    a mistake,” an “all-out” effort in race with U.S.S.R. Most
                                                                 251
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,        19 6 3

     dramatic scientific achievements of next decade, he said, would
     be in molecular biology. (Sullivan, N P T , 6/21/63,11)
d u m 20-21: In hearings conducted by House Committee on Interstate
     and Foreign Commerce, FA-^ Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby out-
     lined detads of proposed Government-industry project to develop
     supersonic transport. (NASA Leg.Act. Rpts. 11/93 and 11/94
June 91 :Addressing Conference of National Organizations in Atilan-
     tic City, NASA Deputy Director of Manned S p a Flight Dr.
     Joseph F. Shea said that “now that the costs are . i S i as pre-
     dicted, the country is reap raising the commitment [to land men
     on the moon in this decadef Such discussions are entirely proper.
      Indeed, the resolve with which we carry out our national activ-
     ities is frequently strengthened [by the] tempering in the heat of
     debate . . . .” (Text)
  A4t39th annual joint ineeting of Virginia Engineering and Technical
     Societies Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of Langley Research
     Center, announced that whenever the U.S. decided to o ahead
                                                            f
     with a manned orbiting laboratory, Lam would be rea y. “Al-
     though there is no NASA approved flight project for a manned space
     station at the present time, Langley will be in a position through
     its studies to provide many of the answers to design and opera-
                                            m is given the go signal.”
     tional problems when such a
      (Newport News Daily Press, 6 7 g E )
  U.S. television audiences witnessed first public ap earanw of Pope
                                                    pcBs
     Paul VI via m y communications satellite.             W)
  VSAF announced $500,000 study contracts awarded to Gene&
     Dyns;mics,/Astronautics, North American Aviation, and Douglas
     Alrcraft Co. for investigation of AmspacePlane (Asp) mncapts.
     Powered by air-breathing ramjet-like engine, Asp would take o f f
     from conventional runway, then travel through space propelled by
                                              @
     liquid-oxygen/liquid-hydrogen rocket en ne, orbit, and &urn
     tn Ia2d tt %?EV%EtiS2F&!zi&eX. (EGG *uclasc 892 63; ?!&E,
                i
     7/1/63,9)
  Establishment of Supersonic Transport Authority within Federal
     Aviation Agency was recommended by advisory grou of airline
     and manufacturing experts headed by Gen. Orval R. &k (usm,
     Ret.). Report of advisory group, released by FAA, recommended
     Authority direct U.S. program to develop supersonic transport
     airliners. (AP, N Y T , 6/22/63,34)
  USN launched Polaris A 3 missile more than 1.500 mi. from U.S.S.
     Observation Island, secund such test in on; week. (UPI, NYT,
     6/22/63.35)
  Edmond E. B’isson, Lewis scientist, installed as president of h e r -
     ican Socity of Lubrication Engineers. (mc Release 6345, Lewis
     Chronology, 5)
dune 22 :Soviet Premier Khrushchev formally welcomed Cosmonauts
     Valery F. Bykovsky and Valent>ina Tereshkova in ceremony be-
                                         V.
     fore crowds in Moscow’s Red Square. Later, in Kremlin recep-
     tion, the cosmonauts were awarded Hero of the Soviet Union and
    Pilot-Astronaut citations as well as Order of Lenin and Gold
     Star medals. (Topping, N Y T , 6/23/63,1,8)
252                                                    1963
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

Jzlne 2%;                 was eclipsed by the moon-a possible first in
            EXPLORER XIV
    satellite history. Satellite was some 70,000 km. from the earth
    with apogee portion in the sun’s direction when a 19-min. shadow
    occurred between approximately 0151 and 0210 UT. (QSFC
    Historian)
  J. C. Garrett, president and founder of the Garrett Corp., died of a
    heart attack in Beverly Hills, Calif. One of the pioneers in re-
    search on pressurization of aircraft, Mr. Garrett engineared the
    pressurization system on the B-29 bomber. His company de-
    veloped the life-su port system used in the Mercury spacecraft.
     ( N Y T , 6/24/63,277
June a3: NASA Daytona Beach Operation established as integral part
    of NASA Launch Operations Center (LOG), Cocoa Beach, Fla.
     (NASA Circular 267A)
  A travel ban by NATO countries on East German scientists has been
    modified by a “trial relaxation” that would permit East G e m n
    scientists to attend scientific meetings in NATO countries if they
    are part of an all-German delegation along with West Germans.
    The meeting of the International Union of Geodesy and Gm-
    physics, scheduled for August 1963 in Berkeley, Calif., was al-
     most withdrawn from the US. because of the ban on East German
    scientists. Intervention by the National Academy of Sciences
    achieved the compromise relaxation. ( N Y T , 6/24/63, 1)
June 24: President Kennedy sent to Congress a request to add $60,-
     000,000 to the BY 1964 budget to finance detailed design studies
    on the supersonic transport, aircraft. I n his June 14 letter to Con-
     gress on the aircraft, the President had set a total ceiling of $750
    million for Government support of the project, with $250 million
     additional to come from the aircraft industry, and with part of
    the Government investment to be recovered through royalty pay-
    ments. ( N Y T , 6/25/63,55)
  Soviet Premier Khrushchev, opening session of World Woman’s
     Congress in MOSCOW,    warned that third world war would “be a
     rocket nuclear war of extermination, . . [destroying] much
    of what we generally call civilization.” Cosmonaut Valentina
     Tereshkova was stellar attraction at Communist-dominated con-
    gress. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/24/63 A-20)
  Reported that NASA Administrator Webb and Defense Secretary
     McNamara were considering proposal that USAF perform military
     experiments during first 12 Gemini space flights, Awiation Week
    and Space Technology reported. (Au. Wk., 6/24/63,25)
  NASA announced selection of Lear Siegler to negotiate contract for
     design study of “psychophysical information acquisition process-
     ing and control system” (Piapacs). Proposed system, mounted
     in pilot’s garment and headgear, would replace present system of
     sensors attached to pilot and would permit continuous acquisition
     of psychological and physical data. NASA pilots would test sys-
    tem in flights of aircraft including F-104, Jet Star, and X-15, a t
                                      ( N A S A Release 63-139 ; FRC Release
     NASA Flight Research Center.
     13-63)
  NASA and DOD negotiation of agreement giving NASA autllority to pur-
     chase its own Atlas-Agena launch vehicles was reported by Mia-
                                                                   253
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,       19 63

            and Rockets. NASA had signed agreement, and D ~ approval
                                                               D
    8&8
    was “expected shortly.” (M&R, 6/24/63,9)
Jwrw 24: J o h n Stack, pioneer of aircraft development over 34 years
    with NACA and NASA, now director of engineering for Republic
    Aviation Corp., interviewed on supersonic transport development
    in 27.27. News and World Report. Asked how much had been done
    on U.S. supersonic transport to date, he said :
          ..    You could almost take it o f the shelf today. The tech-
                                          f
        LL.
    n o l o g is t,here. It’s just a matter of pulling it together and
    putting it into the airplane you want. We were doing research
    on the problems of supersonic transport down at Langley Research
    Center all through the late 1950’s. We knew then that it. was
    feasible. There was no fundamental scientific obstacle.
        “In December of 1959, at the request of E. R. Quesada who was
    head of the Federal Aviation Agency and President Eisenhower’s
    aviation adviser, we made a presentation on development of a
    supersonic transport. Mr. Quesada recommended that work get
    underway. He didn‘t get the money he asked for, but supersonic-
    transport development was established as a national policy.
        “The Kenned administration came in, in 1961, and Najeeb
    Halab replace$ Mr. Quesada a t the FAA. He pushed ahead
           I
    with t e development program. Congress appropriated a total
    of $31 million for the project in 1961 and 1963. This year, 1963,
    was to be the prototype year.
        L‘. . . as you know, the day after Pan American Airways an-
    nounced that it was placing an order for six of the British-French
    Concorde supersonic transports President Kennedy said there will
    be a supersonic transport program.
          ..    If we wait another year [for Congressional appropria-
        L6.
                                                                  .
    tions], we will be in a serious position in this competition. . .”
     (U.S.News, 6/24/63; CR, 7/9/63,11621-22)
  Dr. Gienn T. Seaborg, Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission,
    was unanimously confirmed by the Senate for an additional five-
    year term. Dr. Gerald F. Tape was also confirmed to finish out
    the remaining three years of Dr. Leland J. Haworth’s term on the
    Commission. Dr. Haworth had resigned to become Director of
    the National Science Foundation. ( N P T , 6/25/63,48)
  USAF contract award to Avco Corp. for production of re-entry vehi-
    cles was announced by DOD. $1.3 million contract was awarded by
    AFSC Ballistic Systems Div.      (WD Release 901-63)
  Address by Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairman, before Conference
    on Higher Education in Chicago inserted in CongressimJ Record
    by Rep. Barrett O’Hara, in which he said :
         “The most important source of creative evolution in the future
     will continue to be, as it has been in the past, fundamental scien-
     tific research-the kind of investi tions that give us a better
                                        P            ..
    understanding of the true nature o our world . .
         “We have inherited a revolutionary philosophical concept of
     man as an architect of his environment, a concept that seemed to
     flower only about two centuries ago. Men gained confidence in
     this idea when their economic energy and inventions brought un-
     paralleled modifications of life through the industrial revolution.
254           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    I n the period starting some two decades ago, which may be desig-
    nated as the beginning of the third revolution, Western man be-
    came irrevocably dedicated to the concept of creative evolution.
    The future of the third revolution-of man’s power to mold the
    world to his liking-is almost unlimited.” (Text, CE, 6/24/63,
    A3993-95)
J w $ 4 Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis, Commander of AFMTC, in an
       3:
    interview with Electronic News. stated that the recent Soviet tan-
    dem space flight added urgency to a strong U.S. military space
    program : “The thinking that goes with the exploitation of space
    for peaceful purposes is inconsistent and incompatible with the
    thinking necessary to exploit the military and defense aspects of
    space.” Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo are “not technical weapon
    systems with any military potential.” They require “long check-
    out time, lack quick reaction time, and don’t have the degree of
    maneuverability in space needed for a weapon system.” (Elec-
    tronic News,6/24/63)
 Medical investigation of the 4,565 general aviation accidents in
    the U.S. in 1961 was inadequate, a group of USAF doctors reported
    in the J o u d of the Arnericnn Medical Association. Physicians
    should auto sy the dead and examine survivors with the aim
    of making A)ying safer, the medical officers asserted, but this is
    done only for military and commercial airline accidents-not
    for general aviation, where often only a single investigator from
    FAA or CAB visited the crash. ( N Y T , 5/24/63,6)
J w .%$-July10: Fourth Annual Aviation Education Workshop,
    sponsored by Mississippi State Dept. of Education various avia-
    tion interests, military services, and NASA, was held at Univ. of
    Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg. Robert F. Thompson, Head
    of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Flight Operations Recov-
    ery Branch, was principal speaker June 26, with addresses on
    “Tracking, Search and Rescue Procedures” and “Past and Future
    Programs of Manned Space Flight.’’ ( MSC Release 63-104)
June 25: X-15 No. 1 was flown by NASA pilot Joseph Walker to 3,911
    mph (mach 5.51) and 111,800 ft. a t Edwards AFB, Calif. During
    the flight a new measuring instrument, the traversing probe,
    popped in and out of the wing, measuring the whole profile of
    boundary layer over surface of the X-15. Surface temperature
    rose to 1,OOO” during the flight, the 86th for the X-15. (WI,
    Chic. Trib., 6/26/63 ;NASA Hq.)
  U.S.S.R.’s most recent cosmonauts, Jr. Lt. Valentina V. Tereshkova
    and L/Col. Valery Bykovsky, held press conference in Mos-
    cow. Both insisted that tandem flight had gone off according
    to schedule, both as to duration and maneuvers. Lt. Tereshkova,
    the first woman into space, added another fact to her official
                       she had had pilot training prior to entering
    biography-that
    the space program. ( N . Y . Herald Trib., 6/26/63
                                                    2)
  House Committee on Science and Astronautics egan full com-
    mittee hearings on proposed NASA budget for F Y 1964 and
    authorized expenditure of $3.9 million for NASA proposed elec-
    tronics research center. However, Committee deleted references
    to Boston area as site in FY 1964 budget authorization and also
                                                                  255
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,        19 6 3

    directed NASA t first undertake detail study of “geographic lo-
                    o
    cation, the need for, and the nature of the mposed center.”
     (NASA Le . Act. Rpt. 11/95; Quincy [Mass.Y Patriot-Ledger,
    6/25/63; &ston Traueler, 6/26/63)
J m %:   NASA announced receiving from ei h t nationally known artists
    60 sketches made during Astronout 8ooper7sMA-9 mission un-
    der NASA Artists’ Cooperation Program. Sketches were prelim-
    inary to finished paintin      which would be exhibited and from
                             P
    which reproductions wou d be made. MA-9 was first event which
    NASA invited artists to cover; other NASA activities of historic
    interest would be recorded by artists. (NASA Release 63-140)
  Langley Research Center issued invitations to bid to 39 contractors
    for construction of the laboratory building of the NASA Space
    Radiation Effects Laboratory a t Newport News, Va. With cost
    of the laboratory building estimated a t $3 million, this is the
    last major contract to be awarded for the $12.3 million facility.
    (LaRC R&?&93)
June 26: House Science and Astronautics Committee cut $134,248,600
    from the scientific exploration of space portion of the NASA au-
    thorization for F Y 1964. With a previous cut of $259,122,000
    from the manned space flight portion, total reduction in the
    $5.7 billion request was now $483 million. ( N P T , 6/27/63, 1)
  Develo ment and construction of frictionlw platform by Martin
        f
    Co. or NASA Manned Spacecraft Center was announced by MSC.
    MSCI Crew Systems Div. would use simulator to test and evaluab
    space suits, stabilization devices, tethering l n s and space main-
                                                   ie,
    tenance tools. (MSC Release 63-108)
  House of Representatives passed (410-1) and sent to the Senate
    DOD authorization bill for F Y 1964 in the amount of $47,082,-
    009,000, second largest in peacetime history. Amount was
    $1,932,228,000 less than requested by the Administration. Ma-
    jor House changes in RBCDrequesrs by the A&iiii&&cm: s         !
                                                                   &
    of $100 million (to $43.1 million) in thf MMRBM program, be-
    cause of lack of program definition: crease to $125 million
     (from $98 million requested) for USAF’S X-20 “or Mach 3 air-
    craft programs,” together with a strong endorsement of the X-20;
    no money voted (none requested) for the RS-70, thus ap arently
                                                             R
    ending the House’s long struggle to get DOD to increase t e scope
    of the RS-70 program. (NPT, 6/27/63,1; N&R, 7/1/63,34)
  Postmaster General J. Edward Day, speaking at a luncheon in
    Washington honoring the 25th anniversary of the CAB, said: “To-
    day, the ll domestic trunkline carriers serve more than 600 points
    over routes in excess of 185,000 miles in length. Twenty-four
    smaller carriers provide service t some 900 smaller communi-
                                         o
    ties over routes in exce56 of 8 , O miles. T r e carriers pro-
                                                     he
                                     8O O
    vide domestic all-cargo service to 38 points over routes in excess
    of 14,000 miles and another 15 carriers are licensed to provide
    supplemental services. Fifteen carriers are authorized to pro-
    vide service to a total of 428 points outside the United States
    over routes in excess of 320,000 miles.” ( CR,6/27/63, A4098)
  Charles Michels, LRC scientist, described Lewis work with a “co-
    axial plasma-gun,” being studied as a method to propel future
256           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    interplanetary spacecraft. Michels spoke before the American
    Physical Society in Cleveland. (LRO Release 6344, Lewis
    Chionology, 5)
June 96: USAF launched Thor-Agena D from Vandenberg AFB, Calif..
    with unidentified satellite agd a hitchhiker radiatio; monitorink
    satellite that separated in orbit on July 1,1963. (UPI, Wash.Post,
    6/27/63 ;Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1/27/64)
        roposed new rule of certification of manned free balloons, es-
      E
  FAA lishing minimum airworthiness requirements. (FAA Release T
    ta
    63-33)
  Reorganization of NASA Marshall Space Fli ht Center’s Michoud
                                                8
    Operations w s announced by Michoud eneral Manager Dr.
                    a
    George N. Constan. (NarshallStar, 6/26/63,7)
Jwm 27: X-15 No. 3 piloted by Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (UGAF)
    to 285,000-ft. altitude and 3,425-mph speed (mach 4.89) in
    13-min. flight. X-15 was launched from B-52 mother ship over
    Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 80 sec. Maj. Rushworth
    qualified for military astronaut wings by piloting the rocket re-
    search aircraft to altitude higher than 50 mi. Purpose of flight
    was to familiarize 38-year-old Major Rushworth with compam-
    tively highdaltitude flight. (FRC Release 1 6 6 3 ; NASA Release 63-
    142)
                                      sq. mi.-was brought under FAA’S
  About 1/3 of the U.S.-1,072,000
    positive separation control system for high-speed aircraft flying
    on instruments and over 24,000-ft. altitude. Latest addition was
    285,000 sq. mi. of the Midwest when new Air Traffic Control Cen-
    ters were activitakd at Kansas City and Denver. Most of the
    U.S. was scheduled to be under the system by the end of 1963.
     (FAARelease 63-61)
  NASA announced three personnel appointments t.0 Headquarters : Earl
    D. Hilburn, Vice President and General Manager of Curtiss-
    Wright Gorp. Electronics Div., as Deput Associate Administra-
    tor (for non-manned space flight centers7; Robert F. Garbarini,
    Chief Engineer of Sperry Gyroscope Co. Air Armament Div.,
    as Director of NASA Office of Applications ; and Robert W. Long,
    President of Long Construction Co., as consultant on construction
    matters to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA 14ssocinte Adminis-
    trator. (NASA Release 63-141)
  Sen. Ernest Gruening (D.-Alaska) criticized NASA on the Senate floor
    for its indifference to training and use of women astronauts in the
    manned space propam. Also he inserted in the (7onqressim7
    Record a recent article in Life by Clare Bmthe Luce, in which she
     said :“The astronaut of today is the world’s most prestigious idol.
    Once launched into space he holds in his hands something far more
     costly and precious than the millions of dollars’ worth of equip-
     ment in his capsule; he holds the prestige and the honor of his
     country . . . . But the astronaut is also something else : he is the
     symbol of the way of life of his nation.
        “In entrusting a 26-year-old girl with a cosmonaut mission, the
     Soviet TJnion has given its women unmistakable proof that it be-
     lieves them to possess these same virtues. The flight of Valentinn
     Tereshkova is, consequently, y-mholic of the emancipation of the
                                                                    257
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    Communist woman. It symbolizes to Russian women that they ac-
    tively share (not passive1 bask, like American women) in the
    glory of conquering space3 (CR, 6/27/63,11228-30)
Jvme 2 7 UBAF launched Minuteman ICBM from AMR in 4,000-mi. f i g h t
       ‘:
    down Atlantic Missile Range in successful test. (DOD Release
    929-63)
  Centaur s m vehicle arrived at Lewis to begin series of environ-
             p
    mental tests in the center’s space power chamber. ( m eRelease
    63-49, Lewis Chronol        6)
  senate nnanimously C o X e d hcurtis E..                   ( u w ) be
                                                                     to
    Chief of S a f TSSAF, for a one-year term, beginning July 1,1963.
                 tf,
     (CR,6/27/s3,11204-5)
  Senate unanimously passed a joint resolution authorizing a s p i a l
    medal to be struck in honor o Maj. Gen. Benjamin I). Foulois
                                     f
     (Ret.), one of the first military pilots in the US., chief of the Air
    Service of the American Expeditionary Force in World War I, and
    Chief of the Air Corps from 1931 to 1935. (CR, 6/27/63,11203)
June 223: NASA concurred in Grumman Aircmft Engineering Corp.
    selection of Radio Corp. of America as subcontractor for Lunar
    Excursion Module (LEX) electronic subsystems and engineering
    support. (NASA Release 63-143)
 Rocket-boost testing of the Apollo spacecraft would begin during the
    summer of 1963 from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., NASA
    announced. The first flight tests would see dummy Apollo c p        a
    sules launched to relatively low altitudes by the Little Joe I1
    solid rocket to subject sections and the assembled vehicle t~ m%xi-
    mum combinations of g forces and aerodynamic resistan? that
    would be encomhred in the launch phase of normal fights.
     ( N P T ,6/29/63,35)
  Mercury astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, accompanied by NASA
     astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill, would observe solar eclipse over
                                            specidly q”,nippd-? -? jet,
                                                                 ICf
    cAnt,ml Cnng& nn .Tidy 20
    flying above most of atmospheric haze a t 42,000 ft. During the
    flight Dr. Gill would oint out t o Astronaut Ca nter various
                                                         T
                            %
    scientific phenomena 1 ely to be encountered in uture manned
                              1
     space flights, and Carpenter would attempt to photograph airglow
     caused by zodiacal light. scientists from NASA Ames Research
     Center also would be onboard to photograph rays o the sun’s
                                                               f
    corona, seeking articular detail in sun’s polar regions to trace
     solar magnetic gelds. Flight would be sponsored by Douglas
    Aircraft CO.,National Geographic Society, and 1 other organi-
                                                           1
    zations. (NPT, 6/28/63,1; NASA Release 63-148)
  Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper arrived in home town of Shawnee,
     Okla., for weekend celebrations in his honor, his first Visit thwe
     since Project Mercury MA-9 space flight (May 15-16). (AP,
     W a h .Post, 6/29/63)
  Speaking a t Third International Technical-Scientific Meeting on
     Space at the 10th International Congress on Electronics, Nuclear
     Energy, Radio, Television, and Cinema, in Rome, NASA Director
     of Space Vehicles ( OART) Milton B. ames, Jr., reviewed content
     and objectives of U.S. space program, describing NASA’s         space
     research program: “[NASA] was created to carry out a program
258            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     to explore space in the best interests of men everywhere. The
      entire world is affected, directly or indirectly, by this effort to in-
      vestigate, explore, and make use of outer space. This tremendous
      activlty affects economy, science, technology, education, and hu-
      man welfare . . . .” (Text)
J u m ~ : USAF successfully launched a Minuteman ICBM from Vanden-
        2%
      berg AFB, Calif., the eighth successful Minuteman launch from the
      West Coast base. ( N Y T , 6/29/63, 8 )
   Dr.Leland J. Haworth was sworn in as the Director of the National
      Science Foundation, succeeding Dr. Alan T. Waterman, who was
      retiring. Dr. Haworth is a leading authority on high-energy
      physics, a former director of Brookhaven National Laboratory,
                               6
      and AEC Commissioner. N Y T , 6/99/63,8)
   Editorializing on cuts made y the House Committee on Science and
      Astmmutics i the NASA FY 64 appropriations, N m Y o & Times
                       n
      said: “Now for the first time it is taking a closer look a t NASA’s
      activities and is making a belated attempt to reduce the waste and
      du lication uncovered there.
          & h i s approach should have been utilized all along. Instead,
      the committea’s largesse and laxit encouraged NASA to act as if
                                         i
      there were no limit to what could e spent in the skies.” ( N Y T ,
      6/28/63, 28)
   USAF launched unidentified satellite for geophysics research purposes
      from NASA Wallops Station, Va., using Scout booster. (AP,
      Wmh.Post, 7/7/63; GSFC Sat. Sit. Rept.)
   Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched to 126 mi. altitude from
      White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Payload contained experi-
      ments to study the solar corona and extreme ultraviolet radia-
      tion-studies which would later apply to the Oso-B (S-17) ex-
.     periment. (NASA R t. of S. Rkt. Launchin 7/10/63)
 Jum 929: Dr. Robert R. (%ruth, director of the !banned Spacecraft
      Center, w s the principal speaker at the Space A e S m osium
                  a
      held in Shawnee, Okla., in conjunction with the citygs homecoming
                                                                  yp
      celebration for Astronaut 1,. Gordon Cooper. (Xpnce NewR
      Rozmdup,1/8/64,2)
   USAF launched unidentified satellite using Thor-Agena launch ve-
      hicle from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (AP, Wash. ,&m. Star,
      6/30/63, 4)
 Jzune 30: During F Y 1963 NASA awarded 8% of its total contract value
      to small business, lower than in previous years: F Y 1960, 17% ;
      FY 1961,15%; F Y 1962,1276. (M&R, 1/29/64,9)
   Based on net value of awards, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center
                                             FY
       awarded almost one third of NASA’s 1963 contracts to industry
       ($949.8 million). Second highest was Manned Spacecraft Center
       ($737.2 million). followed bv Western ODerations Office ($412.3
      million) and Gbddard Sp&e Flight Cinter ($303.5 million).
       (M&R,1/20/64, 9)
   Sr>aceSvstems Division (SSD) recorded its 200th Thor launch. The
     -figure”includes the usk of the Thor as a space booster-Thor-
       Agena, Thor-Delta, Thor-Able, and Thor-Able-Star-and as an
       intermediate range ballistic missile ( IRBM) . ( AFSC Release #312-
      R-114, Atch #2,1/1/64, 2)
                                                                       259
                                                       19 6 3
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

Jzune 30: Estimated 10,000-15,000 persons visited NAM Marshall Space
     Flight Center on “Famil Day.” (BwntsViaeTimes,             7/1/63)
                              6.
Dulring June: Dr. Edward Welsh, Executive Secretary of the Na-
    tional Aeronautics and Space Council, writing in Ordmrwe, said :
    “It should be unnecessary to point out that the spacs race is be-
    tween the United sae and Soviet Russia, not between N A ~ Aon
                           tts
    the one hand and the Department of Defense or any of its services
     on the other. Yet, I believe the point needsto be made.
        “We are trying to build national competence and international
     good will and cooperation through our s ace program, not agency
                                               f
    com tence or intragovernmental riva ries. We are trying to
     buil an effective ima e of a nation devoted to peace, to the im-
            x”
     provement of mankindFs well-being, and to the furthering of man’s
     abilities and howled e.
        “To do so we must f e able to discourage aggression,which is the
     antithesis of our objectives. To fail to develop stren h for peace
                                                                f
     thro h com etence in space would, in a sense, be to isarm by de-
               (Oro!mwe, May-June 1963,658)
     faul?
  NASA announced that it would recruit 10 to 15 new astronaut trainees
     this summer. ( MSC S p e News R d u p , 1/8/64,2)
  Study of Soviet astronautics from 1957 through 1962 (RM3595-
     PR) by F. J. Krieger of the RAND Corp., under USAF contract, con-
     cluded that the Soviet space program is an integral part of the
     Soviet military program. Krieger listed four main categories of
     Soviet effort: (1) earth-orbiting man in space; (2) lunar scien-
     tific exploration ; (3) interplanetary exploration ;and (4) Cosmos
     earth satellites, paramilitary in nature.
        Cosmos satellites have come in two s i z e l a r g e ones similar to
     the Vostoks, launched from Tyuratam cosmodrome east of the
     Aral Sea, orbiting at around 65”, and brought back to earth; and
     smaller ones launched with smaller rockets from Kapustin Yar
     cmmedrcae ncrth cf t h Csspian see, d i t - i n g Plt .bmt 490, and
    not recovered.
        Kreiger counted 10 Soviet attempts at interplanetary flight, of
     which 2 have been partially successful (one passing Venus, an-
     other Mars, but both with communications failure) and six have
     failed to get out of earth orbit. (M&R, 6/10/63,16)
  U.S.S.R. would use earth-orbit rendezvous for an early circumlunar
     manned flight with present-generation hardware, according to
     article in Pravda by “chief desi e?’ of Vostok spacecraft. Au-
     thor indicated that the tandem &ht of L/Col. Valery Bykovsky
     and Jun. L ,t Valentina Tereshkova was successful preliminary to
     such flight, which he said would last 8 to 12 days. Re-entry, he
     indicated, was the most difficult part of the moon flight. (iK&R,
     7/1/63,29)
  Bill (H.R. 6866) to rovide each House of Congress with a three-
     man scientific staf! was commented on approvingly by Science,
                                 “. . . Congress is showing interest in
     publication of the AAAS:
     sound scientific dissent against official policy set by the executive
     agenciesthe lunar landing Program is an example-and is look-
                   a
     in increasin ly to the scientific communit for help in seeing the
       fi
     ot er side of t e question.” (CR, 6/26/63, i4064)
260           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

DzUring June: MSFC officially changed the name of its Mississippi Test
    Facility to Mississippi Test Operations ( MTO) . ( MSFC Hist. of .,
                                                                   f
    MHM-7, Draft of MTO Chapter, 2)
 Details of plan for $250,000,000 research center near Pittsburgh dis-
    closed by Dr. Edward Litchfield, Univ. of Pittsburgh chancellor
    and Oakland Corp. board chairman. Oakland Corp. was specially
    formed to undertake development of center, which would include
    nuclear reactor and instrumentation complex, computer center,
    and data bank, in addition to theatsrs, school, restaurant, and
    Carne e Museum. ( N Y T , 6/23/63, 39)
 E d i b r i a k ZndUstr-iaJ Research on “Myopia in Space” : “Contained
    in the concept of space exploitation is at once an economic substi-
    tute for war, an opportunity for peace on earth, an answer to
    overpopulation, and, more important, an unprecedented expan-
    sion of everything we know ! The exploration of space and the
    planets presents a future so wonderful as to make its momplish-
    ment imperative at almost any cost. It is the next logical move in
    man’s quest for new knowledge and a better way of life.” ( C R ,
    6/27/63, A4105)
 Dr. Eugene Fubini succeeded John H. Rubel as Deputy Director,
    DOD Research and Engineering. Rubel resigned to return to pri-
    vate industry. (Av.      Wk.,6/10/63,25)
 Patent #3,093,346 was awarded to seven engineers for design of
    Mercury manned spacecraft. (Jones, N Y T , 6/15/63,26)
 I n Znterstellar Cmmunication, anthology of nrticles on man’s search
    for intelligent extraterrestrial life published b W. A. Benjamin,
                                                   9
    Inc., Dr. Freeman J. Dyson proposed that hig ily advanced civil-
    ization elsewhere in Milky Way galaxy may be using gravity
    machines instead of sunlight as principal power source. If a
    civilization on planet which orbits twin stars fired vehicle from
    planet toward twin stars so as to circle approaching star, vehicle
    would return with far more energy than initially; vehicle could
    then be recovered in manner exploiting the ener . Dr. Dyson is
                                                    F
    theoretical physicist at, Institute for Advanced tudy, Princeton,
                                                    L-

    N.J. (Sullivan, N Y T , 6/9/63)
 Engineer Nathan Price described in Science Digext his Air Space
    Transportation (ASTRA) system proposed for the 1970’s: trans-
    continental passenger rockets would be vertically launched on
    predetermined courses from vertiports in the middle of cities.
     ( N Y T , 6/22/63)
 A working experimental model of a one-man space scooter was
     successfully flight-tested at NAA’S Space and Information Divi-
    sion. The jet-powered platform was designed by Jack Bell,
    director of Lunar and Planetary Systems, who made the first
    flight, and John W. Sandford, research specialist in Advanced
     Systems. According to Bell, “precision control of platforms can
    be learned in a few minutes’ flight time.” The vehicle hovers,
     rotates, or moves in any direction desired. An extremely versa-
     tile piece of equipment, the lunar scooter could permit moon ex-
     plorers to traverse flat! rough terrain where walking is difficult
     and where surface vehicles would stall; as a “crater hopper,” it
     would permit a space-suited moon explorer to span or descend
                                                                  261
                           AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63
          ASTRONAUTICS

into fissures or crevasses; as a “lunesca climber,” it would serve
                                          R“
as B vehicle to scale steep cliffs. As a “s uttle bus,” it would trans-
   rt crew members between orbiting space vehicles, or it might
    used to support man in assembling advanced space stations i      n
earth orbit. Finally, its potential for use i military maneuvers
                                                n
on earth i considerable. ( M I DS&m*tm, 6/28/63)
          s
                             JULY 1963
July 1 :NASA announcBd selection of Boeing Aircraft Co. to negotiate
     contract for four-month study of lunar base concept. Study
     would be first phase of broad lunar base study program to deter-
     mine feasibility of such a project following Project Apollo.
     (NASA &lease 63-145)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb, quoted in press interview, ex-
    pressed his hope that Congress would continue its record of con-
    sistently taking “the necessary action to support the space pro-
     gram . . . As the space program builds up toward pre-eminence
     for the United S a e ,a position we are rapidly approaching, the
                      tts
     space agency is endeavoring to obtain the maximum spa,ce value
     for each dollar it spends and has made an excellent record in this
     regard . . - . [But] the successful and expeditious carrying out
     of the programs recommended in the President’s budget will re-
     quire the $5,712,000,000 which he recommended . . . .” (Hines,
     Wash. Eve.Star, 7/1/63)
  Letter from RCA Chairman David Sarnoff to Sen. Warren Magnu-
     son, Commerce Committee Chairman, and Rep. Oren Harris, In-
     terstate md Foreign Commerce Committee Chairman, made pub-
     lic. Repeating his view that commercial communications carriers
     be consolidated under Communications Satellite Corp., Sarnoff
     charged that rrr proposal for separate, competing carriers (ad-
     vocated in June 18 letter to Congress) would “turn back the clock”
     and be a “disservice to the public and an exercise in futility.’’ He
     urged Congress undertake public hearings aimed at providing
     “powerful Impetus” to search for unified U.S. communications
     policy. ( WdZ Xtreet Jozlrna.?, 7/1/63)
  Reported that DOD cost study of Titan I 1 launch vehicle concluded
                                           1
     total development cost of Titan I11 “exclusive of mission payload
     adaptations” would be $808.3 million. Study concluded the mili-
     tary space booster would repay its development costs over three
     or four years of operation-conclusion based on predictable and
     expectable payload launchings within booster’s capability.
      (Space Bus. Daily, 7/1/63)
  International Academy of Astronautics announ,md 1963 Daniel and
     Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award would
     be awarded to Prof. Marcel Nicolet, Director of Centre National
     de Recherches de 1’Espace in Belgium. Prof. Nicolet’s achieve-
     ments in aeronomy and planetary atmospheres included that of
     accurately predictmg existence of earth’s helium belt, later veri-
     fied by space probes. Award would be presented during IAF
     XIVth Congress in Paris next autumn. (IAA Release No. 15)
  A. 0. Tischler, NASA Launph Vehicles and Propulsion Assistant Di-
     rector (for Propulsion), quoted as saying combustion instability
      262
                                                                   263
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    problem of F-1 rocket engine was now “under control,” in AI&-
    siks and Rockets. hstallation of mechanical isolator separated
    oscillations in engine pum from oscillations in fuel system.
                                    R
    “Since that time the engine as been tested under the most severe
    conditions and there has been no evidence of combustion instabil-
    ity.” (AI&%, 7/1/63)
July 1: Hitchhiker radiation monitor satellite on DOD unidentified
    satellite launched June 27, 1963, with Thor-Agena vehicle, was
    ejected and fired kipk motor to attain higher apogee. Satallite
    measuring magnetically trapped electrons and protons of all sig-
    nificant energy levels showed relation between solar flares and
    low-energy particles in solar lama. No distinct division b e
                                        P
    tween inner and outer Van AI en belts was found, but instead a
    gradual transition. (Pres.Rpt. onflpace,1963,1/27/64)
  USAF Minuteman I ~ “met all its test objectives” in 5,000-mi. flight
                          X
    from silo launch, Cape Canaveral. (IJPI, Wmh. Post, 7/2/63)
  U.S. Army Nike-Zeus antimissile misile performed sucxessfully in
    development test at W h i b Sands Missile Range, N.M. ( M d R ,
    7/8/63,10)
  Dr. Robert W. Buchheim became USAF Chief Scientist, replacing
    Dr. Launor F. Carter. Dr. Buchheim was formerly head of
    RAND Corp., Aero-Astronautics De t.      (DOD Release 690-63)
                                            5
  The 6555th Aerospace Ts Wing, atrick AFB, Fla., was laced
                           et
    under t1,e command of the Space Systems Division ( A F S C ~ , Los
     An les, Calif. The Wing was previously assigned to the
    B a l g t i c S stems Division, Norton AFB, Calif. (A-N-AF
    J m m 2 an? Register, Jan., 1964)
                  4
  Restructuring placed the A F Materials Laboratory, the AF
    Avionics Laboratory, the A F Aero-Propulsion Laboratory and the
    A F Flight Dynamics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB, under
    the operational control of RTD, Bolling AFB. (AFSC Operational
                      in\
     TT---Z7?-Z*-
    u tyrw6ylL.ea, 1LI)
       program had a t this date as its objective the deployment of
  FBM
    additional submarines carrying the Polaris , - missiles and the
                                                   42
    deployment in 1964 of FBM submarines carrying Polaris A 3 mis-
    siles. Thirty-five SSBN’S and four tenders were authorized with
    long leadtime items authorized for an additional six SSBN’S.
     (Polaris Chronology, 1955-63)
July 2: 50-lb. payload of ionospheric measuring instruments launched
    with Argo D-4 sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va.,
    into orbital path of ALOOE~TE satellite. Preliminary data
    indicated measurements were made in upper ionosphere within
    two minutes of soundings taken from ALOUETTE.              Payload
    reached peak altitude of 590 mi. Purpose of experiment was to
    obtain measurements of ion and electron temperatures and den-
    sities; data from payload instruments would be compared with
    similar data transmitted simultaneously by ALOUEITE. Analysis
    of data later confirmed that ALOTJEITJT I data were valid. ( B e s .
    R p t . on Space, 1963, 1/27/64, 128; Wallops Release 63-63)
  NASA announced selection of Genisco, Inc., co fiegotiate development,
    fabrication, and assembly contract ior man-carrying motion gen-
    erator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological prob-
264                                                 1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

                                                        be major compo-
     lems of space flight.
     nent of NASA Ames
     Facility, expected to be
     Release 63-146 ;Ames Release 63-26)
JuEyd: JPL spokesman said tests showed deterioration of washer could
     have caused short circuit and overheating in RANGER v lunar probe,
     which failed to generate power after launch Oct. 18, 1962, and
       assed within 450 mi. of moon Oct. 21. (Wash. Eve. Star,
     !/2/63 )
  I n his ublic statement to President Kenned at the Vatican, Pope
        P                                       %
     Pau VI said: “These past few years have een impressive devel-
     opments in the exploration of space to which the United States
     has made notable contributions.
         “Ma these undertakings take on a meaning of homage rendered
     to GoL,Creator and Supreme Law Maker. Because they augur
            ?
     so much for the benefit of mankind, may they be indicative of true
     and peaceful progress which would bring men together in a
     closer relationship of universal brotherhood . . . .” (Text,
     N Y T , 1/3/63, 3)
  Soviet Premier Khrushchev addressed East Berlin rally, and said :
     “. . . the Soviet Government expresses its willingness to conclude
     an agreement banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer
     space and under water . . . .,, ( N Y T , 7/3/63)
  Dr. Seth B. Nicholson, leading solar astronomer, died at 72 in
     Los Angeles. H e had been staff member at Mt. Wilson and
     Palomar Observatories for 42 years. (AP, N F T , 7/3/63)
July 3: With President Kennedy’s return to Washington from Eu-
     rope, NASA communications satellite RELAY I marked end of its
     busiest programing period. RELAY was “booked solid” during past
     weeks to cover President’s trip, death of Pope John XXIII, and
     election of Pope Paul VI. During its six months of operation,
     RELAY I had been used for 85 public communications demonstra-
     tions, including transmission of television, voice, radio-photo, and
     teletype. (NASA Release 63-144)
  Selection of Republic Aviation Corp. for negotiation of Advanced
     Orbitin Solar Observatory (Aoso) contract announced by NASA.
     Under f5.5 million contract, Republic would complete Phase I
     of Aoso development, including detail design, systems engineer-
     ing, reliability assessment, limited hardware development of
     critical systems and components, and trade-off analysis. ( NABA
     Release 63-147)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced ejection seat escape sys-
     tem for Gemini two-man spacecraft had successfully undergone
     first high-speed rocket-sled test, a t Naval Ordnance Test Station,
     China Lake, Calif. Both dummy astronauts were safely recov-
     ered after ejection a t nearly 600 mph from boiler late spacecraft,
     simulating emergency ejection during boost p ase of Gemini
     mission. Tss simulating ejection before launch were a150 being
                 et
     conducted, consisting of firing ejection seats from 150-$. tower
     and parachuting dummy astronauts to safe landing. (MSC
     Release 63-111)
                                                                    265
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

J d y 3 : Addressing First World Conference on World Peace Through
     Law in Athens, NASA Communications Systems Director Leonard
     Jaffe described role of satellites in communications and said:
     “. . . Today, approximately 300 telephone channels are available
     across the North Atlantic.
         “Notwithstanding these recent and radical improvements in
      trans-Atlantic telephone service, we can predict the need for still
      more channels. Every time communication channels have in-
      creased, they have been loaded to capacity almost a t o n e n e w
     means for communication have never caused the abandonment of
      the old ones. Durin 1960 there were more than three million
                                     f
      overseas telephone ca Is, and reliable estimates indicate a seven-
      fold increase in overseas calls during the next decade. Such an
      increase in t r a 5 c will overtax the current and planned under-
      sea cables, and high frequency radio facilities. And our current
      communication facilities have no capability for transmitting
      television. . . .
         “Communications satellites should soon be providing a substan-
     tial increase in our capabilities for world-wide high quality com-
      mon carrier communications, a t least over those routes where the
      volume of tra5c exceeds resent or forecast capabilities, and is
                                         f
      also great enough to justi y the necessarily large investment in a
      communications satellite system. Eventually, we hope that com-
      munications satellite technology will be improved to the point
      where service can also be provided to areas not served by other
      means, either because of their isolation or because the t r a c
      volume does not justify an investment in more conventional
      communication Sn_eans.
        “The objective of the United States in this area Fas voiced by
     President Kennedy in a public statement, not, too long ago, in
     which he said: ‘There is no more important field at the present
     time thnn c93-TcEic%tiGEs, tlnd fce m n a t g g s p &e advantages
     presented to us by the communications satellite to use this medium
     wisely and effectively to insure greater understanding among the
     peoples of the aorld.’ ” (Text)
  Bochum Institute for Satellite and Space Research, Germany, an-
     nounced reception of 15-min. radio transmission on frequencies
     normally used by Soviet spacecraft. Commercial radio station in
     Paris broadcast that U.S.S.R. had placed a man into space but
      did not elaborate. Soviet news agency Tass made no mention of
     space launching. (UPI, Wash.Post, 7/4/63)
  Effective date of a pointment of Dr. Eugene G. Fubini as Assistant
                                 P
     Secretary of De ense, with s ific duty of serving as Deputy Di-
      rector of Defense Researepand Engineering. (DOD Release
    7/8/63 )
  National Aeronautic Association President Martin M. Decker an-
    nounced five Americans would receive 1962 awards from FQdhra-
   tion Aeronautique Internationale : Paul F. Bikle, Director of
    NASA Flight Research Center, Lilienthal Medal for his record-

                 a
              lider flights; Donald L. Piccard of Raven Industries,
   Montgol er Award for best international balloon performance
   making
    in 1962; and (jointly) ME. Grace M. Harris of Kansas City Aero
     741-623 0 - - 8 P - - l S
266            ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,       1963

      Club, Philip S. Hopkins, National Air Museum Director, and
      W. W. Millikan, Northrop Corp. Washington representative, the
      FAI Paul Tissandier Diploma for outstandin service to aviation
                                                    !?
      in general and sporting aviation in particu ar. (NAA Release)
July 3: First Minuteman missile wing declared o erational in cere-
                                                     E
      mony turning over last of the Montana sites to trategic Air Com-
       mand a t Malmstrom AFB, Great Falls, Mont. ( DOD Release 952-63)
  USAF launched Atlas ICBM from Vandenber AFB in successful rou-
       tine training launch. (DOD Release 987-637
  Polaris A-3 missile launched from land pad on successful 1,500-mi.
       flight down Atlantic Missile Range. (AP, Wash. Eve. Xtar, 7/4/
       63 ;M&R, 7/15/63,10)
  Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile performed successfully in
       White Sands Missile Range test studying precise control of the
       missile by ground equipment under “severe” conditions. ( DOD
       Release 954-63)
July 4: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced study contract
       award to Space Technology Laboratories, with objective of iden-
       tifying and defining essential design requireinents for an opera-
       tional nuclear space propulsion system in the 1970’s. Study would
       be based on Saturn V or Nova-class first-stage booster. MSFC
       also let conceptual design studies to Douglas Aircraft Co. and
       General Dynamics/Astronautics for parallel studies of launch
       vehicles having chemical-propulsion first stages and nuclear-pro-
       pulsion up er stages, to be used in mid-1970’s. Chemical-nuclear
                E
       rocket con guration would have one-million-lb. orbital capabil-
       ity. (Huntsville Times, 7/4/63; Space Bus. Daily, 7/8/63, 33)
   NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced two types of orbital
       manned space stations would be studied to compare concepts for
       %-man operational station-one concept by Lockheed Co. Cali-
       fornia Div. and the other by Douglas Aircraft Missiles and Space
       Systems Div. Each station would be designed to remain in or-
       bit at 200- to 300-mi. altitude for about three yaars, with resu
        ply and crew changes every three months. (L.A. Times, Wm%:
       Post, 7/6/63)
J u l y 5: Minuteman ICBM fired from Vandenberg AFB down the Pa-
       cific Missile Range in routine training launch. (DOD Release
        987-63)
July 6 : I n the wake of Washington reports that Lt. Col. John H.
        Glenn might be candidate for US. Senate from Ohio, the NASA
        astronaut said in aouston Post interview that his plans were to
        remain with NASA and that he had given no thought to a political
        career. (Houston Post, 7/7/63)
   I n study of 26 U.S. colleges and universities for Carnegie Founda-
        tion for Advancement of Teaching, the institutions unanimously
        concluded that Federal aid to education was “highly beneficial.”
        Study reported that 28 Federal agencies supplied funds to the
        26 institutions in period covered (total of 42 agencies support
        U.S. colleges and universities at rate of $1,760,000,000 per year).
        Most influential area of Federal support was research; without
        Federal funds for research “facilities in many instances would
                                                                    267
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    shrink. Many research efforts mould have to be abandoned com-
            . Others would be sharply curtailed.” ( h e r . Council
    p1ete2
    on E uc., Edzccatwncu! Record [special issue “Partners in Search
    of Policies”], 7/6/63 ;NY T , 7/7/63,28)
July 6: Eight Soviet women parachutists, led by T. Voinova, estab-
    lished new world record in grou jumping for accuracy of land-
                                      R
    ing from 600-meter (1,968.5-ft.) eight. Average deviation from
    center of circle was 22.15 ft.-almost 200% better than previous
    record. (Tass, Krmnaya Zvezda,7/7/63,3, -8-T Trans.)
Judy 7 TELGTAR II was successfull tracked for 18 min. by ground
       :
                             7
    station northeast of To 0. Jatellite microwave beacon signal
    was turned on by p o u n station at Andover, Maine. No corn-
    munications tests were conducted, but tracking exercises between
    Tokyo and Andover were to continue through July 20, in repa-
    ration for communications experiments to be conducted ‘‘c%m.ng
    the next period of mutual visibility, beginning in April 1964.
     (Bell Lab. Release, 7/9/63 in LSZD, August 1963 ; Reuters, N I T ,
    7/8/63,36)
  USAF announced launching of unidentified satellite June 28 from
    NASA Wallops Station, using Scout booster. Goddard Space
    Flight Center Satellite Situation Report listed the satellite a~
    “research satellite for geophysics.” (AP, Wmh. Post, 7/7/63 ;
    GSFC 8 % flit.Rpt., 6/30/63)
            0.
  Dr. E. C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics
    and Space Council, spoke before the Georgetown University
    Forum :
       “In brief I would list some solid reasons for the moon trip :
       “1. [There is] No other place so near in space where we can
    test the equipment and the men for future space travel.
       “2. A clear objective gives impetus, order, and efficiency to
    a program.
       ‘‘8. The l:zzy p j & rcci”iyp tkc &T&pm&,             of powerf.;!
    rocket engines, sophisticated spacecraft, trained astronauts, tFck-
    ing systems, and capability to protect man against the multiple
    hazards of space.
       “4. Success in this venture gives prestige essential at negotiating
    tables.
       “5. It will give an impetus to our standard of living, to educa-
    tion and employment, and to new methods and matmals for the
    productive process.
       “6. There will be substantial defense spin-offs, in addition to
    the political and economic benefits which also tend to deter ag-
    gression. For example, rendezvous technique, life-protective
    measures, control and guidance systems, improvement in rockets,
    etc.
       “7. The moon is an excellent latform for mounting astronom-
                                     K
    ical instruments, without atmosp eric handicaps.
       “8. The moon can be a relay point for communications and
    a refueling point for s ace travels. ’ (Text)
  Astrophysicist Dr. F. 8urtis Michel (Capt., USAFR) said in A P
     interview :
268                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

         “. . . NASA knows the requirements for the first space flights
     much better than I do.
         “But I personally believe it can’t be very long before we must
     send scientifically trained men into space. We are going into
     space because we ex ect to find the unexpected, and only a man
                         P
     trained in science wi 1know what he’s seeing when the unexpected
     comes along.” The 29-yr.-old scientist, with 500 hrs. jet flying
     time, would begin new job next Sept. as Assistant Prof. of Space
     Science, Rice Univ., in Houston. Rice President Dr. Kenneth
     Pitzer had described Dr. Michel as “a possible candidate as scien-
     tist-astronaut,” adding he was one of few men in U.S. with such
     qualifications. (AP, N . Y . EeraZd Trib., 7/7/63)
J d y 7 : General Electric Co. said four men would spend one month
     inside full-scale model of space station at GE’s Space Technology
     Center, in test of man’s reactions and performance in simulated
     space-flight conditions. Experiment would begin in September.
      ( AP, N Y T , 7/8/63,25)
  Brig. Gen. Frank Purdy Lahm (U.S. Army, Ret.), second Army
        ilot officially to fly Army’s first airplane in 1909, died at 85.
     !‘aught to fly by Wilbur Wright, he served during World War I
     as air chief of Second Army in France, later became first com-
     mander of first U.S. Air Corps Training Center, at Randolph
     Field, Tex. (AP, N Y T , 7/9/63,31)
Judy 8 ; Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced it was with-
      drawing its $3.2 million contract offer to 16 U.S. astronauts for
      their personal stories. “It is with deep regret that we are with-
      drawing our bid. We knew there would be a vast number of
      subtle and complex problems to resolve before we could arrive at
      a viable contract.
          “Following our most recent conversations with [NASA] officials,
      we have reached the conclusion, most reluctantly, that further
      negotiations would be futile.” (UPI, N Y T , 7/9/63, 1)
   NASA Launch Operations Center awarded two contracts for con-
      struction at the Merritt Island site adjacent to Cape Canaveral :
      Ingalls Iron Works, $11,500,000 contract for three launching
      towers ;and American Bridge Div. of U.S. Steel Corp., $23,534,000
      contract for work on Saturn V vertical assembly building.
       ( N Y T ,7/10/63,5)
  Dr. Nello Pace, physiology prof. at Univ. of Calif., sworn in as
      consultant on life science programs to NASA Administrator James
      E. Webb. (NASA Release)
  Jr. Lt. Valentina Tereshkova’s confirmation that she landed by
      parachute separately from her VOSTOK VI spacecraft was reported
      in Aviation Week und Space Technology. ( A s . Wk.,7/8/63,26)
July 9: 164-lb. payload sent t o 127-mi. altitude with Aerobee 150A
       sounding rocket from NASA Wallops Station in experiment to
      obtain nighttime electromagnetic noise and propagation data.
      Included In payload were three sweeping receivers and a broad-
      band receiver of the type to be included in Eogo satellite (Eccen-
      tric Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) next year. Preliminary
       telemetry evaluation indicated all experiment objectives were
       met. (Wallops Release 63-65)
                                                                    ,269
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

J d y 9: X-15 No. 1flown by Joseph A. Walker               to 226,400-ft.
                                                  (NASA)
    altitude and 3,631-mph speed (mach 5.07), the X-15 engine burn-
    ing for 84 sec. Mounted in aircraft’s fuselage was traversing
    probe, retracting every four sec. and measuring air pressures at
    varying distances from aircraft skin. (FRC Release; FRC X-15
    F l i g h t h g ; NASA Hq. X-15 Proj. O f )
                                           f.
 House Commithe on Science and Astronautics cut $95.5 million
    from NASA proposed F Y 1964 budget, based upon recommendation
    of Committee’s Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and
    Data Acquisition. Today’s reduction brought Committee’s total
    reduction to $488.88 million, cutting requeseed $5.712 billion au-
    thorization t o $5.223 billion. (NYT, 7/10/63, 12; UPI, Wash.
    Post, 7/10/63)
 Dr. Samuel D. Estep, of the faculty of Univ. of Michigan Law
                    r
    School, in a pa r “Some International Aspects of Communica-
    tions Satellite ystems,” offered a series of assumptions on the
    Communications Satellite C o p , among them: no profits for at
    least 8 or 10 years; interde ndent with inhrnational com-
    munications companies, US. government, and foreign govern-
    ments; for next decade, will transmit only normal TV relay (not
    broadcast), and the telephone, and data lay already rovided
                                                               I)
    by overseas telephone, radio, and tslegra% facilities; or some
    years the primary use of the system will%e in the high-density
    traffic between U.S. and Europe; receivin facilities and opera-
    tions in other parts of the world will profably have to be Gov-
    ernment subsidized. (CR,        7/9/63,11572-79)
                                    A. Batten, representing nine NASA as-
 Advertising executive H a
                            T
    tronauts, said that with rawal of Field Enterprises Education
    Corp. contract offer for astronauts’ personal stories did not mean
    NASA disapproved this type contract. Rather, he said NASA be-
    lieved astronauts should conclude such a contract to protect their
    own and their families’ privacy. He p d i c t e d Rstmnmits woi~ld
    reach story-contraet agreement with some other f r . (AP, im
    Houston Post, 7/10/63)
 WD named Dr. Albert C. Hall, Vice President and General Man-
    ager of Martin Co. Space Systems Div., as Deputy Director of
    Defense Research and Rngineering for Space Technology. Ps        ot
    was formerly that of Special Assistant to the Director (Harold
    Brown), held by Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau. (DOD Release
    969-63 ; Av. Wk,       7/15/63 ; Wash. Eve.StaT, 7/10/63)
 Plum Brook Station, NASA Lewis Research Center, awarded a
    $450,000 contract for completion of nuclear rocket and dynamic
    control test stand. The 200-ft.-high stand was to be used for test-
    ing second-generation nuclear rocket components. (Lewis
    Chronology, 3)
July IO: NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement to
    ’ T h e record shows that Congress has consistently taken
    the necessary action to support the space program, and I am con-
    fident that this Congress will continue this record. Although the
    report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics is
    a major milestone on the road to approval of the 1964 NASA
270           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3

    Budget, it is still too early in the consideration of this budget by
    Congress to draw firm conclusions as to what the final result will
    be. The House subcommittees have given the NASA programs a
    most careful review, accumulating data from hearings which will
    total more than 4,000 pages of testimony. Their devotion and
    attention to details has been impressive but in my opinion the
    overall result of their actions is an ina&quate level of sup ort
                                                                    P
    f w a program that is urgently needed, has achieved a high eve1
    of success, and is now giving this nation the promise of early
    preeminence in all phases of space exploration and use. I n the
    areas reduced, NASA will present a strong case for restoration as
    the legislation proceeds to enactment.
       “After its many details were brought under close scrutiny and
    the possibility of postponement of many of these examined, the
    Committee has endorsed the program and the way it is being
    carried out but decided to defer approval until subsequent
    budgets in a number of important areas. My view is that the
    necessary resources should be authorized this year, rather than
    have important segments postponed with the consequent intro-
    duction of uncertainty at many levels in the government-industry-
    university team now engaged in this urgent national effort.
       “At the reduced level of funding recommended, we will cer-
    tainly have to slow up or postpone a number of programs and
    direct a reduction in the scheduled level of effort in the plants of
    our contractors where 90% of the work of the space program is
    done. Unless an adequate level of support is restored, momentum
    already attained with great effort and difficulty will be lost and the
    stretch-out required will add to the final cost of the work required
    to carry out the program.” (Statement)
July 10: “Town Meeting of the World”-international live telecast via
    TELSTAR 1 communications satellite-presented       on CBS-TV. The
              1
    one-hour forum featured former President Dwight D. Eisenhower
    from Denver; former British Prime Minister Sir Anthony Eden,
    Earl of Avon, from London; Dr. Heinrich von Brentano, major-
    ity leader of West German Bundestag, from Bonn; and Jean
    Monnet, France’s “Father of the Common Market,” from
    Brussels. Program was to have been first live transatlantic view-
    ing, but French government refused permission to use Pleumeur-
    Bodou round station needed to relay telecast throughout Europe.
     (NYT,%/l1/63,3)
  Univ. of Chicago scientists led by Dr. Peter Meyer, physicist of
    Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, left Chicago for
    Churchill, Manitoba, where they would conduct experiments test-
    ing theory that electrons and positrons reaching earth are created
    in collisions of atomic nuclei in space. Experiments would in-
    volve sending 185-lb. magnet, plus instrumentation and cameras,
    to 120,000-ft. altitude with 40-story-high balloons, to record and
    analyze particles in area affected by field near the earth’s ma -
    netic pole (where particles can pass with minimal interference7.
     (Chic.Trib.,7 / 8 / 6 3 )
  National Airlines President L. B. Maytag, Jr., told National Aero-
    space Education Council in Miami Beach that mach 2 commercial
                                                                     271
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     airliner would be far more economical and utilitarian than mach
     3, usable only in transoceanic flight because of altitude require-
     ments. Mach 2 aircraft could make transcontinentd U.S. flights
     faster than mmh 3 aircraft, which would have to cruise at 12-mi.
     altitude in order to prevent sonic boom damage. Mach 2 could
     be built of aluminum, but mach 3 airliner would have to be built
     of titanium and steel, Maytag said. (1        Wash. Post, 7/11!63)
                                             -,
July IO: Camera equipped with special synchronization system mak-
     in it capable of taking 8 million pictures per sec. was re orted in
     gsshington Star. Synchronization system was d e v i 2 by Pvt.
     l/C R. Carey of Army Engineer Research and Development
     Laboratory, Ft. Belvoir, Va. (Henry, Wash. Eve.Star, 7/10/63)
  West German Cabinet approved West German participation in two
     European rocket and spam projects-development of three-stage
     rocket by 7-nation ELDO and development of spam probe by 11-
     nation IBRO. (NPT [West. Ed.], 7/11/63)
  Supersonic Transport Advisory Group was dissolved by Federal
     Aviation Agency following completion of task for which it was
     formed in Nov. 1961. (FAARelease 63-63)
JUCy 11: NASA Ames Research Center announced Seven NASA astro-
     nauts were conducting simulated manned spacecraft missions at
     h e s centrifuge facility. Tests involved subjecting astronauts
     to space flight stressesthey might encounter during future manned
     space flights. (Ames Release 63-29)
  Senators Warren G. Magnuson and Henry M. Jackson announced
     three NASA study contracts awarded to Boeing CQ.: $199,920
     contract to continue stud ing methods of recovering Saturn
                                9
     first-stage rocket boosters or reuse; $106,000 award to continue
     studying large clustered solid-propellant rocket motors ; and
     $84,108 contract to study vehicle-integrated rocket powerplant
     with air augmentations. Contracts were let by NASA Marshall
     Spm?Flight center. (‘%tf7P T;7n4Sj 7//11,/63)
  Communications Satellite Corp. issued its first request for contract
     proposals-proposals      for study of multi le access system for
     communications satellites ( C o m S a t ~ r p L l e a s e )
  Soviet news agency Tass announced improved types of rocket c?r-
     riers for spacecraft were launched successfully from Soviet Union
     to central Pacific during June and July, and area was no longer
     off-limits for navigation of ships and aircraft. (Tass, K m o -
     molskaya Pravda, 7/11/63,3, AFSS-T Trans.)
  FAA announced month-long series of tests would evaluate use of heli-
     copters in addition to ground fire-fighting methods to increase
     survival chances of aircraft passengers in crash and fire situations.
     T s swould begin in September. (FAA Release 63-39)
      et
  VSAF announced Minuteman ICBM was successfully launched from
     Vandenberg AFB in routine launch. (DOD Release 997-63)
J d y 18: Dummy S-IV stage for Saturn I rocket arrived at Ca e
                                                                      Y
     Canaveral from Douglas Aircraft Co. via conrerted Boeing 3 7
     Stratocruiser, marking first use of aircraft for transporting major
                                                    (UPI, NYT. 7/14/63,
     NASA rocket components from West Coast.
    64)
272           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

J d y 16’: Columbia Univ. School of Journalism announced $131,000
                                           dissemination of space news
     award from NASA to evaluate NASA’s
     and to study problems and competence of news media in reporting
     and interpreting space news, to determine whether better ways can
     be found to improve public understanding of space sciences and
     space exploration. Study would take 3 years, with comparable
     funds expected for the second and third years.
        Commenting on the grant, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman
     of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said:
     “It seems a strange expenditure, especially when we are des-
     perately trying to maintain their budget . . . .,,
        Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on
     Science and Astronautics, said: “It sounds like the agency is
     carrying out the Space Act by tryin to find ways of better in-
                                          fl
     terpreting to the public the great tec nological developments in
     space.”
        Unnamed NASA spokesman said the grant was “a legitimate
     study fulfilling our Congressional mandate to keep the public in-
     formed.“ (Toth, N YT , 7/13/63,21)
  NASA announced signing $35,200,018 contract with International
     Business Machine Corp. for computer complex design, equipment,
     and associated services for Integrctted Mission Control Center at
     NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 63-151)
  USAF launched unidentified satellite using Atlas-Agena D launch
     vehicle from Pt. Arguello, Calif. This was the 100th launch of
     an Agena space vehicle, the first having been launched on Feb-
     ruary 28, 1959. (UPI, Wash. Post, 7/13/63; M&R, 7/22/63, 11;
     A-N-AF Journal and RegGter, January 1964; CR, 2/18/64,
       2909)
   U.S. Army announced Pike-Zeus antimissile missile fired from
       Kwajalein Island had successfully intm-cepted target from Atlas
       ICBM fired from California 5,000 mi. over Pacific Ocean.     (DOD
       Release 988-63)
J u l y 1 3 : NASA Director of Electronics and Control Dr. Albert J.
       Kelley made public two studies conducted by N&is.t on need for
       electronics research center and letters from NlisLt Administrator
       James E. Webb to Rep. George P. Miller and Sen. Clinton P.
       Anderson. Letters and studies pointed out that electronics diffi-
       culties comprised greatest single cause of failures in spacecraft
       and rockets during past five years. NASA had no highly developed
       skill in design of electronic components, and new center was ex-
       pected to fill that need. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 7/14/63)
   Federal agencies announced plans to support new center for com-
       puter technology and biomedical research in Cambridge, Mass.,
        area. Center would be managed by 12 universities and institu-
       tions in New England. $2,800,000 grant from National Institutes
       of Health was made for first-year support of center, and next
        year’s Government grant of a “comparable” amount would be
        made by NASA. Government grants would continue for at least
        seven years and would cover cost of establishing center and
        operating it for that period. (Totli, N Y T , 7/14/63,1)
                                                                  273
              A S T R O N A F I C S AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

J d y 13: Whirlpool Corp. won NASA contract for development of
      food supply, personal hygiene items, and waste disposal system
      for Project Gemini manned space flights. (AP, NYT, 7/14/63)
July 13-19: ‘(Women in Aviation Week” proclaimed by Maryland’s
     Governor J. Millard Tawes, spotli hting All-Woman Trans-
                                            f
     continental Air Race from Bakersfie d, Calif., to Atlantic City.
      (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/3/63)
July 14: Nike-Apache sounding rocket carried instrumented payload
     to 107.5-mi. altitude in flight from NASA Wallops Station to meas-
     ure electron density and temperature with Langmuir probe and
      solar radiation with ion chambers and Geiger counter. This
     flight was control experiment for series of six similar rockets to
     be launched July 20 during solar eclipse. (NASA Rpt. of Sound-
     ing Rkt. Launching)
July 15: Dr. George M. Knauf (Col., CSAF Ret.) NASA Acting Director
     of Space Medicine, was awarded Legion of Merit by USAF Surgeon
     General Maj. Gen. 0. K. Neiss in ceremony at NASA Manned
     Spacecraft Center. Citation accompanying medal covered
     Dr. Knauf’s contributions to aerospace medicine from Jan. 1,1962,
      when he became NASA Deputy Director of Space Medicine on
     assignment from usm, to Oct. 31, 1962, when he retired from
     USAF. He continued in this NASA position in civilian capacity,
     becoming Acting Director of Space Medicine June 1. (MSC
     Release 63-118)
  Little Joe I1 launch vehicle left General Dynamics/Convair plant
     en route to White Sands Missile Range, N.M., where test launch
     would be made next month. Purpose of flight would be to qualify
     Little Joe I1 launch vehicle for later flights with boilerplate
     Apollo payload and Apollo spacecraft built to production stand-
     ards; Little Joe I T tests mould provide engineering information
-    for use on manned Apollo orbital flights. (MSC Release 63-115)
.m
  I W O French Bereiiic;t: ruck& :lave ieii&ied r d 12 ~ p i A      ar;d
                                                    ii
     60,000-ft. altitudes at Il0 du Levant launch center. (M&R,
     7/15,’63,9)
  By this deadline, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received 271
     applications for astronaut openings. 71 applicants were military
     pilots recommended for possible astronaut duty ; remaining 200
     mere civilians, including three women. (Av. Wk., 7/22/63,325)
* Sen. Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) inserted in Congressional
     Record a letter from physics prof. John H. Gardner, Brigham
     Young Univ., criticizing “the trend in NASA and in the Depart-
     ment of Defense toward the development of inhouse capability
     for the performance of basic research and other scientific tasks
     which can and, under our private enterprise system, should be
     performed by the private sector of the economy with a secondary
     role being played by the university . . . .
        “It is far from evident that the creation of new Government
     laboratories in competition with and at the expense of existing
     laboratories mill help us to achieve our goals in space any faster.
     Appropriate utilization of the private scientific resources of the
     country would seem to be faster and more in keeping with our
     traditions. The statement that NASA has too much money is fre-
274           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    quently heard amone; scientists and it is indicative of the wide-
    spread fears and misgivings scientists have about the ominous
    changes taking place in the kind of role they play in our society.
    These fears and misgivings may underlie much of the growing
    opposition to our lunar landing goal . . . .” (Letter, CR,
    7/15/63,11884)
JuZy 15: Egyptian army test-fired two ground-to-air antiaircraft
    missiles in “remarkably successful” maneuver witnessed by Presi-
    dent Nasser. Rockets’ range was not disclosed, and launch site
    was unidentified. (AP, Wash. Ewe. Star 7/16/63)
July 16: TELSTAR 11 communications satellite went dead during its
    450th orbit, and subsequent efforts to reactivate the satellite by
    radio signal were not successful. Cause of TELSTAR 11’s failure
    was not known, but AT&T said that telemetry data had given “no
    indication that radiation damage has caused the satellite to fail.’’
    Efforts to turn on the satellite‘s communications equipment were
    continuing. (Osmundsen, NYT, 7/18/63 ; Hines, Wash. Ewe.
    Star, 7/18/63)
  House Committee on Science and Astronautics met in executive
    session and ordered NASA FY 1964 authorization bill (H.R. 7500)
    favorably reported to the House. (NASA Leg. Act. Rept. II/107)
  Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station,
    held press conference after returning from three-week tour of
    Soviet space tracking observatories. Lovell said that “there is a
    great deal of discussion in the Soviet Academy as to whether it
    will ever be worthwhile getting a man on the moon . . . .7,
       “I think at the moment, the Americans are racing them-
    selves . . .” [for manned lunar landing], adding that he favored
    manned lunar exploration.
       He announced agreement on tracking deep space probes reached
    between tracking station in Crimea and Jodrell Bank facility, and
    agreement on three astronomical programs in which Soviet and
    Jodrell Bank telescopes would be synchronized. (Farnsworth,
    NYT,.7/17/63 ; AP, Wash.Post, 7/17/63)
  Addressing National Rocket Club in Washington, Rep. George P.
    Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astro-
    nautics, said : “To me, the most important indirect benefit we are
    gaining [from the space program] is probably the least tangible,
    the least measurable, and yet the most far reaching in effect insofar
    as our future national growth is concerned. I am referring to the
    impact our space program is having upon our educational pro-
    grams and institutions. The fact that NASA places demands
    upon and draws from almost every academic discipline has
    produced a stimulus in universities and colleges that is unprece-
    dented in peacetime . . . .
       “What is important to understand is that scientific research and
    development is for the first time in our peacetime history being
    organized within one agency to accomplish a national goal. The
    achievements of our immediate space objectives are, of course, of
     paramount importance. But, I have little patience with the
    critics who cry out that our tax money is being thrown away in
                                                                   275
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    the exploration of space, or that going to the moon will result in
    the neglect of our problems here on earth.
       “It should be obvious to those critics, if they take the time for
    a short historical review, that many years of experience have
    shown that the indirect payoff in human terms for technical in-
    novation is man times more valuable than the original invest-
    ment . . . .7’ (i!ext)
JuZy 16: Dr. Milton Clauser, former Vice President of Space Tech-
    nology Laboratories, and Dr. J. P. Ruinq former Director of DOD
    Advanced Research Projects          ency, Joined Communications
    Satellite corp. as consultants. %omSatCorp. Release)
  Five men entered Boeing Co. space chamber, simulating quarters in
    manned space station or manned lunar base, for 30-day engineer-
    ing test of integrated life-support system. Designed and built
    for NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, system
    included all elements of life support necessary for 150 man-day
    space mission. Associated with life-support equipment were
    specific crew tests simulating problems of space flight. Members
    of test crew: R. H. Lowry, Boeing Chief of Bioastronautics;
    Maj. Edward Westlake (CSAF) of Air Force Systems Cmd.;
    Roger Barnicki, NASA Flight Research Center X-15 personnel
    equipment specialist; Charles Proctor, Boeing biochemist and
    food specialist; and Richard Farrell, Boeing psychologist. (NASA
    Release 63-155)
  Disputing New Pork Times editorial (June 28) which approved
    House Science and Astronautics Committee’s rejecting NASA lunar
    orbiter for special survey of the moon, Assistant Director of Univ.
    of Calif. Institute of Geo hysics and Planetary Physics Gordon
                               K
    J. F. MacDonald wrote t at “no other program funded or con-
    templated mill provide critical data on the moon’s gravity field
    and on the radioactivity of the lunar surface. . . .
    “CPI’AS Space Science Eoardj . . . noied iiiat iiie ~ u r v e i h i i ~
         r
    I,




    of the moon on a planetary scale is of first importance both to
    the manned landing and to the long-range scientlfic investigation
    of the moon . . . .
       “The full value of [Ranger and Surveyor] limited observa-
    tions can be realized only if the are tied in to a less detailed but
    broader coverage of the kindr that can be provided by the
    orbiter . . . .
       “The long-range manned and unmanned exploration of the ‘
    moon will be delayed by failure to fund during the current fiscal
    year the orbiter program. This failure is another expression of
    the inability of the scientific community adequately to p m n t
    their case to Congress.” (Letter, 7/1/63, NYT, 7/16/63, ES)
  51 British scientists working in US. and 17 in Canada have
    been offered government appointments in Britain, Parliamentary
    Secretary for Science Denzil Freeth told House of Commons.
    British government board interviewed 171 candidates in U.S. and
    65 in Canada. (Reuters, Wmh.Pmt. 7/17/63)
  Westland Co. announced Bell Aerosystem Co. had obtained West-
    ern Hemisphere rights to manufacture Hovercraft, developed by
    Westland in England. (UPI, N P T , 7/17/63)
276           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

J d y 16: LRC Plum Brook reactor was started’for first six experi-
     ments. One, under contract to the Lockheed Aircrafi Corp.,
     would study the effects of neutron bombardment on small samples
     of various alloys in a cryogenic environment. (LRC Release
     63-57, Lewis Chronolgy, 6)
  USAF launched Titan ICBM in routine training test from Vandenberg
            (DOD Release 1018-63)
     AFB.
  USAF launched Minuteman missile from Cape Canaveral, the ICBM
     exploding about five sec. after lift-off. Cause of malfunction was
     not yet determined. ( DOD Release 1018-633)
July 17: President Kennedy, asked in press conference whether re-
     ports that U.S.S.R. was not striving for manned lunar landing
     would affect Project Apollo, said :
        “Well, in the first place, we don’t know whether the Russians
     are-what their plans may be. What we are interested in is what
     their capabilities are. While I have seen the statement of Mr.
     Love11 [July 161 about what he thinks the Russians are doing, his
     information is not final. Their capacity is substantial; there
     is every evidence that they are carrying on a major campaign
     and diverting g m d y needed resources to their space effort. With
     that in mind, I think that we should continue. It may be that
     our assumption or the prediction . . . that they are not going to
     the moon might be wrong a year from now, and are we going to
     divert ourselves from our effort in an area where the Soviet,
     Union has a lead, is making every effort to maintain that lead,
     in an area which could affect our National security as well as great
     peaceful development? I think we ought to go right ahead with
     our own program and go to the moon before the end of this
     decade.
        “The point of the matter always has been not only of our ex-
     citement or interest in being on the moon, but the capacity to
     dominate space, which would be demonstrated by a moon flight.
      [This] I believe, is essential to the United States as a leading
     free world power. That is why I am interested in it and that
     is why I think we should continue, and I would be not diverted
     by a newspaper story.”
        Asked about the possibility of cooperating with U.S.S.R. in
     a joint lunar mission, he replied :
        “We have said before to the Soviet Union that we would be very
     interested in cooperation. As a matter of fact, finally, after a
     good many weeks of discussion, an agreement was worked out on
     an exchange of information with regard to weather, but we have
     never been able to go into more detail. The kind of cooperative
     effort which would be required for the Soviet Union and the United
     States together to go to the moon would require a breaking down
     of a good many barriers of suspicion and distrust and hostility
     which exist between the communist world and ourselves.
        “There is no evidence as yet that those barriers will come down,
     though quite obviously we rrould like to see them come down.
                   if the Soviet Union were an open society as we are
     that kin of cooperation could exist, and I would welcome it.
     obvious!?
     I don’t see it as yet, unfortunately.” (Text. Wash. Post, 7/18/63)
                                                                    277
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

J d y 17: National Aeronautics and Space Council considered NAEA-DOD
      coordination in Project Gemini and space stations. Vice Presi-
      dent Lyndon B. Johnson, NASC Chairman, said after the meeting:
      “Coordination is a natural and effective enemy of du lica-
      tion . . . . I a m encouraged by the coordination already L i n g
      exhibited between these two agencies h these important fields,
      but continuing attention is required if this country is to fulfill
      its destiny as the leading space-faring nation.” (NAW Release)
  I n letter to Chairman Miller of House Committee on Science and
     Astronautics, NASA Administrator Webb expressed NASA views on
      H.R. 5171, bill to “authorize the Administrator of the General
      Services Administration to coordinate and otherwise provide for
     the economic and scient purchase, lease, maintenance, operation,
      and utilization of electronic data processing equipment by Fed-
      eral departments and agencies.”
         Mr. Webb wrote that the “scientific and technical use and man-
     agement of computers cannot be separated from the responsibility
     for conducting the national space program. The bill would
     necessarily have the effect of fragmenting and watering down that
     responsibility. Accordingly, I see no alternative but to recom-
     mend that NASA be exempted from the terms of the bill . . . .     ?7

      (Letter, CR,  7/18/63,12273)
  NASA announced six-month contract with Space Technology Labora-
     tories, Inc., for study of and recommendations for NASA manage-
     ment of manned space flight program. Study was associated with
     NASA organizational changes necessitated by completion of Project
     Mercury and focusing on Projects Gemini and Apollo. Included
     in study would be ways of improving relationship of NASA centers
     and industrial contractors involved in manned space flight
     program. (NAU Releas! 63-156)
  I n roll call vote (245-144), House of Representatives approved
     @II,W in I ~ t e r i e Dent. h n a e t fer FV     te p ! Kntinnnl
                                                                ~
                            r
     Air Museum. (Wash. kve. Star, 7/17/63, B1)
July 18: X-15 No. 1flown by Maj. Robert Rushworth ( ~ S A F to 3,925-
                                                                )
     mph speed (mach 5.63) and 104,800-ft. altitude, the X-15 en
                                                                   Y
     burning for 84 sec. I n test to determine stability of the roc et-
     powered research aircraft, automatic stability controls were turned
     off, and in spite of yawing the X-15 remained successfully on
     course. This was first such test of X-15 without loaer tail fin.
     (FRC Release; FRC X-15 Flight Log; NASA Hq. X-15 Proj. Off.)
  House of Representatives passed H.R. 5171 to authorize automatic
     data processing coordination by General Services Administration.
     No amendment was passed to exempt NASA from bill’s provisions.
     (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/109 ;CR, 7/18/63,12277)
  National Federation of B s n s and Professional Women’s Clubs,
                              uies
     convening in Dallas, adopted resolution calling upon NASA to
     give qualified women equal opportunity for astronaut-training
     selection. ( Wmh. Post, 7/19/63)
 NASA announced signing $980,488 contract with Pratt and Whitney
     -&craft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. to conduct research in use
     of fluorine/hydrogen and fluorine-oxygen/hydrogen as rocket
     propellants. Objective of 13-month research project was to
278           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     demonstrate feasibility of a complete engine system using the two
     mixtures. (NASA Release 63-158)
July 18: I n ceremony at NASA Hq., Francis M. Rogallo and Gertrude
     S. Rogallo were awarded $35,000 for their invention of flexible-
     wing paraglider. Other awards :Walter K. Victor and Dr. Eber-
     hardt Rechtin, $5,000 for deep space communication system :Wil-
     liam J. Alford, Edward C. Polhemus, and Thomas A. Toll, $3,000
     for inventions leading to application of variable-sweep wing to
     supersonic aircraft ;Noah S. Davis and Andrew J. Kubica, $1,500
     for decomposition unit ; Robert V. Hess, $1,200 for Hall-current
     plasma accelerator; Curt P. Herold, $1,000 for multiple quick
     disconnector; and Elden C. Whipple, Jr., $1,000 for method and
     apparatus for determining orientation of a space vehicle. (NASA
     AB, Memo, 7/11/63 ; NASA Release 63-154)
  NASA announced withdrawal of controversial research grant to
     Columbia Univ. School of Journalism at the University’s request
     because of an apparent misunderstanding of its scope and pur-
     pose. NASA had awarded the grant for studying “ways of making
     scientific advances of the space program more readily available”
     to news media. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/19/63)
  Polaris A-3 missile launched from Cape Canaveral land pad in
     successful flight down AMR. (M&R,7/29/63,28)
July 19: X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Joseph A. Walker attained
    record altitude of 347,800 f . (65.9 mi.) and speed of 3,710 mph
                                 t
     (mach 5.50). Flight was planned as 315,000-ft. altitude build-up
     for pilot Walker in preparation for later 350,000-ft. attempt, but
    X-15’s engine burned 85 sec. instead of planned 83 sec. Nitrogen-
    filled balloon was to have ejected from X-15’s tail during ascent
    to obtain altitude density measurements, but electrical ejection
    signal did not function properly. This was 90th flight of X-15.
     (FRC Release 25-63; FRC X-15 FIight Log; NASA Hq. X-15 Proj.
    Off.; NASA Release 63-160)
 Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
    with 230-lb. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light
    from stars. Equipped with four scanning photoelectric spectro-
    photometers, payload reached 115-mi. altitude, impacted in
    Atlantic Ocean 68 mi. downrange. (Wallops Release 63-68)
 NASA announced appointment of ,James T. Dennison and Dr. Thomas
    P. Mu hy as special assistants to NASA Assistant Administrator
          %
    for Tec ology Utilization and Policy Planning, Dr. George L.
    Shpsoii. Dennison, formerly Director of Research and Engi-
    neering at Dennison Manufacturing Co., was assiyed overall
    responsibilities in technology utilization. Dr. Murp y, formerly
    staff assistant to NASA Administrator, was assigned responsibilities
    in policy planning, socio-economic studies, and research projects.
    (NASA Release 63-159)
 Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., repeated in Washington press con-
    ference that he was not planning a career in politics. (Hines,
    Wash. Eve. atnr, 7/20/63)
 USAF OAR announced formation of Scientific Advisoy Group,
    composed of 12 leading U.S. scientists : Dr. Joseph Kap an, chair-
   man; Dr. Oliver G. Haywood, Jr.; Prof. Robert J. Havig-
                                                                           279
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

     hurst; Prof. Henry Houghton; Dr. John P. Howe; Dr. Mark
     Kac; Dr. Carl Kaplan; Dr. Nathan L. Krisberg; Dr. Gerard P.
     Kui r; Dr. David B. Langmuir ; Prof. Leonard Schieff ; and
     PmTFrederick Seitz. Group would serve as advisory body to
     OAR Commander, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander.                (OAR Release
     7-634)
J d y 19: USAF launched three unidentified satellites and a Tetrahedra
     Research Satellite (m)from Pt. Arguello : a single unidentifielk
     satellite from a mor-Agena D vehicle and the other two
     unidentSed satellites with the TRF, from an Atlas-Agena B launch
     vehicle. The 1.5-lb. TBS was to measure solar cell radiation dam-
     age. (PIw. Rpt. on Space, 2933, 1/27/64; M&B, 7/29/63, 28)
  Sen. Barry Goldwater, speaking before Air Force Historical Foun-
     dation at Maxwell AFB, criticized US. space policies : “By choice
     of official policy, so far, weare choosing to relegate the military
     function of space to a secondary position. We have delayed and
     debated to the point where it must be said that the United States
     today has no fully defmed and effective military space program
     at all.
        “. . . We have, in fact, policy declarations statin that we will
                                                               7
     not orbit weapons of -mass destruction in space un ess f o d to
     do so by the hostile action of others. I n short we say that we
     will not utilize the military potential of space until such time as
     it may be too late. . . .
        ‘‘cJustwhat is this race in s p m ? By our actions we are clearly
     saying that it’s a race for the Moon. We are moonstruck. And,
    to be sure, the Moon is most romantic . . . . But, while our eyes
     are fixed upon it, w e a u l d lose $he E r h or be buried in it . . . .
                                              at                              9,


     (Text)
  Mrs. Betty Miller was awarded medal for exceptional Service to
    aviation by FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby, for being
    first womnn tn fly alone a r m s the P n r i f i r Tj401)-mi. flight. from
     California to Australia was completed in 54 hrs., 8 mm. flying
    time April 30-May 12. (AP, NYT, 7/20/63)
  Cen. Lucius D. Clay (USA, Ret.) named recipient of 1964 John Fritz
    Medal, citing him for “his distinguished service to the enginem-
    ing profession, the nation, and to the world.” ( N P T , 7/19/63)
July %:     Eclipse of the sun visible across Canada and Northeastern
             I
    U.S. NASA joined other scientists and astronomers in scientific
    studies during the eclipse, with emphasis on ionosphere and on
    sun’s corona.
       At Churchill Research Range, USAF. o m facility located at Ft.
    Churchill, Can., six Nike-Apache sounding rockets equipped with
    instrumentsto measure electron density, electron temperature, and
    solar radiation in ultraviolet and x-ray regions were launched for
    NASA Goddard Space Flight Center; Aerobee 150 sounding rocket
    equipped with spectrophotometric instruments to measure abso-
    lute intensity of spectral features in ultraviolet region was
    launched for Johns Hopkins Univ. ; and Canadian Black Brant
    sounding rocket with instruments to measure variations in D and
    E layers of ionosphere was launched for USAF Cambridge Re-
    search Laboratories. GBFC and AFCRL scientists said preliminary
280           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    results indicated collected data confirmed previous predictions of
    composition of the ionosphere.
       At White Sands Missile Range, GSFC project for eclipse was
    Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with coronagraph to photo-
    graph sun's corona, ultraviolet spectrometer aimed at sun's center,
    and camera to photograph Lyman-Alpha rays.
       A t Wallops Station, o m project was measurement of electron
    and neutral particle temperatures in the ionosphere using instru-
    mented payload launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket to
    207-mi. altitude.
       At Pleasant Pond, Me., GSFC team photographed eclipse with
    specially made instrument for photographing stars and comets
    near the sun.
       DC-8 flying observatory flew north from Edmonton, Can., to
    meet eclipse at Great Slave Lake, following path of moon and
    flying above much of atmospheric-haze layer. Sponsored by
    Douglas Aircraft Go. and National Geographic Society with 1       1
    other participating organizations, expedition included NASA
    Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and NASA astronomer Dr. Jocelyn
    R. Gill studying various scientific details of the phenomenon.
    Also onboard were Sheldon Smith and Ray Torrey of NASA Ames
    Research Center, photographing rays of sun's corona. (NASA Re-
    lease 63-148; MSC Release 63-113; Goddmd News, 7/15/63, 1, 8 ;
    OAR Research Review, Vol. 11, No. 1 ; DOD Release 978-63 ; Wal-
                                          1
    lops Release 63-70 ;M&R, 7/29/63,24)
July 20: Five men locked in Boeing Co. test chamber on simulated
    30-day space mission were forced to cut the test short after 104
    hrs. because hole developed in reactor tank (comparable to septic
    tank). (AP, Cbveland Plain Dealer, 7/21/63)
  NASA launched Scout rocket with flight experiment to test re-entry
    heat shield material for spacecraft, but Scout veered off course
    and had to be destroyed before it left vicinity of Wallops Station
    launch area. Cause of malfunction was being investigated.
     (Wallops Release 63-69)
  Solid-propellant rocket motor for Titan I11 test-fired for first time
    at United Technology Center, burning for about two min. and
    producing more than a million lbs. of thrust. Two such motors
    would be used in first stage of Titan 111. (M&R, 7/29/63, 15)
  Cathode of experimental ion engine set endurance record of 1660
    hours operation. Electric propulsion engineers at LRC estimate
    they reached 16 per cent of the cathode life required for a round-
    trip Mars mission. (Lewis Chronology, 7)
July 2.2: U.S. Navy announced it had successfully permanently sta-
    bilized an orbiting satellite through use of 100-ft. boom. Dif-
    ference in gravitational forces acting on satellite and on end
    of the boom aligned satellite so that its face will be permanently
    pointed toward earth. As satellite was tumbling through space
    with its face toward earth, boom was released from canister,
    causing entire assembly to rock through 40" arc. Weight at-
    tached to boom by 40-ft. spring bobbed yo-yo fashion, slowing
    oscillation of boom and satellite until nearly all sway was re-
    moved. Satellite would remain stabilized indefinitely. Navy
                                                                  281
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     announcement said this was first successful stabilization of
     satellite without fueled mechanical controls. (WD Release 1034-
     36)
Ju7y 22: Sen. Mike Mansfield (D.-Mont.) paid tribute to X-15 pilot
    Joseph A. Walker and his record flight of July 19, and said that
    “there can be no question that Mr. Walker and all the members of
    the X-15 team are pioneers of the space age. The solid contribu-
    tions of the X-15 program hare been many and valuable. They
    include information on aerodynamic heating, the behavior of the
    boundary layer, the effect of noise levels on aircraft structures,
    measurement of friction drag on aircraft skin, new control sys-
    tems, new piloting techniques, new landing gear designs and new
    ways of measuring landing gear loads, better instrument dis-
    plays, and many other improvements to ‘performance, efficiency,
    or safety of air and space vehicles.’ I n addition, during the cur-
    rent series of tests, the X-15 is being used to carry scientific
    experiments into space. One of these experiments will use a
    camera which may give us the first meaningful photographs of
    stars taken from outside the earth’s atmosphere. Speed and alti-
    tude records may be the incidental contributions of the remark-
    able X-15 program. More significant in the long run is the
    information and experience it has provided and continues to pro-
    vide about this strange new sea of space upon which man has
    embarked . . . .” (CR,7/22/63,12354)
  NASA announced extension of contract with Research Triangle Insti-
    tute, Durham, N.C., for abstracts and evaluation of literature on
    reliability and quality assurance. (NASA Release 63-161)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced $l,OOO incentive award
    by NASA Inventions and Contributions Board to Matthew I.
    Radnofskg and Glenn A. Shewmake of MSC Crew Systems Div. for
    design of one-man life raft used in Project Mercury landings.
     (MScRe1eA.w 6.3-119)
July 23: 238-1b. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light
    from stars was launched with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket
    from NASA Wallops Station to altitude of 110 mi. Telemetry
    data obtained during flight would be compared with data from
    similar experiment conducted July 19. (Wallo s Release 6.3-71)
                                                    &)
  Dr. George E. Mueller, Vice President for R&D of pace Technology
    Laboratories, named to new position of NASA Deputy Associate
    Administrator for Manned Space Flight, succeeding D. Brainerd
    Holmes who would resign Sept. 1as Director of 0 c of Manned
                                                       5e
    Space Flight and Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned
    Space Flight Centers. (NASA Release 63-162)
  First test-firing of twin-engine system which would power Titan
    I 1upper stage, engines roducing 16,000 Ibs. of thrust in 284-sec.
     1
    test at Aerojet-General &rp., Sacramento. Engines mere started
    and stopped three times in the firing. (N&R,     7/29/63,19)
  Addressing commencement of Parks Air College of Univ. of St.
    Louis, NASA Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr.
    Raymond L. Bisplinghoff discussed research and development
282           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    required to build an “economically attractive supersonic trans-
    port airplane.” H e ointed out that this nation’s “total manned
    aircraft flight time Eeyond Mach number 2.5 is less than four
    hours, all of which has been amassed by NASA’s      Flight Research
    Center a t Edwards, California.
       c‘. . . we are undertaking a challenging and difficult develop-
    ment, but one that we can handle by a reasonable stretching of
    today’s technolo .” (Text)
                     c$
July 23: Vice Presi ent Lyndon B. Johnson, addressing Governors’
    Conference at Miami Beach, said :
       “In the world of today, we must recognize that the winds and
    the waves are with us. This is the time for us to steer straight
    and true toward the horizons we have for so long hoped to reach.
       “But we should also recognize that favoring winds are rising at
    home. Our record in space is a prime example. We started
    late. We moved too slowly at first.
       “But the record shows now that where the Soviet Union has
    successfully launched 43 payloads into orbit, the United States
    has launched 144.
       “Our ratio of sucesses to failures in launchings prior to 1961
    was only 1 to 1-but it has now reached the ratio of 5 to 1.
       “The Soviet continues its lead in the ability to launch heavier
    weight into space. But we are pulling far ahead in developing
    practical uses of space with weather, communication, and naviga-
    tion satellites.
       “We are not racing for prestige in space. We are engaged in
    a deadly serious race for peace-and for control of our own
    destiny. This is a race free men must win . . . .” (Text, CB,
    A4759-60)
  X-19 Vtol aircraft, first of three vertical-rising aircraft being built
    under Army-Navy-Air Force program, unveiled at Caldwell, N.J.
    X-19 was designed to combine agility of helicopter with speed of
    fixed-wing airplane. (Hudson, NYT, 7/24/63)
July 24: William E. Stoney, Jr., a pointed Chief of Spacecraft Tech-
                                   E
    nology Div. of NASA Manned pacecraft Center’s Office of Engi-
    neermg and Development. Stoney previously was chief of Ad-
    vanced Vehicle Conceptual Studies in NASA Hq. Office o Advanced
                                                             f
    b e a r c h and Technology. (MSC Release 63-20; MSC Space News
    Roundup 8/7/63,6)
  USAF announced orbiting on June 27 of 176-lb. HITCHHIKERsatellite
    to measure distribution and energies of radiation particles in
    earth’s magnetic field and upper atmosphere. Ejectsd from an-
    other satallite (unidentified) launched from Vandenberg AFB
    June 27, HITCHHIKER    was propelled by its own engine into ellipti-
    cal orbit July 1:208-mi. perigee, 2,568-mi. apogee, 132-min. pemod,
    82” inclination to the equator. (DOD Release 1042-63)
  Paul Bikle, Director of NASA mc. piloted glider from Hailey, Idaho,
    to Swift Current, Saskatchewan, Canada, for an unofficial
    national soaring distance record of 545 mi. (AP, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 7/25/63,2)
  Manned Spacecraft Center was scheduled to com l e k its move into
    k h new Clear Lake complex by July 1,1964. &mpleta plans for
     he
                                                                     283
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

     the move had been laid out in a Master Move Plan. (Space News
     R d p , 1/8/64,2)
July 24: USAF launched Minuteman ICBM from underground silo on
     k t flight down Atlantic Missile Range. (DOD Release 1055-63)
J d y 25; U.S.-U.K.-U.S.S.R.    nuclear test-ban treaty prohibiting nu-
     clear testing in the at.mosphere, in space, and under water was
     initialed in Moscow by negotiakors W. Averell Harriman, U.S.
     Under Secretary of S a e for Political Affairs; Viscount Hail-
                             tt
     sham, British Minister for Science; and Andrei A. Gromyko, So-
     viet Foreign 1Minister. Treaty was subject to formal signing and
     parliamentary ratification by U.S. Senate, British Parliament,
     and Supreme Soviet. (Toppin , NYT, 7/26/63, 1)
                                      i
  House Committee on Science and stronautics reported H.R. 7500,
     NASA FY 1964 authorization bill, to House. Committee’s authori-
     zation recommendation was $5.2 billion. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt.
     II/113)
  Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before Sub-
     committee on Investigations of Senate Commitke on Government
     Operations that his own personal study of General Dynamics and
     Boeiag Co.contract proposals for w x convinced him that General
     Dynamics provided the most practical design and the most realistic
     cost estimate. (Testimony)
  Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (us-), X-15 pilot, was presented mili-
     tary astronaut wings b Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Curtis E.
                             f
     LeMay. (Wmh.Post, 2663)
  AT&T spokesman said cause o =TAR       II’S failure was still not known.
                               f
     “We’re still sending command signals, but we still have no clue
     to what happened.” ( N.Y. E e r a Td.,
                                 h     ,                7/26/63)
  Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences voted (6 to 5)
     to delete nearly $5 million requested in NASA budget for F Y 1964
     for proposed electronics research center. Vote was tmtative,
     wzdmg G2al *?K!-mittee &inn on NAEA F Y 1964 m le t (NPT.
                                                           *l s.
     ‘f/26/63)
  Aeronautics press briefing held a t NASA Hq., with presentations by
     officials from Hq., Ames Research Center, Flight Research Center,
     and Langley Research Center. NASA Director of Office of ,4d-
     vanced Research and Technolog-g, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff,
     said :
        “It is important to point out that we have chosen to confine
     NASA’S aeronautical program to research and advanced technology
     activities leading to new aeronautical vehicle concepts, but not
     including the very costly de-i-elopment of new aircraft. I n this
     respect, NASA‘s  aeronautical activities differ from those in space
     where new vehicles are developed, constructed and operated. It
     is our belief that in general the development and construction of
     new aircraft should be the responsibility of the user since on1 .he
                                                                     i
     can make the compromises necesrjwy to produce aircraft w ich
     can play their proper role in civilian or military applications.
     We believe this view to be consistent with the advanced state of
     aeronautical technology, the sophisticated aircraft industry which
     now exists and the nation‘s use of commercial and military air-
     craft . . . .” (Text)
284           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         1963

J d y 25: I n aeronautics press briefing, NASA Administrator James E.
     Webb replied to reporter’s question on cost of supersonic trans-
     port development: ((We can do a great deal for $1 billion. I
     think we could probably build a flying prototype for less than
      that.” I n President Kennedy’s proposed plan for supersonic
     transport, development, $750 million would be spent by Govern-
     ment (FAA, DOD, and N M A ) and remaining $250 million by indus-
     try. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post. 7/26/63)
  Lt. Col. John Powers (USAF) , MSC Public Affairs Officer, announced
     in Washington he had conferred with NASA Administrator James
     E. Webb and Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden about
     “the changing nature of the manned s ace flight program.” I n
                                             t
     accordance with this change, brought a out by the end of Project
     Mercury, NASA would “realign our organization and our people,
     including myself.” (West, Howston Post, 7/26/63)
July 26: NASA SYNCOM 1 communications satellite launched into orbit
                          1
     with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from AMR, entering ellip~hal
     orbit (140-mi. perigee, 22,548-mi. apogee). Five hrs. 33 min.
     after launching, apogee-kick motor onboard fired for 21 sec.,
     placing SYNCOM 11 in orbital path ranging from 22,300-mi. to
     22,548-mi. altitude and adjusting its speed to near-synchronous
     6,800 mph, Traveling in slightly lower than synchronous orbit
     and at less than synchronous speed, satellite began drifting east-
     ward at rate of 7.5” per day. Ground signals would attempt to
     reverse drifting so that satellite would attain synchronous posi-
     tion over Brazil.
        Communications tests duning SYNCOM 11’s ascent into orbit were
     successful, including reception and transmission of “The Star
     Spangled Banner,” a voice messtge, and a teletype transmission.
     Once in synchronous position, SYNCOM 11 would provide telephone,
     teletype, and photo facsimile communications between Lakehurst,
     N.J., and Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. (NASA Release 63-152; N Y T ,
     7/27/63 ; N.Y. Herald Trib., 7/27/63)
  In televised speech to the Nation on the nuclear test-ban treaty,
     President Kennedy said: “The treaty initialed yesterday . . .
     is a limited treaty which permits continued underground testing
     and prohibits only those tests that we ourselves can police. It
     requires no control posts, no on-site inspection and no international
     body.
        “We should also understand that it has other limits as well.
     Any nation which signs the treaty will have an opportunity to
     withdraw if it finds that extraordinary events related to the sub-
     ject matter of the treaty have jeopardized its supreme interests;
     and no nation’s right to self-defense will in any way be impaired.
     Nor does this treaty mean an end to the threat of nuclear war. It
     will not reduce nuclear stockpiles; it will not halt the production
     of nuclear weapons; it will not restrict their use in time of war.
        “Nevertheless, this limited treaty will radically reduce the
     nuclear testing which would otherwise be conducted on both sides;
     it will prohibit the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet
     Union and all others who sign it from engaging in the atmos-
                                                                  285
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

     pheric tests which have so alarmed mankind; and it offers to all
      the world a welcome sign of hope . . . .” (Text, NPT, 7/27/63,
      2)
July 26: U.S. Army announced successful test firing of Nike-Zeus
     antimissile missile a t White Sands Missile Range. ( DOD Release
      1059-63)
  Ranson W. Baldwin reported in New Pork T i m that during latest
     Soviet nuclear tests “one high-altitude ex losion destroyed two
                                                i
     incoming missiles. I n one American hig -altitude test in the
     Pacific, a fairly small nuclear detonation high above the earth
     caused fission-an atomic chain reaction-in a nose cone 150 miles
     above the earth and 800 miles from the explosion.
        “This phenomenon, called neutron flux,travels great distances
     in a virtual vacuum. Thus it may be able to neutralize fissionable
     material in incoming warheads. This is a techni ue about which
                                                      %n
     the Russians are believed to know more than          erican scien-
     tists . . . .” (Baldwin, NYT, 7/26/63)
  FCC released letter to Communications Satellite Corp., indicating
     ComSatCorp. directors should make definite plans for stock
     issue. Pointing out that ComSat Act of 1962 required ComSat
     Corp.’s directors be divided among stock-owning public, cum-
     munications companies, and presidential nominees, FCC said that
     “undue delay in the &ablishment of the corporation may force the
     present [appointed] Board of Directors t o engage in activities
     and to make decisions which should be left to the representatives
     of the owners of the corporation.”
        ComSatCorp. Chairman Leo D. Welch told press that there was
     ‘ko basis for the concern expressed by the Commission,” and
     ComSatCorp. would issue stock “at as early a date as the directors
     determine to be compatible with the public interest and the carry-
     ing out of the purpose and objectives of the Act.” (Clayton,
     Wmh.P o d , 7/26/63; Toth, NYTi 7/27/63)
  USAF announced routine training launch of Atlas ICBM from Van-
     denberp AFB. (WD Release 1080-63)
July 27: Eastward drifting of SYNCOM r~ communications satellite
     was reversed by ground command firing of hydrogen peroxide
     jet controls onboard the satellite. SYNCOM 1 was now drifting
                                                   1
     westward at rate of 5” per day. After drifting into desired
     position, satellite would be stopped by onboard control jets so
    that it would be in synchronous position of %-hour orbit.
     Command signals to SYNCOM 1 were sent by U.S. Army Satellite
                                    1
     Communications A ency station aboard USNS Kings ort in Lagos
                                                        B
     Harbor, Nigeria. ~ N A S ARelease ;AP, Wash. Sun. tar, 7/28/63 ;
     AP, Wash. Post, 7/28/63)
  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, at District
    Convention of American Legion, Dept. of Virginia, in Roanoke,
    said: “Those who view the lunar program simply as a ‘propa-
    ganda’ effort fail to grasp that not only our prestige, but our
    capacity for constructive international leadership, our economic
    and military capacity for technological improvement, depend
    upon our ability to achieve acknowledged superiority in science
286                                                  1983
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     and technology, and to use this capability in our own behalf and
     that of our allies.
        “With a billion people already allied against us, and the un-
     committed and emerging nations weighing events that will affect
     their own future welfare, the United States must present the
     image of a can-do nation with which they can confidently align
     their futures.
        “Thus the program, in addition to its other aims, becomes liter-
     ally also a matter of national necessity. The world has come to
     regard space exploits as a measure of a nation’s strength. And
     alliances and loyalty are given to the strong.
        “We must master this new environment-just as we have had to
     master the land on which we make our homes, the oceans that
     carry our ships, and the air that sustains us-to guard against
     the day when mastery of space might mean world domina-
     tion . . . . (Text)
                 ”
J d y 27: House Rules Committee announced it was considering a
     “complete, full and thorough investigation” of Federal expendi-
     tures on research, to determine: what departments and agencies
     conduct research, at what cost, and with what results; amounts
     being spent on scholarship grants and grants f o r research to
     colleges and industry; and what facilities, if any, coordinate the
     various research programs, including grants to colleges and
     scholarship grants. ( N Y T .7/28/63,1,49)
  Six Republican members of House Committee on Science and As-
     tronautics recommended establishment of a special Congressional
     committee, composed of members of Armed Services Committee
     and Science and Astronautics Committee, to re-evaluate the na-
     tional goals in space. The Congressmen said U.S. was ignoring
     “the main thrust of the Soviet space aim, which is to dominate
     inner space through the ability to exercise control over the surface
     of the earth.” Statement was included in a Committee report on
     NASA FY 1964 authorization bill.       ( A P N Y T , 7/29/63,12)
  Writing in Wmhington Post, Howard &mons said: “There is no
     absolute guarantee that U.S. experts, using scientific means alone,
     can detect every nuclear detonation in . . . [the air, under water,
     or in space] ;but the over-all U.S. detection capability is regarded
     as good enough to make cheating in those environments a very
           business, indeed.
     ri$J enerally speaking, this detection system provides an excellent
     probability for detecting and identifying any and all atmospheric
     nuclear blasts larger than a few kilotons from ground level up to
     6milesabovetheearth’ssurface . . . .
        “Detection and identification from 6 to 15 miles above the earth’s
     surface is not as effective, but considered to be adequate.
        “From 15 miles out to 100 million miles, detection becomes
     easier-with ground-based and satellite-based detection systems-
     unless a cheater were to go to complex and cost1 lengths to hide
     the blast behind a shield in space . . . .” ( W a d . Post. 7/27/63)
  USAF Minuteman ICBM launched from Vandenberg AFB in routine
     training test by Strategic Air Command crew. ( W D Release
     1080-63)
                                                                  287
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

July 28: NASA scientists expanded on reports that future astronauts
    might use crayons and paper to record sights during space flights,
    saying that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., was particularly
    interested in applying his sketching talents to space fli hts. Cdr.
                                                           f
    Schirra was apparently disa pointed with some p otographs
    taken during his MA43 space bght, finding that such phenomena
    as the moon’s halo did not show in photographs taken from his
    spacecraft. (Witkin, NPT,7/28/63,30)
  “Outstanding Unit Award” given to 6593rd Test Squadron a t Hick-
    am AFB, Honolulu, for “its record in the development and appli-
    cation of aerial techniques for the recovery of space capsules
    returned from orbiting satellites.” USAF announcement said more
    than 70 per cent of satellites launched last year with recovery as
    goal were actually retrieved by the squadron; in s more recent
    series, 88 per cent were recovered. Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, AFSSD
    Commander, said recovering capsules from space has reached “the
    point where recovery is accomplished on a routine basis.” (UPI,
    Wmh.Post, 7/29/63)
  AFsc reported it was experimenting with gelatin for structural uses
    in space. I n simulated space vacuum chamber, gelatin pressed
    into fiberglass cloth becomes rigid, AFSC said. Gelatin was said
    to have excellent resistance to ultraviolet radiation. (AP, NYT,
    7/28/63,13)
 FAA Administrator Najeeb Halaby announced a pointment of
                                                      P
    Gordon M. Bain as De uty Administrator or Supersonic
    Transport Development. gormerly Assistant Administrator for
    Appraisal, Bain would head FAA organization charged with over-
    all responsibility for Government-industry development of super-
    sonic transport aircraft. (FAA Release 63-69)
  General Electric Co. announced USAF Titan I1 “carries a re-entry
    vehicle which would ‘significantly increase’ this country’s ability
    tc p ~ h t teti missile d a f e ~ m . ” (Wit!&, NYT, ?/29/f;?)
July 2.9: NASA announced SYNCOMII communications satellite was per-
    formin “extremely well,” drifting westward at rate of 4.5” per
    day. 8rbital data: 22,800-mi. apogee, 22,110-mi. perigee, 1,454-
    min. period (slightly more than 24 hours). SYNCOM 1 was ex-1
    pected to be on station above Brazil in about three weeks. (AP,
    NYT, 7/30/63)
  RCA announced RELAY I communications satellite had operated suc-

          <
    cesfull for 203 days, setting record for performance and dura-
    bility y a communications satellite. RCA, which built s a t d i t e
    for NASA, said RELAYI had traveled estimated 156 million mi. and
    carried out more than 1,350 communications experiments and
    demonstrations. (AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 7/29/63)
  President Kennedy appointed Robert M. White to succeed
    Francis W. Reichelderfer fls Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau.
    White was president of Travelers Research Center, Inc., an inde-
    pendent nonprofit organization engaged in =D in environmental
    and mathematical sciences. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/30/63)
  Rep. James Fulton (R.-Pa.) introduced bill to establish in NASA
    an inspector of programs and operations (H.R. 7770). Bill was
288           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         1963

    referred to committee on science and Astronautics. (NABA Leg.
    Act. Rpt. II/114)
Ju2y 29: 347-acre Government site in Newport News, Va., presented to
    Commonwealth of Virginia for Virginia Associated Research
    Center (VARC), established by Univ. of Va., VPI, and College of
    William and Mary. VARC would operate the adjacent Space
    Radiation Effects Laborator under NASA contract.
                                 9
       Speaking a t luncheon fo lowing site presentation ceremonies,
    NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed role
    of physicist today :
       “It seems clear to me that man’s newly won ability to leave the
    confines of earth and explore the frontiers of space offers a chal-
    lenging new opportunity for scientists of all disciplines, and for
    physicistsin particular . . . .
       “The need . . . is for our creative physicists to think of simple
    devices, or at least small ones, to make the critical physical
    measurements that will heighten our knowledge of the charac-
    teristics of the universe around us. The task is not easy, but the
    challenge is great, and the opportunities for new findings are,
    it seemsto me, almost unlimited . . . .
       “Today space exploration is the great motivating development
    that can serve to promote the over-all Srowth of science and
    enhance its role in the national life . . . . (Text)
  Sen. Jack Miller (R.-Iowa) inserted in Congressional Record the
    May 10 Republican policy committee staff study examining U.S:
    priorities in space as well as article from current issue of Reader’s
    Digest entitled “We’re Running the Wrong Race with Russia”
    which said:
       “The Russians have recently achieved an increase in the effec-
    tiveness of nuclear explosions so devastating that it dwarfs all
    previous records. Confirming this, our own atomic experts have
    warned that such stupendous forces, let loose above us from a
    satellite, could, in a few seconds, literally cremate a large part
    of the United States. There would bo nothing left below, no
    man, beast, vegetation, buildings, nothing at all but the glare
    of whits-hot cinders.
       “In the face of such a dire threat, it must come as a stunning
    shock to all thoughtful Americans to learn tliat the TTnited
    States has no top-priority programs beamed at preventing, antic-
    ipating, or deterring such a terrifying prospect. Our top priori-
    ties are all tied up with steamrollering through the moon shot.
    Many billions of public money, together with the rich cream of
     scientific talent, are lavished on an effort that could well be
    aborted in midstride by Soviet enterprise and realism.
       “There is a cryin need for a reappraisal of our space aims,
                         B
    for more specific pu lic information, especially since statemants
    from those highly placed in Washin,gton are so contradictory
    that they blur rather than clarify our understanding . . . .7,
     (Reader’s Digest, 8/63, C R , 7/31/63,13035-39)
  New Y o r k Times editorialized that “there is a need for a thorough
    review of all the activities and outlays carried on by NASA.
                                                                         289
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

        “This would not be necessary if Congress had been exercising
     ordinary supervision over our space efforts. But, goaded by Mr.
     Kennedy’s determination to beat the Soviet Union in the race
     to the moon, Congress has permitted NASA to lead a charmed life,
     providin what amounted almost to a blank check for its opera-
              f
     tions an a free hand to its managers. NASA, it seemed, could
     donowrong. . . .
        “There is no doubt that false starts and dead ends are inevitable
     in exploring the unknown frontiers of space. But NASA’s            effec-
     tiveness will be enhanced by tighter controls over spending and
     grater coordination of its activities.” ( N P T , 7/29/63)
J d y 2 9 ; Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.-Ill.) inserted in C q r e s s i o n a l
     Etecord Dr. James D. Atkinson‘s “An Approach to American
     Strategy” from the book Nationu2 Secum‘ty, Politicd, Military,
     and E c o m k Strategy in the Decade Ahead, in which Dr.
     Atkinson said :
        “ S p m military capabilities would broadly appear to be:
        (1) Intelligence operations : observing, recording, detecting.
        (2) Direction : of land, sea, air, or combined operations.
        (3) Offensive actions: against land, sea, or air t a r g h ; against
     other space vehicles.
        (4) Defensive actions :neutralizing attacking missiles; counter-
     acting other space vehicles.
        ( 5 ) Psychopolitical operations in advance of or in support
     of military actions. . . .
        “The transferrence of classical military operational concepts
     to spam remains to be accomplished and the next decade will see
     this takin place apart from the obvious projections of well-
     u n d e r s d m i l i t a r y operations. Space offers intripin new pos-
     sibilities for the exercise of power a t low intensit fwels, but
     with enormous strategic import . . . . (Text, ZR, 7/29/63,
     12852)
July 30: Speaking on Senate floor, Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D.-Alaska)
     proposed establishment of Con essional 0 5 c e of Science and
                                        f
     Technology “as a creature of ongress, responsible only to the
     Congress.
        “This office would have a small, highly skilled, permanent, pro-
     fessional staff and a large body of consultants, available to the
                                                                   .
     Congress to furnish advice, evaluations, and reports . . . It
     would be the task of the permanent staff to ask questions for
     Congress, to answer questions of Congress, and to assist the Mem-
     bers in handling the scientific matters which come before them.
     It would also be the responsibilit of COST to report to the a p ro-
                                                                         P
                                          $
     priation committees whatever ac ievements, happenings or ail-
     ures in the scientific world appear to be of importance . . . .         97

      (GR,   7/30/63,12896-98)
  At Second Space Industry Assistance Symposium in Houston,
     sponsored by MSC and Houston Chamber of Commerce in
     cooperation with Rice Univ., Dave W. Lang, Chief of MSC
     Procurement and Contracts Div., said that average basic salary
     for all xsc employees was $8,590: “The industrial support pay-
     roll [of MSC] stands at $27 million per year locally and is ex-
290            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

      p to reach $45 million next year. The Clear Lake site itself
        td
      is expected to cost nearly $150 million by the time it m h e s
    completion. The majority of these expenditures will provide
    income for Houston area firms and individuals through prime
    and subcontracts to Houston area firms, purchase of materials
    through local suppliers, and employment of local skilled and un-
    skilled labor.” Since locating in Houston, MSC had awarded more
    than $12 million in contracts to Houston area firms. I n addition,
    MSC attracted some 300 business representatives per month from
    out-of-town. “If these out-of-town visitors spend a minimum of
    $15 per day, it adds up about $lOO,OOO more in revenue each year
    to the growing impact of MSC.”
       Lang also remarked on the influence of MSC on local univer-
    sities :
       “The reason for the high interest in education is apparent when
    you see that out of 1213 scientific and technical personnel, 1050
    have bachelor of science degrees, 140 have masters, and 23 doc-
    torates.” (Text; NASA-MSC Fact Sheet #202)
Jw@ 30: USAF launched Blue Scout, Jr.,.probe from Cape Canav-
    era1 to altitude of more than 8,000 mi. 50-lb. instrumented pay-
    load was designed to conduct measurements of the ionosphere.
     (DOD Release 1080-63)
  NASA would support pilot program to develop adult education
    c o u m on the space program in Pawtucket, R.I., E. E. Collin of
    NASA Education Services said in New York Herdd Tribune.
    NASA $2,500 contract with Rhode Island State Dept. of Public
    Instruction would financs 10 two-hr. presentations covering over-
    all space ex loration program, each given by expert in the sub-
    ject area. &wr y, N.Y. Herald Trib., 7/30/63; Collin, NASA
      AFEE)
         Manned Spacecraft Center held Second Industry Assistance
 NASA
     Symposium at Rice TJniv., Houston. (MSC Release 63-114)
  Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges released letter of com-
     mendation to Francis W. Reichelderfer, retiring a Chief of
                                                            s
     Weather Bureau, which said: “. . . When you took your post 25
     years ago, the Bureau established its first network of radio-sonde
     upper air observations. On your departure you are leaving a
     legacy of the world’s largest and most sophisticated weather sys-
     tem, one that is already effectively using such modern tools as
     satellites and computers.
       “During your tour of duty, your leadership and inspiration
     guided meteorologists throughout the world to work toward the
     common goal of a truly global weather system. Your plans to
     expand your international activities will, I am sure, contribute
     much to world cooperation and advancement in atmospheric
     sciences . . . .” (Commerce Dept. Release G-63-142)
  Atlas ICBM fired from Vandenberg AFB by Strategic Air Command
     combat crew in successful 7,000-mi. test. (DOD Release 1080-63)
J d y 31: National Aeronautics and Space Council met “to examine
     the interrelationship between the military and non-military
     aspects of the spaca program, with special attention to the Apollo
     project.” Following the meeting, Vice President Lyndon B. John-
                                                                        291
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,           1963

    son, NABC Chairman, said: “I am impressed with the solid com-
    petence which we are building in space-a competence which can
    be used to further our national security, our p r e s t i p our scientifk
    knowledge, and our standard of living. The bene ts flowing from
             lunar program,. for example? contribute a foundation for
    NASA’s
    a wide ran@ of capabilities, includmg those of national defense.
    This is a coordinated national proT m . ” (NAW Release)
July 31:NASA announced Paul Haney, ublic Affairs Officer for NASA
    Office of Manned Space Flight, would replace Lt. Col. John A.
    Powers, MSC Public Affairs Ofcr effective Sept. 1. Colonel
                                       fie,
    Powers would become special assistant to Dr. Gilruth. (AP,
    Wash. Eve.Star, 7/31/63 ;NASA Release 63-167)
 NASA Administratur James E. Webb said in address before National
    Association of Counties, Denver: “The question which now con-
    fronts the Congress, and the nation, is whether our progress [in
            ace program] has been so great that we can afford to be
                   that we can begin to rest on our laurels with the
                  assurance that a slower pace will still win the race.
       “The clear record of success which has come from five years of
    consistent, expanding effort has moved us well along the road to
    leadership in space. Those of us who have worked with this pro-
    gram have confidence that, given a continuation of that effort
    on a sustained basis, and at a level consistent with what our na-
    tional resources and other national requirements permit, we will
    establish re-eminence in all fields and we will achieve the na-
               P
    tional goa of exploring the moon within this decade.
       “Meanwhile, no one can have assurance that if we depart from
    the policies which have served us so nobly during our first five
      ears in space, there is not grave danger that we will remain second
    Lt   for a long time to come, or forever. w e are in space because
    we believe that great scientific and economic benefits will result
    f m m our e f r s Rut, we. are also in spam because it is intimately
                fot.
    related to our strength and security in a world in which men have
    not yet learned to live in peace with each other . . . .” (Text)
 Article by NASA scientists Dr. Homer E. Newel1 and Dr. Robert
    Jastrow in Atlantic MwnthJy inserted in Congressimd Record by
    Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Committee on Aeronau-
    tical and Space Sciences. Replying to scientists critical of pace
    set for landing men on the moon, the authors said :
       “This question requires a further exploration of the motives
    underlying the U.S. space effort. I s it primarily a scientific pro-
    gram, or IS it motivated by a broader concern with the national
    interest? Looking back to the overwhelming support given the
    new space program by the Congress in 1961, it seems clear that this
    support was not tendered for scientific reasons primarily, but c-e
    from a deep-seated conviction that the expanded program will
    make an important contribution to our future strength and secu-
    rity. We believe that this is the reason why the people have sup-
    ported the enlarged space program. That brings us to the point
                                                                       r
    on which we take issue with some of our scientific collea a             ,
    who complain, ‘The scientific exploration of the moon has een
    accorded a secondary priority in the lunar program.’ This remark
292           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    is based on the premise that science should have top priority in
    the space program. However, while science plays an important
    role in lunar exploration, it was never intended to be the primary
    objective of that project. The impetus of the lunar project is
    derived from its place in the long-range US. program for the
    exploration of the solar s stem. The heart of that program is man
                             9
    in space, the extension o man’s control over his physical environ-
    ment. The science and technology of space flight are ancillary
    developments which support the main thrust of manned explora-
    tion, while a t the same time they bring valuable returns to our
    economy and our culture. The science which we do in space pro-
    vides the equivalent of the gold and spices recovered from earlier
    voyages of exploration. It is the return to the tax ayer for his in-
                                                      f
    vestment in his nation’s future. But the driving orce of the pro-
        m is not in scientific research alone, valuable though that may
    C i n the long run. Thus, the pace of the program must be set,
    not by the measured patterns of scientific research, but by the
    need for a vigorous response to the national challenge . . . .”
     (Text, CR, 7/31/63, A4874-76)
July 31: USAF launched Thor-Agena D with unidentified satellite from
            (Pres.Rpt. on Space, 1963)
    PB.
D u k g July: NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected General
    D namics/Ft. Worth and Douglas Aircraft Go. to conduct paral-
       P
    le studies of manned Mars exploration flight “in the unfavorable
    time period” (1975-85). Under seven-month contracts, the com-
    panies would outline the mission and development program for the
    Mars flight, identifying spacecraft and booster systems and select-
    ing mdst promising mission profile. (Space Bus. Daily, 7/5/63 ;
    L A . T&vws, 7/9/63 ;Mar8hall Star, 7/10/63,8)
 NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $100,000 contract to Boeing
    Co. for six-month study of logistics spacecraft to be used for
    ferr ing men and equipment to and from orbiting space station.
    Stuiies would be of two wingless lifting bodies: M-2, developed
    by NASA Ames Research Center, and HL-10, originated at NASA
    Langley Research Center. ( MSC Space News Roundup, 7/24/63,
      8)
  Raytheon Co. announced development of one-lb. laser capable of
    sending 10 voice messages for more than one mile over infrared
    beam. New laser used mixture of neon and xenon gases. ( N Y T ,
    7/28/63)
  USAF announced it was establishin three-man Gemini liaison and
                                     r5
    support office at NASA Manned pacecraft Center. Under Col.
    William A. Stellenwerf, office would deal primarily with Titan
    I1 launch vehicle for Gemini and recovery requirements. (Au.
    Wk., 7/15/63,31; A-N-AP Joumz. & Reg., 7/13/63,16)
                            AUGUST 1963
August I :XARINER n interplanetary space probe completed its first
       orbit of the sun, after traveling approximately 540,000,000 mi.
        (aphelion, 113.8 million mi., occurred June 18, 1963; perihelion,
       65.5 million mi., m u d Dec. 28, 1962). Launched Aug. 27,
       1962, the spacecraft passed within 21,648 mi. of Venus Dec. 14,
       1962, and provided 111 million bits of information on Venus and
                                      N Y T , 8/2/63, 7 ; MSC Xpace Newn
       interplanetary space. (1   -,
        andu up, a/7/63,i, 2 )
   House passed bill to authorize $5,203,719,400 for NASA in F Y 1964
        (33447). House bill would authorize $4,013,175,000 for research
       and development; $508,185,000 for administrative operations;
       and $682,359,400 for construction of facilitiee. House cut $34.4
       million from the bill as reported from Committee, on Science and
       Astronautics : Amendment introduced by Rep. Richard L.
       Roudebush (R.-Ind.) cut $24.4 million from Committee’s m m -
       mendation for facility, training, and research grants, the amend-
       ment intended “to stabilize” NASA’S university program a t F Y
       1963 level. Another amendment cut $10 million from advanced
       design development. Amendment offered by Rep. John W.
       Wydler (R.-N.Y.) to cut $3.9 million authorization for electronics
       mser~rcli center was defeated ( 1 1 1 4 ) . (CR,8/1/63, 13070-
       13129)
Augwst I-November I :Project Stormfury, experiment to investigate
       ways of reducing destructive force of hurricanes, conducted
       jointly by Weather Bureau and Naval Weather Service. Experi-
       ment involved seeding hurricane clouds and cumulonimbus
       clouds (not associated with hurricane winds) with silver iodide
       to i-rn if energy atterns can be changed. Itesuits wouid be
       compared with similpar experiment conducted during 1961 Hurri-
       cane Esther. (WD Release 1077-63)
Q t i g w t I : Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences
       ordered H.R. 7500 favorably reported (pending receipt from the
       House). With amendments, bill would authorize $5,511,520,400
       for NASA in F Y 1964. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/117; N.Y. Herah?
       Trib., 8/2/63)
  Commenting on action of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and
       Space Sciences, Committee’s Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson,
        (D.-N.M.) said Committee approved NASA appropriations re-
       quests whenever they “made sense in terms of National objectives.
       On the other hand, some projects failed to get committee authori-
       zation because they are in need of further explanation . . . .
          “If an Apollo landing on the moon were to be the end of the
       line, then the attitude of the Congress toward NASA expendi-
       ture will be one thing. But if space is here to stay, and we believe
       it is, then our attitudes would be something else again. When we
                                                                293
294                                                  19 0 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    are asked for funds to cover a variet of advanced research
                                                L
       rojects and new engines and vehicles yond those occasioned
    y Apollo, it is hard to be enthusiastic in supporting these proj-
    !
    ects in the absence of clearly s t a t 4 national goals.” (Missile/
    Space Daily, 8/2/63)
August 1: I n re ort to Bureau of the Budget, NASA commented on bill
     (S. Res. 5Op to establish Senate Select Committee on Teclmologi-
     cal Developments. NASA recognized that “there may be substan-
     tial advantages derived both for the Senate and for the general
     public from the establishment of a committee such as this,” which
     would study and investigate responsibilities of Government de-
     partments and       ncies for scientific and technical develo ments
                       T                                          R
     and the effect o such activities upon U.S. scientific, tec nical,
     and economic progress and upon structure of the U.S. economy.
      (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/118)
 I n Washington press conference, President Kennedy was asked
     about relative status of antimissile missile programs of US. and
     U.S.S.R.in li ht of last year’s Soviet nuclear tests “in which very
                   8
     large warhea s were detonated.” The President replied :
         “I don’t think that the problem is solved by the explosion of
     a large megaton bomb. The problem is really one, as you know,
     of discrimination, of being able to prevent saturation, of having
     to protect many tar ets while the adversary can select a few . . . .
         “The problem of develo ing a defense against a missile is
     beyond us and beyond the loviets technically, and I think many
     who work in it feel that perhaps it can never be successfully
     accomplished because the whole problem, a you know, is to have
                                                    s
     100 objects flying through the air at thousands of miles an hour
      [and] to be able to pick them out. And if you can do that there
     is an advantage, it still seems to me, to the offense because they can
     pour i 200, or 300.
             n
         “And therefore, the problem is not the size of the bomb but
     rather the problem of discrimination, the problem of selectivity,
     target’? and all the rest.
         “On t os8 matters we can continue to work. But I must say
     those who work the longest are not particularly optimistic that
     a scientific breakthrough can be made . . . .” (Transcript,
     NYT, 8/2/63, 10)
  Speaking a t the Fourth International Space Science Symposium in
     Wamw, Poland, Dr. R. S. Young of NASA’s               Ames Research
     Center, said that certain earth bacteria not only survive but grow
     satisfactorily in a laboratory-created Martian environment.
     Knowledge of growth of earth organisms on Mars is important
     for two masons, D .Young said. Pix%, the extremely complex
                         r
        roblem of decontaminating earth spacecraft depends upon proof
      Ra
     t t earth organisms do not present a hazard to other planets.
     Second, as much information as possible about survival on Mars
     or on other celestial objects is needed for designing instruments
     on spacecraft to detect and analyze such life if it exists. (The
     Cleveland Press, 8/1/63)
                                                                                           295
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

Augwt 1 .- Australian Minister of Supply Allen Fairhall announced
   US.-financed space tracking station would be built near Canberra.
   The 60-sq.-mi. complex would be built by 14ustralia and staffed by
   Australian scientists and technicians. (NPT, 8/2/63, 8)
 On his third anniversary as president of USAF‘S Aerospace Corpora-
   tion, which itself was three years old last June 25, Ivan A. Getting
   reported the organization now has annual budget of $22,600,000
   and 4,500 total personnel (1,617 scientists, engineers, and techni-
   cians.) During year just completed, Aerospace Cor . provided
                                                                                  &
   midance on $1billion in mace svstems contracts and billion in
                                           (Aerospace Corp. Release ;
   gallistic missiles and con$one&.
   NPT, 8/4/63)
 First technical descriDtion of U.A.R.’s Pioneer rocket ameared in
   Cairo newspaper &her Saa. Article said Pioneer multistage
   rocket has range of 625 mi., is powered with liquid oxygen and
   another unnamed liquid, and is intended as space research vehicle.
    (AP, H m ~ t o Post, 8/2/63)
                   n
Augwt 2: Second Shotput suborbital sounding rocket flight in US.-
   Italian San Marco project was launched from NSSA Tlrallops Sta-
   tion, the 177.5-1b. payload reaching 183-mi. altitude in flight to
   test instrumentation for San Marco satellite. Another purpose
   of launching was to determine whether Shotput despin difficulties
   of first San Marcm launching had been corrected, and flight offi-
   cials indicated the vehicle performed satisfactorily.
      Shortly after the Shotput launch, a related experiment was
   launched from Wallops Island using Nike-Cajun sounding rocket.
   Three mylar balloons were ejected from Nike-Cajun and tracked
   by radar, to provide air density data to aid in evaluating San
   Marco experiment.
      A third Shotput, launching later this year would continue test-
   ing instrumentation performance and launch techniques for San
                                                              :. l,..mnl.;--
                                                               .
                                  -,... 1.4                                       ,I -,t,.1l;tn c
                                                                                   dnaLsuic
                       -l.:,.l.
    XK,,,   --;,.,.t                          -..l-:.,,+,.
                                  nuuiu
                       wiiiciii                               iii   iauiiLiiLu6   V
                                              cuiiiiLiiaLtj
            ~LVJC%-
    AU L
     T UU

   into equatorial orbit from platform off east coast of Africa. San
   Marco is cooperative project of Italian National Research Council
   and NASA. (NASA Release 63-172 ; Wallops Release 63-75 ; NASA
   Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
 After 10 months of satisfactory operation in orbit, EXPLORER XIV sci-
   entific satellite, with its six experiments to measure energetic ar-
   ticles and magnetic fields in space, was still functioning. 8 u r -
   ing the 10 months, data acquisition stations received 6,003 hrs. of
   data from EXPLORER XIV, of which more than 4,500 hrs. were digi-
   tized and 3,200 hrs. were sent to the six experimenters. (NASA
   EXPLORER xm Prog. Rpt. No. 5 )
 Joint U.S.-U.K.-Australian Project Dazzle to study behavior of ob-
   jects re-entering atmos here would be conducted at Woomera
   Rocket Range in AustmYia, DOD announced. U.K. would provide
   Black Knight rockets and re-entry payloads; U.S. would provide
   instrumentation for test. (DOD Release 1088-63)
 Sweden successfully launched US. Army Nike-Cajun rocket from
   Kronog5rd rocket range in test to explore “bright night clouds.”
    (M&R,   8/12/63,11)
296           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

August 2 : USN Sparoair research rocket launched from F-3B jet
   at 30,OOO-ft. altitude, the two-stage rocket climbing to 350,000-
   ft. altitude while its instrumented payload measured ultraviolet
    radiation of the stars above 99% of earth’s atmosphere. Payload
    impmted Pacific Ocean 70 mi. west of Pt. Mugu and no recovery
    was attempted. (AP, N Y T , 8/7/63)
 I n response to inquiriecj about rumors that Astronauts M. Scott
    ‘Carpenterand Walter M. Schirra were ill with space-flight aftsr-
    effects, unnamed NASA Hq. spokesman quoted Dr. Charles A.
    Berry, Chief of MSC Medical Operations O f c , as saying:
                                                      fie
    “Neither Carpenter nor Schirra has any difficulties at all, and
    they are in excellent health.
        “In fact, none of the astronauts who have made space flights
    has suffered any ill effects, and the entire group is in top physical
    condition.” (UPI, Houston Chronicle, 8/3/63, 9)
 Atlas booster, first stage of Centaur space launch vehicle, arrived
    at Plum Brook Station to begin series of structural tests in
    E-Stand. (LRC Release63-64, Lewis Chronology, 7)
August 3: Patent to Boeing Co. engineers Joseph H. Doss and Ga
                                                                      7
    A. Graham for method of suspending astronaut in his spacecra t
     with netting and cables was reported in New York Times. In-
     ventors claimed system would give astronaut more mobility than
    couches used in Mercury spacecraft. (Jones, NYT,8/3/63,21)
  Photographs of members of Leningrad Cosmonaut Club featured
     in Soviet press. School children members of clubs said to have
     flown in jet aircraft, trained in pressure and isolation chambers,
     and executed arachute jumps; they have studied radio opera-
                   f
     tion and were amiliar with astronomy, space medicine, and “cos-
    monautics.” (KomomZ skaya Pravda, 8/3/63,4, AFSS--T Trans.)
August 4 : First public demonstration of communications exchange
     via sync.hronous satellite, when two U.S. wire services and Ni-
     gerian newsmen exchanged news stories of about 300 words each
     via SYNCOM 11 communications satellite, hovering 22,823 mi. over
     Western Africa. Photographs of President Kennedy and Ni-
     gerian Governor General Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe also were ex-
     changed. Transmissions were made from NASA station at Lake-
     hurst, N.J., and USNS Kingsport communications ship in Lagos
     Harbor, Nigeria. (AP, Wash. Eve.Star, 8/5/63 ; NASA Release
     63-171)
  Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce issued report urging selec-
     tion of Edwards AFB as U.S. Space Recovery Center. Report
     was based on 12-month study of potential recovery sites through-
     out U.S. for all types of space vehicles. Chamber General Man-
     ager Harold W. Wright said : “We hope that the National Aero-
     nautics and Space Administration will seriously consider the Ed-
      wards facilities for its u e and not attempt to duplicate similar
                                 s
      facilities elsewhere . . . .
         “The federal government has already poured millions and mil-
      lions of dollars into the highly-instrumented Pacific Missile
      Range, the electronic recovery control center a t Sunnyvale and
      the highly developed facilities in the Edwards-Wendover, Utah-
      Holloman-White Sands, N.M., complex.
                                                                   297
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

       “This provides the nation’s space effort with the best available
   land recovery site.”
       NABA Hq. spokesman, queried about report, stated Project
   Gemini landing operations were still under study, “with a p-
   sibility we will require no large, fixed base for recovery of the
   spacecraft.” First series of Gemini flights would employ water-
   landings, and them was possibility that all Gemini fl1 hts would
                                                          B
   de end on water m v e n e s . In m y case, “NASA k we aware of
   Ecfwards,” spokesman said, and the agency would give Chamber’s
   study careful consideration. ( L A . T i m , 8/5/63)
Augwt 5 NASA announced SYNCOM II communications satellite, now
         :
    driftin westward over Atlantic Ocean at 22,800-mi. altitude,
    would %e stopped when it reached desired position at 55” west
   longitude. At this location SYNCOM IIwould be lowered i t pre-no
   cise synchronous orbit, so that it would appear to trace elongated
   figure-8 pattern alo 55”meridian to points 3 O north and south
                                                     3
    of the equator, perio f 1,463 min., perigee 22,221 mi., apogee 22,912
                         I
   mi., drift rate (degrees per day westward) 6.8. (NABA Release
   63-168 ; QSFC Historian)
 TIROB VI, still orbiting the earth and still providing excellent uality
                                                              7l
   photographs, exceeded durability record of 302 days set y its
    predecmr TIRM v. Launched Sept. 18,1962, ma VI provided
                                                         o
    58,589 pict.ures (several hundred more than w o e v), of which
    about 90 er cent were usable. TIROS VII, launched June 19,1963,
    continuefto operate in conjunction with TIBoB vI. (NASA ~ e -
    lease 68-174)
 Static test-firing of first Saturn S-IV flight stage conducted by
    Douglas Aircraft Co. at Sacramento, the cluster of six R L l O
    engine generating the full 90,000 lbs. of thrust for more than one
    minute. The stage was slated for Saturn SA-5 launch vehicle, to
    be flight-tested later this year. (MarshdZ Stacr 8/7/63, 1)
 Some historic achievements of NASA Langiey iiesearcb center,
            installation specializing in basic aeronautical and space
    NASA’s
    research, reported in press: invention of world’s first transonic
    wind tunnels; discovery of the “area rule,” a design principle
    regarded as key to practical supersonic flight; invention of auto-
    matically inflatable satellites, leading to development of world’s
    first communications satellite (Echo) ; development of first all-
    solid fuel launch vehicle (Scout) to place U.S. satellite in orbit.
     (W. Warwick, R.I., Pawtuxet VaJZey Times,      8/5/63)
 Richard Tereselic, Lewis engineer, described hydraulic press intensi-
    fier which he designed at a considerable savings. The device cost
    approximately $4,000 and can obtain pressures up to 100,000
    pounds per square inch. A similar system purchased commer-
    cially would cost $60,000. ( LRC Release 63-62, Lewis Chronology,
    7)
  At Grand Kremlin Palace in Moscow, treaty banning nuclear weapon
    tests in the atmosphere, in outer space, and under water was
    signed by Secretary of State Dean Rusk for the United States,
              Secreta the Earl of Home for U.K., and Foreign Min-
    Forei
    ister g d r e i A. %romyko for U.S.S.R. (NYT, 8/6/63, 12)
     741-623 - O
              Z
298           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

Azcgzcst 5 : On test ban treaty, U.S. News and World Report said:
         “Nuclear test ban does not mean disarmament. Nuclear
     weapons still will be the weapons of future war. Weapon test-
     ing will not come to a full stop.
         “Tests will continue underground. France will o on testing in
                                                        f
     the air. Red China will test in the air, too, if an when she gets
     the bomb . . . .
         “Test a reement, now being entered into, favors Russia. Rus-
              5
     sia, behin in smaller nuclear weapons, can catch up by testing
     underground. United States, behind in bigger weapons and in
     an antimissile missile, will be hindered in her effort to catch up
     by the bar against testing in the atmosphere . . . .
         “Just as long as Russia is a closed country, ruled by a dictator-
     ship, possessed of weapons capable of destroying United States,
      there can be no real disarmament, no real end to the arms race
      without great danger . . . .” (U.S. News, 8/5/63, in O R ,
      7/31/63,13060)
  Rep. Melvin R. Laird (R.-Wis.) introduced resolution (H. Res.
      473) to create select committee for investigating expenditures for
      research programs conducted by or sponsored by Government
      departments and agencies; proposal was referred to House Com-
      mittee on Rules. ( NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/119)
  French plans to establish tracking network, to be integrated later
      into European network, reported in Missiles and Rockets. French
      network would include tracking stations in Canary Islands and
       South Africa, four telemetering stations in Africa. (M&R,
      8/5/63,9)
  USAF launched Minuteman ICBM from Cape Canaveral underground
      silo, but malfunction caused missile to fall short of expected target
       area. ( M d R , 8/12/63,11)
 August 5-9: Desert survival training for NASA’s Gemini/Apollo
                                                       nine
      astronauts conducted at Stead AFB and Carson Sink, Nev.,. the
       astronauts participating in lecture sessions, field demonstrations,
       and actual survival practice. ( MSC Res onse to Query)
 August 6: U.S.S.R. announced COSMOS XIX !d been placed in orbit
                                                   a
       (519-km. apogee, 270-km. perigee, 92.2-min. period ; 49O angle
       of inclination to equator). (Tass, Pravda, 8/7/63, 1, AFSS-T
       Trans.)
   Tracking and data acquisition operations ceased for os0 I (Orbiting
       Solar Observatory), launched March 7, 1962. ( GSFC Historian,
       8/14/63)
   I n hearings on H.R. 7381, bill to modernize dual-compensation
       and dual-employment laws, conducted by House Committee on
       Post Office and Civil Service, NASA Administrator James E. Webb
       testified :
          “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is
       strongly of the opinion that the proposed legislation should be
       enacted (1) t permit the Government to capitalize on certain
                      o
       skills, competence, and experience in the areas of aerospace science
       and technology possessed by a sizable group of military personnel
       who have completed their service careers, and (2) to correct cer-
       tain inequities in the present statutes pertaining to the Government
       employment of these personnel.
                                                                       299
                                                       19 6 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

       "Many of the abilities and skills and much of the knowledge
    valuable to NASA are possessed by certain military personnel who
    have been closely associated with missile and military space
    programs and aeronautics Collectively, this body of men, edu-
    cated and skilled in aerospace science and technology, r e p m n t s
    a reservoir of knowledge and experience which constltutes a
    national asset of inestimable value. Unless this limited group of
    specialists can be attracted to remain in the Government, this
    asset will not be available directly to the Government's s am
                                                        9
    program. A s of August 5,1963,227 active dut military ofl!mps
    are detailed to NASA by the Department o Defense . . . .               9,

     (Testimony)
dugust 6: License granted by the Atomic Energy Commission for
    operation of low pressure, low power (100 kw) M c Up Reactor
                                                        ok
    to Plum Brook Station of NASA Lewis Research Center. The MUR
    mould be used to determine the effects of experiments on the radia-
    tion flux in the core of its high-power twin, the Plum Brook 60-
    megawatt reactor. Slso, experiments requiring loT-level nuclear
    bombardment would be run in the MUR. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
  NSSA announced preparations for dual launching of satellites with
     Scout launch vehicle late this year. Under contract to NASA
    Langley Research Center, State Univ. of Iowa would provide
     Injun satellite containing instruments to record corpuscular radi-
     ation streaming into earth's upper atmosphere from space. The
     other satellite, a 12-ft. inflatable sphere t o measure air density,
    was being built b Lam. The two satellites would be launched
                        i
     into near-polar or it from PMX. (NASA Release 63-170)
  Communications Satellite Corp. announced selection of American
    Telephone and Telegraph Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., and Radio
    C r . of America to study multiple access techniques for com-
      ap
    munications satellites. Each company would study different
                                                         data GI; S X i S h g
    ZPpiCNiCh 2nd piGGi&? c G i Z f k % i c G i p Tiih
    t pes of equipment for engineering information SO that
     8omSatCorp could choose design of first operational commercial
    comsat system. (ComSatCorp Release)
 Weather conditions forced postponement of NASA pilot Joseph A.
    Walker's 68-mi. altitude flight in X-15. Flight was made
    Au .22. ( UPI, NYT, 8/7/63)
        k
 DOD p ans to orbit its first two experimental satellites for detecting
    nuclear tests in outer space reported by New York 2"hrws. The
    Project Vela satellites, under jurisdiction of DOD'S Advanced Re-
    search Projects Agency, were expected to be capable of detecting
    unshielded nuclear tests as small as 10 kilotons and as far awa as
                                                                       P
    lSO,OOO,O00 mi. from earth. To be launched this fall, sate1 ltes
     would orbit earth at 50,000-60,OOo mi. ( N P T , 8/7/63, 12)
  Raytheon Co. announced appointment of D. Brainerd Holmes as
    senior vice president, effective Oct. 1. (NPT, 8/6/63,8)
  Dr. M. Samuel White named Federal Air Surgeon of Federal Avia-
    tion Agency by FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby. (FAA
    Release 63-73)
300           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

August 6 : Second anniversary of Titov’s orbital space flight in VOSTOK
   II? Pravda using occasion to announce the cosmonaut and his
   wife were expecting the birth of a baby. (UPI, Wash. Daily
   News,8/7/63)
August 7: B its 1,842nd orbit, RELAY I communications satellite had
             dy
   been ‘use in 930 wideband experiments; 409 narrowband experi-
   ments; 95 demonstrations (TV and narrowband). Transponder
   had been operated for 190 hrs. over period of 454 operations.
    (GSFC Historian, Memo, 8Jl4/63)
 Senate began debate on H.R. 7500, NASA authorization bill for FY
   1964. I n o ening statement, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman
   of Senate 8ommittee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said:
       “I am fully aware of the many opinions & i c h have been es-
    pousd as to the priority of funding between our military and
    civilian space programs, ‘andthe concern expressed in many quar-
   ters with respect to the high authorization of expenditures for
    the civilian portion of our space program. I should only like to
    say at this point that our administration has declared a a national
                                                             s
    goal the landing of a man on tihe moon by 1970. NASA has been
    given the responsibility b the administration of carrying out this
                             91
    national objective and w ile I, like others, would disagree with
    some of ‘ decisions that have been made by Mr. Webb, the Ad-
              t
              e
    ministrator, and his associates, I , personally, feel, and I believe
    the other mem’brs of the committee would generally agree, that
    NASA deserves unqualified credit for Dhe manner in which it has
    embarked upon this formiddble task . . . .
       “The United Statss is in space to stay. NASA is dedicated to
    the objective of making our Nation preeminent in space, and has,
    indeed, to date compiled an enviable record and taken a long step
     toward the accomplishment of this objective . . . .” (OR,
    8/7/63, 13710-16)
  Under Secretary of the Air Force Brockway McMillan said in letter
     to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairmm of Senate Committee on
    Aeronautical and Space Sciences :
        “Our assessment of the NASA programs in the light of your ques-
    tions has strengthened our conviction that the potential joint value
     of the NASA and Defense Department programs a n be more fully
     realized by closer collaboration in the early conceptual phases, to
     insure that the objectives of each agency are clearly recognized
     at each successive stage of program evolution. Our point is illus-
     trated by recant experience in developing experiments to be spon-
     sored by the Defense Department on the Gemini flights. Al-
     though the concerted joint effort, under the guidance of the
     Gemini program planning board, has been fruitful, it has be-
     come obvious that an earlier beginning of intensive collaboration
     might well have allowed greater results. Looking to the future,
     we hope to apply this lesson in the establishment of an orbital
     space station program. We view a sp<acestation as an essential
     preliminary to an operational space defense system, and as a
     valuable source of experience which will apply to NASA objectives.
      As this program is in the early conceptual phase, we think it
      possible to begin now to fully exploit its high potential to serve
                                                                       301
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    both civilian and milita needs. As you know, the Defense
    Department has p r o d t o NASA that there be collaboration
    in studies leading to the definition of the space station p m
    gram. . . .” (Letter, CR, 8/9/63,13900)
A q m t 7: In letter to FCC Chairman E. William Henry, ComSatGrp
    Chairman Leo D. Welch said ComSat directors agreed that stock
    be issued to the public “at the earliest practicable date” and were
                                       . ~ later than early 1964. Rspl ing to
    planning stock I S S U ~ not ~
    FCO contantion tzlat stoclrholders should have voice in &mSat
    policy making (see July 26), Welch asserted that FCCwas invad-
    mg management functions of the directors and argued that the
    corporation’s initial studies were necessaxy t o give potential in-
    vestors “a responsible presentation of material facts in compli-
    anm with the applicable Federal and state securities laws.” (N.Y.
    Herald Tm’b.,8/8/63 ; Clayton, Wash. Post, 8/8/63)
  A City of Los Angels Commendation award was prasented to Air
    Form Space Systems Division by Lm Angela myor, The Honor-
    able Samuel Yorty. The citation, in recognition of SSD’S contri-
    bution to the national s p m effort, was acceptd by General Ben I.
    Funk, Commander. (A-I\;-AF J o u m J and Register, Jan., 1964)
Augwt 8: Wikh launching of Nike-Cajun sound@ rocket from
    Kronoglrd Range, Sweden and U.S. completed series of sounding
    rocket experiments to study noctilucent clouds near Arctic Circle.
    Sponsored by NASA and Swedish Committee for Space Research,
    program included launchings of Arcas mckets with payloads to
    measure winds and Nike-Cajun rockets with payloads to make
    direct cloud samplings during 1961 and 1962. Four Nike-Cajun
    rockets with rocket grenade payloads were successfully launched
    during summer 1963, these experiments measuring upper atmos-
    phere temperatures, winds, remure, and density and measuring
                                   f
    changes in size of artificial c oud particles created !by smoke puffs
    A - - l l l *lL U ---y : d 3 . Exphmiti3i-S T e i Z s&TiSsk fEX h&*txte
                b 1epa
    llV
     ?-

    of Meteorology, Univ. o Stockholm ;NASA Goddard S a m Flight
                                     f
                                                               K
    Center hxd responsibility for U.S. coordination in t e project.
     (NASA Release 63-179)
  Senate ddbat0 of H.R. 7500, NASA auhhorization bill for FY 1964,
    continued. Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio) said:
         “The argument has been made that it is unwise to spend billions
    of dollars to explore outer space when we have 90 many unsolved
    problems remaining here on earth. In my judgment, however,
    and I am sure most of my c o l l ~ e agree, elimination of expendi-
                                                   s
    tures for space exploration would not necessarily result m the
    transfer of those funds to other forms of research. M O ~ V W ,        an
    investigation of the fund% of all forms of Federal research re-
    veds that no real conflict exists betwean space exploration and re-
    search in obher fi01ds.
         “In fact, this investigation provides persuasive evidence that,
    rakher than interfering with other forms of rese6lrch, our
    effort has stimulated a more favorable climate for resamy?
    general, so that progress is being made simultaneous1 in a great
    many areas totally unrelated to spam . . . . (8R7         ”       8/8/63,
    13751)
302            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

                     assage of $5.5 billion NASA FY 1964 authoriza-
Aztgzcst 8: Urging
                     8
   tion bill, Sen. tuart Symington said: “It s h d d be made clear
   that the United States is not committed to an all-out race, a crash
   program, so as to be first to the moon.
      “The moon is no h i g h line in a race. It is but ’ f ~
                                                            proving ground,
   Where we will test and demonstrate that competance in space tech-
   nology which our security should insure . . . .
      “[There is] a proper division of effort between military and
   civilian space programs, between space science and space tech-
   nology, between current programs and advanced research in
   support of future rograms, between the space program and other
   possibilities for su! stsnt ial Federal contributions to research and
                      I

   development.” ( AP, NYT, 8/9/63)
 NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced drop-test of parachute
   recovery system for two-man Gemini spacecraft had been con-
   ducted successfully, the drop made from 20,000 ft. into water at
   Salton Sea, Calif. (MBC Release 63-125; UPI, NYT, 8/10/63)
 Mackay Trophy presented to crew of SAC B-58 for record flight of
   Mar. 5, 1962, which established new Los An eles-to-New York
                                                      E
   flight time of 2 hr., 58.7 sec. Administered y National Aero-
   nautic Association, trophy was presented by Under Secretary of
   BF Dr. Brockway McMillan in ceremonies at Carswell AFB, Tex.
    (see May 22). (DOD Release 1119-63)
 Nike-Zeus antimissile missile fired at White Sands Missile Range in
   series testing components for Nike X. (DOD Release 1121-63)
August 9 : Voice and teletype messages exchanged v.ia SYNCOM TI
   communications satellite between ground station at Paso Robles,
   Calif., and communications ship Kingnport in Lagos Harbor,
   Nigeria. The test spanned 7,700 mi., greatest surface distance
   ever spanned between two points on earth via a communicat’           ions
   satellite. (NASA “SYNCOM IT Fact Sheet”; N.Y. Herold Tm’h.,
   8/10/63)
 Senate passed NASA authorization bill (H.R. 7500) providing
   $5,511,520,400 in F Y 1964, a restoration of $307,801,000 cut by
   House action Aug. 1. Senate bill would authorize $4,225,275,000
   for research and development ; $539,185,000 for administrative
   operations; and $747,060,400 for construction of facilities. Sen-
   ate adopted amendment to bar, under certain circumstances, any
   authorized funds for R&D for exclusive benefit of any erson pro-
                                                              K
   viding satellite communication services (other than overnment
   agency) and amendment requiring that, in addition to study of
   location for Electronic Research Center, there would be written
   notice to Administrator that study committee had no objection to
   selected location. Bill was ordered to House-Senate conference
   committee. (OR, 8/9/63, 13877-889, 13893-912)
August 9-11 : TIROS VI and VII meteorological satellites observed Hur-
   ricane Arlene approximately 600 mi. northeast of Bermuda,
   Typhoon Bess approximately 100 mi. west of Japan, and Ty-
   phoon Carmen approximately 500 mi. east of the Philippine
    Islands. (GSFC Historian Memo, 9/4/63)
                                                                   303
                               AND AERONAUTICS, 1963
               ASTRONAUTICS

August 9: NASA Langley Research Center announced contract
   awarded to Basic Construction Co. for building to house syn-
                             Space Radiation Effects Laboratory at
   chrocyclotron of NASA’s
   Oyster Point, Newport News, Va. (URC Release)
 Letter from Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank E x ri-
   mental Station, tu NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. H u g r L .
   Dryden reporting on his recent visit to U.S.S.R. was inserted in
   Con.p.sSional Record b Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.). Sir
   Bernard quoted M. V. d l d sh, president of Soviet Academy of
                                   K
   Sciences, as saying U.S.S.R. ad rejected, a t least for present, any
   plans for a manned lunar landing, because of insurmountable
   problems of radiation in space. According to Sir Bernard,
   Keldysh said “that the manned project might be revived if
         ess in the next few years gave hope of a solution of their
               and that he befieved the appropriate procedure would
      to formulate the task on an international basis. He stated that
   the Academy believed that the time was now appropriate for
   scientists to formulate the task on an international basis (a) the
   reasons wh it is desirable to engage in the manned lunar enter-
   prise and ({ ) to draw up a list of scientific tasks which a man on
   the moon could deal with which could not be solved by instruments
   alone. The Academy regarded this initial step as the f r t and
                                                               is
   most vital in any plan for proceeding on an international
               ..
                9,
    basis..
      NASA Administrator James E. Webb’s reply to this letter also
    was inserted, in which he said :
       “. . . With regard to space research and exploration, as you
    know, our present relationships with the Soviet Union have
    developed directly from the correspondence between President
    Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev on specific possibilities of
        ..
    cooperation in this field. Dr. Dryden’s discussions with Acad-
              Rl--o---nv r          thn nn&v nnnr nn 5 0 h,“,Te fe&=&
    0rnrn-n-
                                          yuo
              u.ugu.lAu.”                  JUUL
                                   ”
                                   .
                                   A
                                   L              “I
    UIU”*&LI                “I-*

    Tithin this framework. There is already a current agreement
    between the Soviet Academy of Sciences and NASA which rep-
    resents the first fruit of these early efforts.
       “Accordingly, if the Soviet Academy is indeed interested in the
    matters you describe in your letter, we will look forward to the
    possibility of further explorations by Dr. Dryden and Academi-
    cian Bla onravov as to their views and desires . . . .” (Letters,
    CR,8/9763,13903)
August 10: Soviet government announced Cosmonaut Valentina
    Tereshkova would visit P            e Aug. 15 at invitation of Czech
    government. (AP, wash.??rn Star, 8/11/63, A6)
 Company began h a 1 razing of World War I1 TNT manufacturing
    facilities at Plum Brook Station. At theheight of production
    during WW 11, 12 TNT production lines were in operation and
    6,000 employees were at work. The 6,OOO-acre site now is the
    home of a nuclear reseapch reactor and numemus rocket engine
    test stands. (LRC Release 6 M 5 , Lewis Chronology, 7)
A4zlgust 11: Dr. Edward P. Ney, Univ. of Minnesota physicist, said
    in New Pork T i m interview that sightings by Astronauts Glenn,
    Carpenter, and Cooper during their orbital Mercury space flights
    represented the “first direct observation” of what probably is
304            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    cosmic dust in the airglow layer of about 48- to 54-mi. altitude.
    Major Cooper reported that light of two stars in Big Dip er had
                                                                 E
    been extinguished by airglow layer, and Dr. Ney said t is was
    “stronv evidence for the existence of dust” which could block out
    the ligh. (Toth, NYT, 8/12/63,17)
Augwt I1 : Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.),Chairman of Senate
    Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in television
    interview that “with very good luck” the U.S. could land a man on
    the moon by 1968 or 1969, but he personally thou ht U.S. lunar
    landin would be in earl 1970’s. Senator An L ferson said he
           5                    B
    doubte reports that U.S. .R. was not racing U.S. to the moon.
     ( CBS-TV “Washington Reports,” AP, Wash. Ewe. Star,
    8/12/63)
  Questionnaire regardin Government agencies’ policies and prac-
    tices in preparing a n f releasing information to the Congress and
     the public was sent to all Federal agencies by House Forei
    Operations and Government Information Subcommittee. (A?
    NYT, 8/12/63)
A u w t la: Goddard Space Flight Center engineers directed radio
     signal sent from Lakehurst, N.J., to SYNCOM TI communications
     satellite 22,000 mi. in space, signaling hydrogen peroxide jets
     onboard to fire and slow satellite’s drift westward from rate of
     about 7” to about 2” per day. With aid of additional maneuvers
     signaled from ground, SYNCOM 11 was expected to attain synchro-
     nous orbit within three days, appearing to hover over 55” west
    position and prescribing figure-8 pattern 33” north and south of
     equator. (AP, N Y T , 8/12/63)
  TELSTAR 11 communications satellite resumed operating for first time
     since July 16. Satellite received and transmitted sound and tele-
     vision picture test sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories on TEL-
     STAR TI’S 622nd orbit. Cause of the satellite’s restoration, like its
    silence, was not known. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/13/63; N Y T ,
     8/13/63,12)
  S-IV stage for the Saturn S A 4 launch vehicle completed its static-
    test program with a full-duration firing lasting 479 =.
             Wk.,
      (Av.        8/26/63,33)
  Third birthday of ECHO I balloon satellite, launched into orbit Aug.
     12,1960. World’s first artificial passive communications satellite,
     the 100-ft. inflatable mylar sphere demonstrated use of radio
     wave reflection for global communications. ECHO I was still orbit-
     ing the earth, having traveled some 425 million mi., and was still
     usable for communication.
         NASA announced G. C. Schieldahl Co. had been selected to build
     Echo I satellite, scheduled to be placed in orbit this winter.
               T
     IJnder $362,000 contract Schjeldahl would build three models, one
     for static-inflation tests, one for orbital fliqht. and one for back-
     up. ECHO TI would be larger and more rigid than its predecessor.
      ( N A S ~ Release 63-183; Rep. .Joseph E. Karth, C R , 8/12/63,
                ~
     h5097;AP, NYT, 8/13J63)
  First anniversary of first tandem manned space flight, which began
     Aug. 12,1962, when VOSTOK N piloted by Lt. Col. Pave1 R. Popo-
     vich was launched into nearly same orbit as that of VOSTOK 111
                                                                    305
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   piloted by Maj. Andrian C. Nikolayev, launched into orbit less
                                  r
   than 24 hrs. earlier.             int the two spacecraft were within
                           A4tOne
   6.5 km. (4 mi.) of each ot er, according to Soviet newspaper
   Pravdn. Upon landing Aug. 15, Mai. Nikolayev in VOSTOK III
   had completed 64 earth orbits, 1,645,000 mi. ;and 95 hrs., 25 min.
   flying time. Colonel Popovich in VOSMK N had completed 48
   earth orbits; 1,242,000 mi.; and 70 hrs., 29 min. flying time.
Augwt 22: NASA selected Bendix Eclipse-Pioneer Div. and RCA
   Data Systems Div. to provide components and equipment for
   Saturn I B and Saturn V guidance and checkout systems. Bendix
   and RCA already were providing-similar services in Saturn I
   launch vehicle system. (NASA Release 63-182)
 Sir Bernard Lovell,. Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimen-
   tal Station, said in U S . News and World Re ort interview that
   U.S.S.R. did not have a priority program for landing a man
   on the moon. The president of the Academy of Sciences
    [Mst.klav Keldysh] said that the Soviet Academy saw certain
   insuperable difficulties.
      “First, they did not a t the moment see how it was possible to
   protect any lunar voyages from the lethal effects of solar
       _. .
   radiation.
      “Secondly-and mixed up with t h i e i s that they did not think
   it was economically feasible with present techniques to land suf-
   ficient material on the moon to give the necessary protection
   against solar radiation and, at the same time, to enable a scientific
   program to be carried out and also to give the chap a reasonable
   chance of getting back to earth.
      “Most important of all, it seemed to me, is this: They have
   decided that with a soft landing of instruments on the moon they
   can extract nearly all the scientific information they want long
   before there would be a chance of getting a man there to do it . . . .
      “I ti312 the piT&*2czt of thc h s . d z E y quite h r k ! y th2.t I
   didn’t agree with this sentiment, because I m a very firm believer
    in the importance of       tting a man on the moon not only for
                            T
   scientific reasons but a so because it is a great challenge facing
   the humanrace . . . .37
      Sir Bernard said U.S.S.R. was concentrating on two objectives
   in space exploration: (1) “soft landing of mstruments on the
   moon . . . and, subsequently, other planets” and (2) “assembly
   of a platform in space . . . . The cosmonaut program is related
   . . . to this effort to erect a big platform in space and put a
   telescope on it . . . .” (Interview, US.Newg, 8/12/63
                                                              d
 Washington Evening Star editorialized that NASA “shoul lose no
   time in exploring the possibilities suggested by Sir Bernard [Lo-
   vell] in his letter to James Webb, NASA’s   head. The Russians may
   be sincere about the matter; anyhow, we should try to find out
   whether they are or not.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/12/63)
 NASA announced three-year $400,000 grant to Univ. of Washington
   for research in new, advanced ceramics and the improvement of
   existing materials for use in the space program and for indus-
   trial applications. (NASA Release 63-180; AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
   8/12/63)
306           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

August 12: NASA Director of International Programs Arnold Frutkin
     discussed U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative meteorological satellite pro-
     gram in Aviation Week and Space Technology interview. Begin-
     ning late next year, NASA would launch Nimbus meteorological
     satellites into polar orbit and U.S.S.R. would launch polar orbit-
     ing satellites. Paths of two satellites would be phased SO that the
                                                                       E
     are 90” apart, so that one satellite of each pair will cross eac
     spot on globe every six hours. (Av. WE., 8/12/63)
 Experiments to determine behavior of dust on moon’s surface de-
     scribed by Dr. John W. Salisbury of AFCRL Space Physlcs Labora-
     tory in O A R Research Review. Conducted in lunar simulation
     chamber in which effects of low pressure, radiation, and tempeTa-
     ture on hysical properties of probable lunar surface materials
             B
     were stu ied, experiment demonstrated for first time that silicate
     powders, like metals, adhere to one another in ultrahigh vacuums.
     Particles also adhere to glass and metal surfaces. Experiment
      director Salisbury concluded “properly designed vehicles will not
      sink away into a sea of lunar dust, should one exist. The tend-
     ency of dust particles to stick to all metal and glass surfaces will.
      however, provide an unusual difficulty in the operation of camera
     lenses, portholes and mirrors.” ( O A R Research Review, 8/12/63,
     34)
  I n address before National Editorial Association’s airplane division,
     inserted in Congressional Record by Rep. Garner E. Shriver
      (R.-IZans.) ,Boeing Co. president William M. Allen discussed pro-
      posed Government-industry program to develop supersonic trans-
      port aircraft in light of past progress in U.S. aircraft develop-
      ment. “The first large expansion of passenger air transportation
      in 1931 employed trimotored airplanes each of which provided on
      the average, in actual operation, about 3,500 seat-miles of trans-
      portation per day. These airplanes cost $75,000 each. I n rapid
      jumps we have been able successively to increase the ca ability of
      the product until now, in the form of the 707 or the XC-8, it is
      delivering 400,000 seat-miles per day, which is 114 times the out-
      put of the 1931 trimotor. The jet airplane cost is $6 million, or
      80 times the cost of the trimotor.
         “Each step of progress which has made this change possible has
      been larger than the one before, and the jump to supersonic is by
      far the largest of all. The development cost has mounted accord-
      ingly . . . .” H e cited Boeing’s financing in 1935 of prototype
      four-engine airplane which became the F ing Fortress, at cost of
                                                1
      $660,000, and Boeing’s designin and builiing in 1952 of first U.S.
      jet transport, at cost of nearly $20 million. “A prototype super-
      sonic transport of the type regarded now as most practical is esti-
      mated to cost a possible $150 million . . . .
         “Already Boeing has expended in the neighborhood of $15 mil-
      lion on supersonic transport study . . . . But the big costs are
      still ahead in supersonic prototype development . . . .
         “It becomes evident that there is valid reason for the initiative
      which our Government is taking in developing means to finance
      the program and that the continued coo eration of Government,
      the manufacturing industry and the airyine industry is required
                                                                  307
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3

   in working out a program that can be practically accomplished
   with the economic capability of industry and will serve the
   national interest.
      “In carrying out this program and undertaking to meet the
   intensive competition which we will face from abroad, we feel it is
   important, as Federal Aviation Agency Administrator N. E. Hal-
   aby has recognized, that we retain the advantages of the private
   enterprise system of contractual responsibility which has proved
   so effective in the past . . . .’, (Text, CR, 8/12/63, A5106-07)
August l a : Transfer of Pacific Missile Range from USN to USAF would
   be accomplished in six months, Missiles and Rockets reported.
   USN would retain F’t Mugu portion and continue to operate range
                        .
   instrumentation ships; Pt. Arguello would be merged with
   Vandenberg ~ mwhich would be transferred from Strategic Air
                        ,
   Command to AF Systems Command. New division to be created
   under AFSC would operate PMR, AMR, and Satellite Test Center
    (composed of Sunnyvale facilities and Hickam AFB recovery
   youp). (M&R, 8/12/63,12)
 U. . Weather Bureau was considering purchasing Japanese weather
   observation rockets from Prince Motors, Ltd., of Tokyo. (M&R,
   8/12/63, 9)
August 19-16: International Symposium on the International Geo-
   physical Year held in Los Angeles and attended by 300 scientists
   from 32 countries. Sponsored by Geophysics Research Board
   of NAS-NRC, symposium featured discussions of discoveries made
   and advances achieved since beginning of IGY in 1957. (NASA
   AFC, Consolidated C d e d w , 6/15/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 8/12/63)
 Conference on artificial satellites held a t Virginia Polytechnic
   Institute, Blacksburg, Va., sponsored b \.’PI in cooperation with
    Sational Science Foundation and XASA Langley Research Center.
    13 NASA scientists and engineers were among the featured speakers.
    (;.:ass Re!eaee 63 ??3)
       Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Director of Space Sciences, said
   in introductory lecture :
       “Those who argue that we should dispense with the frills of
   science and s ace exploration, and concentrate on the necessities
    of military Ievelopment, forget that we can’t really say what
   the military necessities in s ace will be. Our crystal ball is
    not that good, and it w o u l d L foolhardy to pretend that it is.
   We do not wish to develop a Maginot l i e in space, only to have
   it flanked by forces of greater flexibility. We need to develop
   in a broad way our space capability so that we shall have the
    ability to move in any direction required by future events to
    meet any threats along whatever lines may develop.
       “. . . Out of this broad activity in space will come the ability
   of the United States to use space and to operate in space either
   as it may chose to do voluntarily or may find itself compelled
   to do in its own defense. The development of our ability to
    operate in s ace including manned space flight, gives to our
    country anotKer dimension in which to meet the challenges-both
    opportunities and threat-f      the future. We can do engineering
    in space, advance our science in a way that cannot be accomplished
308             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

      at the surface of the earth, and extend the range of practical
      applications for the benefit of man. And, if necessary, we can
      thwart the attempts of any enemy to use space against us.
          “In this day and age we cannot afford to ignore this last point.
      I n our own self interest, and for the safety of our country, we
      cannot permit others to develop space capabilities that we cannot
      match, and that may, therefore, be used disastrously against us.
          “This is a capability we must have to ensure our survival in
      the s ace age as the independent, self-determining nation that our
          P
       fore athers set us up to be, and that we have always insisted on
      bein
          “&is is the capability that we shall have from the development
      of the ability to investigate scientifically with satellites and space
      probes, and from space applications, from the ability to perform
      manned space flight and manned space operations, from the vast
      complex of manufacturing and assembly plants, launchings com-
       plexes, tracking and telemetering facilities, and from the invalu-
       able experience that this initial stage in the space program will
       give us.
          “This is the most significant point about the present era in
       space. This is the most important aspect of the present activity
       in space.
          “We are now laying the groundwork for whatever role we may
       have to play in space in the future. We are ensuring that no
       one will ever be in a position to use space against us while we,
       helpless and frustrated through lack of the necessary space capa-
       bility, have to take what comes . . . .” (Text)
           Dr. Wilmot N. Hess of Goddard Space Flight Center told
       Conference August 14 that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion
       in 1962 provided new information for determining path and rate
       of decay of high-energy electrons, thus providing better under-
       standing of the Van Allen radiation belts. “While the nuclear
       explosion shortened the lives of some satellites and increased the
       intensity of radiation around the globe, it had a valuable side
       effect.
           “To students of the Van Allen belt, it was almost like having
       a controlled experiment in space . . . .” (AP, N Y T , 8/15/63,
       11)
          ANNA I geodetic satellite’s flashing beacons had resumed after
       more than two months of blackout, Richard B. Kershner of Johns
       Hopkins Univ. ,Qpplied Physics Laboratory disclosed in Aug. 15
       press conference. I n Blacksburg for Artificial Satellites Confer-
       ence, Kershner said: “We have no explanation for the lights
       coming back on two weeks ago. We don’t like to believe in space
       gremlins, but we’ve reached the mint where that’s as good an
       explanation as any.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 8/16/63)
           Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research
       Center, addressed banquet. Dr. Thompson called on educators
        attending the conference to join with NASA and other research or-
        ganizations to develop new and more effective means for accel-
        erating effective distribution and assimilation of newly acquired
        research information. He cited prospective establishment of Vir-
                                                                 309
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,        19 6 3

     ‘nia Associated Research Center (VARC) adjacent to the ~ a a c
   fpace Radiation Effects Laboratory at Newport Xews, Va., as
   a new and imaginative device to promote flow of knowledge be-
   tween a major laboratory and three outstanding Virginia institu-
   tions of higher learning. (Lam Release)
                   c.  Kraft, Jr., Chief of N A ~ AManned Spacecraft
      Christopher
   Center’s Flight Operations Div., said Aug. 16 :
      “The first U.S. manned spaceflight program [Project Mercury]
   was designed to (1) put a man into earth orbit,. (2) observe his
   reactions to the space environment, and (3) brmg him back to
   Earth safely at a point where he could be readily recovered. All
   of these objectives have been accomplished, and some have pro-
   duced more information than we expected to receive . . . .   ,,
      Discussing the stringent reliability requirements of manned
   space flight: “The smallest mistake in a man-rated system can
   bring totally unexpected results. The unexpected is the rule
   in the unknown, and if man is going to live in the region beyond
   our atmosphere, he is going to live under new rules o r not at all.
   We hare been aware of these rules . . . but they have not been
   brought to our attention so vividly as they have in the manned
   flightprogram . . . .
      “The manned space flight pro am has added greatly to our
                                     f
   knowledge of the universe aroun us and demonstrated that man
   has a proper role in exploring it. There are many unknowns that
   lie ahead in space, but we are reassured because we are confident
   in overcoming them by using man’s capabilities to the full-
   est . . . . We now depend on man in the loop to back u p automa-
   tic systems rather than using automatic systems alone to insure
   that the mission is accomplished . . . . We have arrived at what
   we think is the proper mixture of that formula. Man is the decid-
   ing element ; but we cannot ignore the usefulness of the automatic
    syst~rns~”
      Kraft told news conference that two engine problems were en-
   countered in the Titan I1 booster for Project Gemini. Titan
   11’s first stage generated chugging oscillation which could cause
   “the pilots to have their eyeballs shook out.’’ Second stage engine
   was producing only about 90% of desired thrust. Both problems
   apparently were associated with turbine drive mechanisms
    (M ~ Release 63-126 ;AP, Chk.Trib., 8/17/63)
          C
      Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Deputy Director of Tracking and
   Data Acquisition, discussed satellite data recovery and tracking
   system for manned satellite program. He described the manned
   space flight network used in Project Mercury and the augmenta-
   tions planned for support of Project Gemini, concluding:
      “. . . while certain equipment augmentations will be effected,
   many of the techniques learned during the Mercury program,
   particularly in terms of procedures required to assure positive
   Network support, will be utilized in Gemini and in this way, an
   ever-increasing background of know-how will be available for
   the extremely complex missions which will be encountered i        n
   the manned lunar landing program shortly to be upon US.”
August 13: Spokesman for Westinghouse Defense Center, which was
310           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    preparing program definition study of nonmilitary navigational
    satellite under NASA contract, predicted navigation by satellite
    could become reality “in three or four years . . . . Using elec-
    tronic sensors, the system would determine automatically the po-
    sition of each ship or aircraft with respect to known references
    and relay this information to a ground station. This station
    would then compute the navigation ‘fix’ and relay this informa-
    tion to the user via the satellite . . . .” (Space Bus. Daily,
    8/13/63,230)
August 13: Sen. E. L. Bartlett (D.-Alaska) introduced in Senate a
   bill (S. 2038) to establish a Congressional Office of Science and
   Technology (COST) advise and assist members and committees
                         to
   of the Congress on matters relating to science and technology.
   Bill was referred to Senate Committee on Rules and Administra-
   tion. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/125)
 Speaking on floor of Senate, Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) ad-
   vocated deployment of Nike-Zeus and development of more
    advanced antimissile missiles :
       “Imagine a world, tmaty or no treaty, in which the Soviets had
   achieved a substantial lead in development of an anti-IcsM.
   Where then would be the sword and shield of peace S What then
    would be the position of the Soviets to back their aggressions,
   and what would be our ability to sto them?
                                         1
       “President Kennedy is fully confi ent that we can put a man
   on the moon-no mean feat-and is willing to spend $5 billion
    ayeartodoit . . . .
       “I have talked enough to competent scientists and engineers
    who believe that a good anti-rcBM. capable of protecting the
    American people, would be no tougher task. Rut of course it
    would require an equal enthusiasm, money, and effort as our moon
    program does to accomplish. HOW         can we fail to apply any-
   thing less than our best efforts to produce it 8 . .” (CR, 8/13/63,
   14043)
August 14: New information on solar wind, obtained from analysis
   of data from MARINER 11 interplanetary probe, released by Na-
   tional Academy of Sciences. Data showed continuous flow of
   solar wind from sun due to expansion of solar corona. Velocity
   of solar wind is between 300 and 800 mi. per sec., indicating great
   fluctuations in coronal ex ansion. Temperature of solar wind
   ranges around 500,000”. <pn approximately 20 occasions, velocity
   of solar wind increased from 20 to 100% in periods of a day or
   two; these fluctuations correlated with maqnetic disturbances on
   earth. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Btnr, 8/14/63)
 At JPL briefing of NASA Hq. scientists, it was reported that Ranger
   6 would be ready for flight to the moon by about Thanksgiving
   and Mariner 3 would be available for flight past Mars by fourth
   quarter of 1964. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/63)
 AEC announced discovery of “anti-xi-zero” antiparticle by team of
   physicists from Yale Vniv. and AEC’S Brookhaven National Labo-
   ratory. AEC said discovery confirmed fundamental theory of
     hysics which states that for every elementary particle there must
   { an antiparticle. Anti-xi-zero antiparticle filled in the final
    e
                                                                    311
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 0 3

    gap in family of elementary particles and their antiparticles,
         %%id. (Carey, AP, Nashrille Tennessean, 8/15/63)
    AEC
Bugust 14: ‘LA   Report Covering Evaluation of Areas Considered for
    Proposed ~ - 4 Electronics Research Center,” by Robert C. Sellers
                      s~
   & Associates, inserted in Congres&md Record by Rep. John W.
   Wydler (R.-N.Y.). Report concluded :
                   statistics on graduate educational capability in the
       “1. NASA’s
    Boston area do not stand up as against that of New York [metro-
    politan area].
                   inference that the industrial complex in the Boston
       “2. NASA’s
    area offers potential benefits does not stand up KI light of the cur-
    rent backlogs in that area without expansion of existing organi-
    zations, as against New Yolk’s Long Island area.
       “3. I n reviewing NASA’s  statements, the Senate and House com-
   mittees should also ask : After seeing overexpansion’s disruptive
    effects in other areas of the h’ation, is it good planning to create
    a new situation when other areas can support their needs with
   minimal expansion 2’’ (Seller Report, CR,8/14/63, 14203-04)
 Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Titan I 1 program director, quoted as
                                         1
    saying USAF planned to fly at least 10 X-20 (Dyna Soar) space-
   craft, the first two to be unmanned and remaining eight carrying
    astronauts. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63,238)
 Reported that a US. military satellite, launched by Agena, had
   established a record 46 days of operation under continued atti-
   tude stabilization. (Space Bus.Dad 8/14/63)
 President Kennedy named Eugene R. Black, former president of
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as
   special adviser on financing development of U.S. supersonic
   transport airplane. Stanley deJ. Osborne, chairman of Olin
   Mathieson Chemical Corp., would assist Black as deputy adviser.
    (Wall Street J o u d , 8j15 j 6 3 ;CTPS, Chic. Trib., 8/15/63)
 Missile tests for Project Dazzle? a defense research program to de-
   velop antimissile missiles, involving cooperation between the
   United States, Britain, and Australia, would be conducted at Aus-
   tralia’s big Woomera rocket range, using the British-developed
   Black IZnight rocket.
      Project Dazzle would involve identifying and tracking missiles
   re-entering the earth’s atmosphere from space. The program
   would include basic research into the physical phenomena asso-
   ciated with the re-entry of objects from space. Australian and
   British natural scientists would be responsible for analyzing the
   results recorded by an instrumentation system provided by ARPA.
    ( U S . Naval Institute Proceedings, November, 1963; The Chris-
   tk.n 8c;ence Monitor, 8/14/63)
 Dr. Albert J. Kelley, NAs&Director of Electronics and Control, %id
   in address before Fourth International Electronic Circuit Pack-
   aging Symposium :
      “Electronics and its associated disciplines constitute the brain,
   nerves and senses of flight vehicles. It is estimated that about 40
   per cent of our booster costs, 70 per cent of our major spacecraft
   dollars, and 90 per cent of our tracking and data acquisition funds
   go into electronics. Unfortunately, in the same context approxi-
312          ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   mately 90 per cent of our flight failures, not to mention flight
   delays, arise from electronic failures. Success in this area is
   obviously a major factor in over-all mission accomplishment since
   a dead or unintelligent vehicle is useless if it cannot measure data
   and send it back to earth . . . .
      “NASA electronic research must satisfy the following require-
   ments :
      “Undertake, under contract and in-house, advances in the elec-
   tronic art to meet the requirements of future space flight.
      “Guide industry and university sponsored research, in space
   electronics, into channels useful to both NASA and the sponsoring
   industry.
      “Provide facilities to verify the performance of advanced elec-
   tronic equipment developed for space use, irrespective of source
   of funding.
      ”Conceive, develop, ground test, flight test and interpret data
   for NASA flight experiments designed to prove advanced electronic
   equipment ‘in-use.’ ”
      Dr. Kelley then described the functions of the proposed Elec-
   tronics Research Center, which would be “the focal point of our
   electronics research efforts.” (Text)
August 14: GSFC scientist reported U.S. nuclear blast above Pacific in
   1962 disclosed key data on travel pattern and life of high-ener,gy
   particles in Van Allen belt with accuracy to a distance of 5,000 mi.
    ( A d A E ,Oct. 1963,7)
 FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby predicted in news conference
    that US. supersonic transport aircraft “will be in actual air
    service not more than six months after the [British-French] Con-
    corde starts carrying passengers.” Prototype of Concorde was
    expected to be flying by end of 1966. Mr. Halaby said U.S.
    should be able to test-fly supersonic transport by 1967 that would
   be “better, faster and longer-ranged with superior handling and
    capacity characteristics.” ( UPI, N Y T , 8/15/63,48)
 FCC Chairman E. William Henry predicted in address to American
    Bar Association’s Committee on Communications, meeting in
    Chicago, that a single communications satellite eventually may
    equal carrying capacity of all telephone cable circuits between
    U.S. and rest of the world. Last pear 5 million telephone calls
    were made from U.S. to 176 countries. Existing facilities prob-
    ably will be used to capacity by 1965, he said, and $500-million
    international communications system will be in operation by 1970.
    New transistorized cable, with capacity of almost six times present
    capacity, will be available. (Wolters, Chic. Tm’b., 8/15/63)
Augmt 25: SYNCOM 11 communications satellite was successfully ma-
    neuvered into synchronous position 55” west longitude, over
    Brazil and South Atlantic Ocean. The satellite was slowed from
    westward drift speed of 1.2O per day to nearly zero drift by firing
    of onboard nitrogen jets. Previous firings of hydrogen peroxide
    jets occurred Aug. 11, when BYNCOM 11 was slowed from 7” drift
    per day to 2.7” drift per day, and Aug. 12. when satellite was re-
    duced to 1.2O drift. Firings were directed by engineers at NASA
    Goddard Space Flight Center, and actual command was executed
                                                                    313
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     from ground station at Lakehnrst, N.J. SYNCOM II was now sta-
     tioned about 22,300-mi. altitude and traveling a t speed of about
     6,800 mph, matching earth’s rotation speed of 1,040 mph at equa-
     tor to keep it on station. It was hovering in figure-8 pattern
     33” north and south of equator. NASA Administrator James E.
     Webb called completion of the positioning maneuvers the cul-
     mination of “one of the outstanding feats in the history of space
     flight.” (NASA “SYNCOM 1 Fact Sheet”; NASA Release 63-185)
                                  1
A u g h t 15: Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space
     Flight Center, announced appointment of Robert B. Young as
     MSFC Director of Projects and Industry Operations. Presently
     Vice President and General Manager of Aerojet General Corp.’s
     Sacramento Plant, Young would assume his MSFC position Nov. 1.
      (NASA Release 63-184)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in letter to Sen. Thomas
     Kuchel (R.-Calif.) : “It is not NAGA policy to direct or instruct
     its prime contractors as to where to place their subcontracts or the
     identity of subcontractors.” Statement was in response to Sena-
     tor Kuchel’s request for comment on charges that NASA was order-
     ing contracts be awarded in specified locations. NASA provisions
     in prime contracts regarding subcontracting policy : selection of
     subcontractors be made “on a competitive basis to the maximum
     practical extent”; subcontracts be awarded to small business firms
     in labor-surplus areas “to the maximum practical extent”; NASA
     must approve contractor’s plan to manufacture more than $1
     million worth of space work outside of contractor’s own plants;
     and NASA reviews contractor’s basis for selecting proposed sub-
     contractor “and the de-        of competition obtained by the prime
     contractor.” (MacDougall, Wash. Post, 8/16/63)
  Dr. T. L. K. Smull, NASA Director of Grants and Research Con-
     tracts, said in commencement address, Univ. of Georgia :
         “Today we are dealing not only with profound changes in a
     social and economic structure of our country and of the world;
     we are dealing as well with even more profound changes in man’s
     o m conception of the boundaries and limitations of his habitable
     environment and of his understanding of the forces of the
     universe.
         “Therefore, the opportunities available to you graduates in the
     next decade are, in a very real sen?, boundless. The challenges
     of tomorrow are not just for the scientist, the engineer, and the
     technician working toward scientific developments, but for all
     men and women in all professions-for every one of you.. Even
      if science is not your field, you must understand what it .implies
      simply because science will continue affecting your lives with even
     greater impact as each year passes . . . .
         “Never before has a civllization seized upon and exploited a
     new technology at the rate man is now exploring the new dimen-
     sion of space. I n the 2,060 days since the Russians launched
      Sputnik, NASA has conducted 96 major vehicle lsunchings, a        n
      average of one every 22 days. I n this period, the USSR has
      announced about 35 successful space flights.
     741-623 -
             2
             1
314           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

                impressive accomplishments will be dwarfed b United
       “NASA’s
                                                            c9
    States activities during the rest of this decade as our’un erstand-
    ing of the nature of space, the sun, and the map of the Universe
    is reatly enhanced.
       ‘In an age of exploding knowledge in all of the physical
    sciences no area of human activity better focuses and dramatizes
    the meaning of today than does this boldest, most challenging
    arena of space . . . .” (Text)
August 15: FAA issued to industry the Re uest for Proposals establish-
    ing performance objectives for U%. supersonic transport air-
    plane. Initial designs were to be submitted to FAA by Jan. 15,
    1964. (FAA Release 63-76)
 Rep. R. C. Pucinski (D,-Ill.) introduced in House an amendment to
    Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to make illegal any civil super-
    sonic aircraft within U.S. that generated sonic boom over-
    pressures exceeding 1.5 lbs. per sq. ft. on ground directly beneath
    its flight path. (OR,   8/15/G3,14271-76)
 85-ft.-tall research balloon drifted out over Pacific Ocean at 90,000-
    ft. altitude and was reported “hopelessly lost” by balloon flight
    center at Palestine, Tex. Balloon was sent aloft Aug. 13 to gather
    meteor particles, and had been intended to land a t Pecos, Tex.
     (UPI,Wash. Post, 8/16/63)
 Findings of Trendex survey of public attitude on space exploration,
    conducted by Hicks and Greist, Inc., advertising agency : “There
    seems to be a definite relationship between age and attitude to-
    ward the space program. Generally, there is an increasingly
     negative opinion about the program with increase in age . . . .”
     (Kaselow. N.Y. Hero71 Trib.. 8/15/63)
  ESAF successfully fired Titan I ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, a routine
    training launch by SAC crew. ( DOD Release 1142-63)
August 16: NASA announced it arid Soviet Academy of Sciences had
    approved Memorandum of Understanding providinq for imple-
    mentation of cooperative space agreement reached June 1962 in
    Geneva. Memorandum outlined procedures for ITS-U.S.S.R.
    exchange of meterological data from weather satellites operated
    bv each country, joint communications experiments using Echo
    I1 passive reflector satellite, and contributions of geomagnetic
     data from snecial respective satellites to World Magnetic Survey
     in 1965. Memorandum of TJnderstandinp was drafted at meet-
    ings between U.S. negotiators, led by NASA Deputv Administrator
    Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Soviet negotiators led by Academician
    Anatoli A. Blagonravov, Chairman of Commission of Explora-
    tion and Utilization of Outer Space of Soviet Academy of
     Sciences. (Memorandum of Understanding; N;\EA Release 63-
     186)
  At International Geophysical Year Conference in Los Angeles, Dr.
     W. G. Reynon of Great Britain said that plans for another ICY of
    international cooperation during 1968-69 peak sunspot activity
     were beinq discussed bv Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) .
      (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/16/63)
                                                                             315
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

-4ugust 17: NASA Ames Research Center announced laboratory syn-
    thesis of Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) molecule, universal
    medium of energy exchange in earth’s life-forms. ATP was most
    complex molecule yet produced in a laboratory, according to Dr.
    Cyril Ponnamperuma of Ames Exobiology Dlv., who performed
    the experiment by shining ultraviolet light on nine combina-
    tions of chemical mixtures. Dr. Ponnamperuma said the nine
    different mixtnres may have resembled composition of earth’s
    oceans at the d a m of life four billion years ago. “Such experi-
    ments are lending significant support to the theory that biological
    molecules, which are the prerequisites of life, could have appeared
    by the interaction of forces and materials which existed on the
    earth before life did.” Collaborating in the ATP synthesis were
    Dr. Carl Sagan of Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory, on the
    theoretical level, and Ruth Mariner of Ames. (AP, Wash. Sun.
    Star, 9/18/63)
  Centaur stage was fired for first time with both R L l O engines
    equipped with flight-type propellant su ply systems. Conducted
     at General Dynamics!Astronautics, 8an Diego, test ran for
     planned 30 sec. in steam-diffusion chamber to simulate space
    vacuum. ( M d R , 8/26/63,12)
  NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization
     and Policy Planning, Julian Scheer, said Lt. Col. John A. Powers,
     former Public Affairs Officer a t NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
     would become technical consultant to NASA’s                exhibits program at
     Hq., effective Sept. 1. Colonel Powers would supxvise construc-
     tion of spacecraft models used in NASA exhibits. (AP, Wash.
    Sun. Star, 8/18/63)
  NASA-DOD agreement on Manned Orbital Research and Development
    System (MORDS) was signed, which required AACB to coordinate
    all study contracts. (Joint N-~FA-DOD Release)
* AFGZ 2 l i f i G i i l i C d thg m p m t i v e , tx--ser&e p e e p ” cnnducted to
    build a new family of ~TOL. The three services mere sharing
    equally in funding, support, and evaluation of the 5-19, XC-
     142A, and the X-22A experimental aircraft. (AFSC Opem-
     tional Highlights, 12)
August 18: According to results of survey b x’ational Industrial
                                                       9
    Conference Board, about two per cent o US. working popu-
    lation and nearly one third of its scientists and engineers are
    engaged in research and development. Survey also showed total
    RBD spending, including both private industry and Government,
    is more than $17 billion per year. I n 1960, more than one half
     of overall financing came from Federal government. Defense,
    atomic energy, and spztce projects accounted for 57% of all r e
    sources devoted to %D in 1960. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/63)
  Re . Gerald R. Ford (R.-Mich.), Chairman of House Republican
    Eonference, named Rep. Charles S. Gubser (R.-Calif head of
     10-member study group to make a “constructive a n i positive
     examination’’ of aeronautics and space fields. (UPI, NYT,
     8/19/63)
316           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

August 19: House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on
   Independent Offices began hearings on ~ ~ s a- proprintions for
                                                   E 4
   FY 1964. NASA Administrator James E. Web said in opening
   statement before the executive meeting :
      “I urge that your Committee approve the total amount of
   appropriations authorized. I should like to point out that even
   if the full amount requested by the President were authorized
   and appropriated, we face in these funds and in the plants of
   the contractors a similar situation to that with our own Centers
   where they requested 2,000 more people than we were able to
                                                                 r0-
   approve under the budget restriction. I n our manned space
   gram we will be short between one hundred and two hun red
   million dollars out of the three billion dollars requested by the
   President. We are prepared to operate with a tight belt, we are
   prepared to operate without contingencies. However, I do want
   to point out to the Committee that we are still going to have a
   serious problem if we encounter any major difficulties in the form
   of a catastrophe on the launching ad or with a test station.
                                       K
      “I should also like to say to t e Committee that after the
   Authorization Bill has been enacted and after the Appropriations
   Bill has been passed, we are going to prepare an over-all o
   ing plan. We plan to show it to both the House and
    Space Committess and we will be happy to show it to the Appro-
     riations Committees. With this re-examination and the basis
   !r committing the funds actually appropriated, we d l be in
    o
   a pasition where we will know what our situation is and whether
    we will have to ask for a supplemental appropriation . . . .    77

    (Testimony, NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/128)
 Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on
   Independent Offices, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L.
   Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned
   lunar landing program :
      “There are three principal candidates for what might be called
   the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory ; the
   further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplane-
   tary travel.
      “One difficulty is the definition. MERCURY is a one-man orbital
   laboratory; GEMINI is a two-man orbital laboratory; APOLLO is a
   three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the dura-
   tion of the trip to the moon.
      “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you
    want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men?
      “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both
   the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We
   have agreed there should be only one project for the time being
   because this will be a 2 or 3 billion roject. We have agreed we
   will not proceed unilaterally. A $cision, of course, has to be
   made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this
   fieldoranother . . . .
      “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is
    a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and,
   figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few
                                                                              317
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    days. Or you mi ht convert a whole lunar bug to a freight car-
                        f
    rier to extend the engtli of stay. You can go from that to a lunar
   base where you try to build a station, as in the Antarctic, that
    man can occupy for sometime . . . .
       “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and cer-
    tainly Congress will be involved in it.
       “There are people who favor one or another of these projects.
    I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory a being the
                                                          s
    next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds
    on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to
    a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been
    in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a
    trip to Mars or Venus and back.
       ‘As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this
    kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say a t this
    time when the hardware will be recommended by the administra-
    tion. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has
    priority is the possible military application.” ( e r n s. . .
                                                         Haig
    Independent Oflices Appropriations for FY 1964, Part 3,242-243)
Bugust 19: New evidence verifying existence of long-lived solar
   plasma streams in interplanetary space was published in article
   by four GSFC scientists in Physicd Reuiem Letters. Evidence was
    based on data gathered by EXPLORER IX energetic particles satel-
                                           I
    lite: On two occasions the satellite observed solar events produc-
    ing solar plasma streams. Indication that they were long-lived
    was revealed when the plasma streams caused geophysical dis-
    turbances more than 20 days after the streams were created.
     (OSFG Release 6-14-63)
9 National Geographic Society announced two scientists with astro-

    nomical instruments were recently lofted by plastic-skinned bal-
    loon to 15-mi. altitude in experiment to m r d radio sounds from
              auvuai Cl---h;~  Cnn;.-.tV n lU&Cl iI m ~ ~ &he?
                                                      d~
    a~niia. nT-+:---l                                             -nnt      aden-
    -L-
                      uwg~ayiuu
            ~i                 WVV*VYJ   V          .             Ivv-A--
                                                         VYllVL             y----



   tific contributions by man’s oldest means of flight, including
   balloon-lifted telesc0p:c camera which made unprecedented photo-
    graphs of sunspots and another instrumented payload which ob-
    tained man‘s clearest observations of planet Mars. Balloon-car-
   ried instrumentation now probing upper atmosphere is obtaining
    valuable data on astrophysics, meteorology, and aeromedicine.
     (Chic. Trib., S/20/63)
  Communications Satellite Corp. announced award of contract to
   Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. for computer services to facili-
   tate ComSatCorp’s comparative global satellite communications
   system studies. (ComSatCorp Release)
  MGsiZes and Rockets quoted NASA spokesman on lettar from Sir
    Bernard Love11 in which the British astronomer indicated
    U.S.S.R. wanted to explore possibilities of cooperatmg with U.S.
    in lunar exploration program:
       “[The letter] . . . represents the personal impressions of a pri-
    vate individual on a matter of the greatest obscurity, namely the
    Soviet space program. . . .
       “It doesn’t seem wise to give the letter any undue importance,
    although we wereglad to get it . . . .
318           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

      “We already have a channel of communication, namely the dis-
   cussions between Dr. Dryden and Soviet Academician Blagon-
   ravov. It is reasonable to expect that channel would be used for
   a serious proposal.” (M&R, 8/19/63, 21)
August 19; Tremendous atmospheric explosion in Kimberley Moun-
   tains of Western Australia was reported by observers, who saw
   trail of smoke and ball of orange flame and heard the explosion.
   Australian Weather Ofc spokesman said cause was unknown but
                         fie
   suggested possibility of artificial satellite’s exploding during at-
   mospheric re-entry. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 8/21/63)
 DOD plans for consolidation and expansion of the three U.S. missile
   ranges would be closely reviewed by National Aeronautics and
   Space Council to see if they duplicate NASA plans, Aviation Week
   and space Technology reported. (Au. WE., 8/19/63,30-31)
 Nat Welch, Federal representative on Southern Interstate Nuclear
   Board, suggested to Southern Governor’s Conference ways to at-
   tract and develop nuclear and space industries in their states:
      “Suggestion 1. Be a champion of education . . . . Your great-
   est contribution in your State is to see that educational budgets
   are substantially increased . . . .
      “Suggestion 2. Capitalize on the nuclear and space industries
   in our State. Industry begets industry . . . .
      ‘Suggestion 3. Exploit your new breakthroughs . . . [such as,
   for Louisiana] NASA’s Miclioud plant . . . .
                          new
      “Suggestion 4. Build a solid legislative base now for the growth
   of nuclear and space industries . . . .
      “Suggestion 5. Work with your congressional leaders . . . .
      “Suggestion 6. Romance your unique advantages . . . . Care-
   full inventory your industrial advantages . . . .
      duggestion 7. Encourage the entrepeneur as well as the scien-
   tist . . . .
      “Suggestion 8. Lend a helping hand to your existing indus-
   tries . . . .
      “Suggestion 9. Recognize and appreciate [achievements of
   industriesin your State] . . . .
      “Suggestion 10. Do your homework well . . . .
      “Your efforts in promoting the growth of nuclear and space
    industries will help not only your State but the entire
   re ion . . . .
      ‘Your efforts will also substantially contribute to the attain-
   ment of national goals. As President Kennedy points out, if we
   can increase our growth rate from 3 to 5 percent a year this will
   substantially aid in providing employment for all of our people,
   in increasing Federal revenues, and in creating a more dynamic
   economy.” (Text, CR 8/20/63, A5312-13)
 On 10th anniversary of flrst successful Redstone missile launching,
   Army fired Redstone rocket at White Sands Missile Range in
   successful test by Redstone Field Artillery unit. ( M & R , 8/26/63,
   14)
 USN launched Polaris A-3 from land pad at AMR in “very successful”
   flight test. (M&R,8/26/63,14)
                                                                  319
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

August 19: Informants said in Cairo that Egyptian scientists were
    interested in obtaining a satellite tracking station from U.S.
    (AP,     Wash. Post, 8/20/63)
August 20: *4sked in press conference about U.S.-U.S.S.R. collabo-
   ration in manned lunar flight program, President. Kennedy said :
   “Well, we haven’t had any success in reaching any agreement.
   The kind of agreement, to be really meaningful, would require a
   good deal of inspectZion both sides, and there’s no evidence as
                               on
   yet that the Soviet Cnion is prepared to accept that. All we’ve
   gotten was an agreement to exchange weather information. We
   haven’t anything more substantial.” (Transcript, NYT, 8/21/63)
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric said in testimony
   before Senate Committee on A4ppropriations’Subcommittee on
   DOD Appropriations: “Our goal is to establish, a t an early date,
   a developmental communications satellite system consisting of a
   minimum number of simple, reliable satellites together with a
   minimum number of widely spaced ground stations, which can be
   tested and evaluated as a ‘package’ within the framework of the
   established military communications network. This p w r n
   would demonstrate the technical and operational charactemtics
   of such a system as well as its compatibility with the existing
   communications complex. The ability to transmit signals be-
   tween a satellite and two ground stations has a l y d y been demon-
   strated. But the ability of a ‘system,’ comprising a number of
   satellites and ground stations, to provide a reliable means of mili-
   tary communication has yet to be explored . . . .” (Testimony)
 Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant to DOD Director of Defense and
   Engineering, said in address to National Rocket Club in Wash-
   ington that DOD viewed X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini projects
   as “insurance” against uncertainties of future military manned
   space missions. Dr. Fubini expressed ho that DOD-NASA coop
                                             .R“
   c r a t i x in Gexici a d s 20 T d d px-CT:& wxe z2sxel2 t help
                                                                 3
   clarify man’s possible role in military space missions. (M&R,
   s/~s/s~, 14)  12,
 Army Corps of Engineers announced start of construction of world’s
   largest structure, the Vertical Assembly Building for Saturn V
   launch vehicle. VAB is being built on Merritt Island, adjacent to
   Cape Canaveral, Fla. As design and construction agent for
              manned space flight facilities, Corps was managmg con-
   NASA’s
   struction contracts in Merritt Island for NASA Launch Operations
   Center. (DOD Release 1141-63)
 Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aero-
   nautical and Space Sciences, inserted in Congrembnal Record an
   artkle from MbSiles and Rockets, which said :
      “The United States has gained more knowledge of outer space
   than the Russians because we’ve done a better overall job with
   our unmanned satellite program. We are using unmanned ve-
   hicles tu help predict weather around the world, to improve
   navigation, to make possible international television and other
   communications, and to keep track of what the enemy is doing
   to establish missiles and other weapon systems aimed at us.
320           ASTRONAUTICS                         19 6 3
                         AND AERONAUTICS,

       “Not only have we learned more about the planet Mars through
    unmanned space research, but we’ve gained much knowledge of
    the vast reaches of space in between and beyond . . . . We’ve
    pursued unmanned space research down far more streets and
    alleys than have the Soviets.
       “For the most part, our unmanned satellites are yielding knowl-
    edge that will assure success with manned flights into space i   n
    the future. For that reason, if no other, it is easy for the un-
    manned satellite program to be overlooked, its significance lost
    in the international competition of manned flights. This is a
    pity, for what we do in unmanned space exploration today is the
    very foundation on which we will build future manned space
    exploration.
       “In saying this we are not being artisan to the claim so oftan
                                        P
    heard these days that we ought to orget about, the manned pro-
    gram and explore space only with unmanned vehicles. We regard
    the controversy as a mere tempest in a teapot that will prove
    meaningless in time . . . .” (CR,       8/20/63)
A4ugust 21; USAF fired Titan I1 ICBM in 5,800-mi. flight down the At-
    lantic Missile Range, the missile carrying malfunction-detection
    system similar to the one to be incorporated in Titan I1 Gemini
    booster. The Titan I1 also carred scientific pod containing in-
    struments to study radiation in the missile’s exhaust plume.
     ( N Y T , 8/22/63, 2 2 ; M & R , 8/26/63, 14)
  S-1 stage for Saturn SA-5 launch vehicle arrived at Cape Canav-
    eral, having left NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville,
    Ala., by barge Aug. 10. (At?.Wk., 8/26/63, 33)
 Gordon M. Bain, FAB Deputy Administrator for supersonic Trans-
    port Development, told representatives of 11 foreign airlines that
    U.S. could build a safe, commercially profitable supersonic trans-
    port airliner. He stressed that “we don’t think we are lagging
    far behind” British-French development of Concorde. ( N Y T ,
    8/22/63)
 NASA announced it would negotiate contract with Pratt and Whitney
    Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for continuation of R L l O rocket
    engine development. Contract would complete the R L l O quali-
    fication program; it would specify improvements to be incor-
    porated in the liquid-hydrogen engine as well as certain support
    services to be provided to Centaur and Saturn vehicle systems.
    R L l O engines were being used to propel the Centaur upper-stage
    launch vehicle and the S-IV stage of Saturn I launch vehicle.
    (NASA Release 63-189)
 NASA selected General Electric’s Missile and Space Div. to develop
    recoverable biosatellite (Bios) system. Based on study contracts
    awarded to GE, Lockheed Missile and Space Co., and Northrop
    Corp. in April, new contract called for development, assembly,
    and testing of six 1,000-lb. flight spacecraft plus ground test
    vehicles. Biological experiments for the flights had not yet been
    defined. (NASA Release 63-190)
August 22: X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Joseph A. Walker to re-
    cord 354,200-ft. altitude (67.08 mi.), the aircraft attaining maxi-
    mum speed of 3,794 mph ( m x h 5.58) at 167,000-ft. altitude.
                                                                   321
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     Purpose of flight was to obtain data on stability and control in
     extreme ranges of flight, especially during re-entry from high
     altitude with X-15’s ventral fn removed. X-15 carried, for first
                                      i
     time, an altitude predictor using an internal computer t o provide
     instantaneous measurements of aircraft’s climb an le and rocket
                                                        7
     engine’s energy; these measurements were then re ayed to pilot
     through use of an altimeter displaying the predicted altitude.
     Immediately after launch from €3-52, X-15 went into steep climb
     about 4 4 O above horizontal, its engine burning full thrust for
     85.5 sec. On upward trajectory pilot Walker applied speed brakes
     to prevent excessive velocity. For about three min. he experienced
     near weightlessness. This was 91st flight of x-15 rocket research
     aircraft, 25th in X-15 by Walker. (NASA Release 63-191; FRC
     Release)
August 22.- President Kennedy pressed button at White House un-
     veiling by remote control the first USAF C-141A Starlifter jet
     transport a t Marietta, Gn. General Joe W. Kelly, MATS Com-
     mander, said the 550-mph aircraft “promises to be the fastest,
     most efficient and flexible airlift system in the world.” (WD Re-
     lease 1146-63 ;A-N-AF J o u d & Register, 8/24/63,5)
  Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President of Cal Tech, addressing Western
     Electronic Show and Convention banquet in San Francisco, noted
     that “many people talk about the space program as a scientific
     program. . . . [Actually] the engineers of the world ought to
     have credit.” Dr. DuBridge said scientific bases of space program
     were laid from 60 to 300 years ago, but enormous advances in
     engineering and rocketry in last 50 years had made space accom-
     plishments possible. “The scientists [of today] are working in
     their laboratories on things that may lay the groundwork for
     application 50 years from now.” (Davies, NFT, 8/23/63,38)
Augwvt 22-26: 310 nuclear physicists from 22 countries exchanged
     idepflg en high-energy nrrclerntnm at ronfewnm held in Dubna.
     U.S.S.R. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/28/63)
-4ugwvt 27: SYNCOM 11 communications satellite relayed its first live
     telephone conversations, a transmission between President Ken-
     nedy and Nigerian Prime Minister Sir Abubaker Tafawa Balewa
     and other messages between US., Nigerian, and U.N. officials.
     Arranged bv USIA. the demonstration program originated from
     the White House and Voice of America studios in Washington
     and from ground station aboard USNS Kingsport in Laqos Harbor,
     Nigeria. (Goddard News, 8/26/63,3 ; Av. Week, 9/2/63? 24)
  US.-Canada agreement for cooperative testing of communications
     satellites launched by NASA was announced by NASA and Canada’s
     Dept. of Transport. Each cooperating national agency would
     provide a ground station to receive and transmit television and
     multichannel telephone and teleqaphic signals via communica-
     tions s?tellites, according to Memorandum of Understanding
     signed in April and made operative by exchange of notes today.
   - (NASA Release 63-194)
  Senate-Honse conference committee on NABA F Y 1964 aiithorization
     bill (H.R. 7500), meeting in executive session, agreed to file con-
     ference report on differences between Senate-passed and House-
322           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   p     d versions of the bill. Conference committee’s bill would
   authorize total of $5,350,820,400 for NASA in FY 1964. (NASA
   Leg. A t Rpt. II/132)
          c.
August 2 : UBAF awarded two contracts in its program to develop
         3
   technology for large solid-fueled rocket motors : (1) $5 million
   contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp. for demonstration static-
   f i g of half-length 26O-in.-diameter motor of approximately 3
   million lbs. thrust and for demonstration static-firing of 156-in.-
   diameter, two-segment motor of 3 million lbs. thrust; and (2)
   $3 million contract to Aerojet General Corp. for demonstration
   static-firing of half-length 26O-in.-diameter motor of approxi-
   mately 3 million lbs. thrust. Based on results of these contracts,
   USAF will select one contractor to continue development of “21111-
   length” 260-in.-diameter motor. (Wall Street Journal, 8/26/63 ;
   space Bus. Daily, 8/28/63,307)
 Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science
   and Astronautics, announced formation of nine-man Subcom-
   mittee on Science, Research and Development. Chaired by Rep.
   Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) , Subcommittee would have
   following objectives : overall evaluation of scientific research and
   development throughout the 2ountry ; strengthening of Congres-
   sional sources of lnformation and advice on science and tech-
   nology; achievement of most effective utilization of scientific and
   engineering resources of U.S. to accomplish national goals; and
    Congressional overseeing of the National Science Foundation.
    (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/133)
 NASA M n e Spacecraft Center announced the 271 applicants for
         and
    astronauts had been screened to 30. Of these, 10-15 would be
   seleeted in late October. (AP, Wmh.Post, 8/29/63)
 Request for proposals to provide services and materials necessary
   for operating and maintaining X-15 “High Range” issued by
   NASA Flight Research Center. Range consisted of terminal sta-
   tion at Edwards AFB and two up-range statiom at Beatty and
   Ely, Nev. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/22/63,280)
 German Ministry of Defense ordered 140 Arcas sounding rockets
    from Atlantic Research Corp., through Bureau of Naval Weapons,
   to be used for meteorological soundings during IQsu. This same
   week Atlantic Research Corp. was issued patent for the seven-
    foot-long, solid-fueled Arcas. ( N Y T , 8/24/63 ; M&R, 8/26/63,
   9)
  Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric, in letter to Sen.
    Richard B. Russell, Chairman of Senate Committee on Armed
    Services, detailed the four safeguards to maintain national se-
    curity in connection with test ban treaty: “The conduct of com-
    prehensive, aggressive, and continuing underground nuclear test
    programs . . .; The maintenance of modern nuclear laboratory
    facilities and programs in theoretical and exploratory nuclear
    technology . . .; The maintenance of the facilities and resources
     necessary to institute promptly nuclear tests in the atmosphere
    should they be deemed essential to our national security . . .;
    The improvement of our capability . . . to monitor the terms
    of the treaty . . . .*’ (Letter)
                                                                                                 323
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

August 123: Balloon flight with instrumented payload to study oxygen
   conditions in stratosphere mas conducted successfully from Pales-
   tine, Tex., John Sparkman, manager of National Center for
   Atmospheric Research’s Balloon Flight Station, announced.
                                                                                  x
   Balloon rose to 108,000 ft.; its 680-lb. instrument ackage was
   recovered in good condition 40 mi. north of San ngelo, Tex,
   Three similar attempts had failed when balloon split on two
   occasions and weather forced postponement on a third. Project
   was sponsored by Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (Em-
   s t o n Post, 8/24/63)
 Donald T. Gr ory, Technical Assistant to Director of NASA Manned
    Spacecraft Tenter, addressed nearly 1,000 Dade Count edu-
                                                                                             Gating
   cators a t workshop for new teachers in Miami,. Fla.
   U.S. requires about 60,000 engineers yearly-while only 33,700
   graduated in 1963-Gregory emphasized the importance of
   teaching all children about scientific and technological events
   of the space age and stimulating their interest and knowledge in
   science and engineering at an early age. (MSC Release 63-139)
August 94: USAF SAC crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas
   ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (DOD Release 1174-63)
August 2%; USAF launched unidentified satellite from PMR using Thor-
   Agena D launch vehicle. (Pre8. Rpt. on Space, 196.3, 1/27/64)
August 26‘: Rep. G o g P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted to the
                       ere
   House the conference report and statement on bill (H.R. 7500)
   to authorize F Y 1964 appropriations to NASA. As reported, bill
   would authorize total appropriations of $5,350,820,400. Report
   was submitted to Senats August 28. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. 1 /     1
    133)
 Office of Construction established in NASA Hq., with nationally
   recognized construction contractor Robert W. Long as Director.
   Reporting to NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry
                                                 ---
                              T :-.-I.-
    I P-:--T T T - I L - - T                           ----1d
                                             T                            .~.ar’clnnnnt~vrrrtinn
                                                            -: -
                                                             -n
    Lillall3, V t itlLG1 U U l l l g j l G , W                                    u
                             .                   lL&   VVVUIU ~ V A G W
                                                            L=            L.-U-       YVIIUCLUWVLVI-


     projects and future construction plans to assure their timeliness,
     efficiency, and economy. Since June 27, 1963, Long had served
     as consultant for construction to Associate Administrator Dr.
     Robert C. Seamans; before that appointment he had been manag-
     ing partner of Long Construction Co., Kansas City, Mo. ( ~ A S A
     Release 63-192)
  NASA announced publication of “Handbook on Space Radiation Ef-
     fects to Solar Cell Power Systems,” prepared for NAEA by Exotech,
     Inc., of Alexandria, Va. The handbook and the recently published
     transcript of Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, held rn Wash-
   - ington earlier this year, were expected to help industry produce
     more durable, radiation-resistant solar-cell systems for satellites.
     (NASA Release 63-187)
  Legislative Manager of US. Chamber of Commerce Theron J. Rice
     said in public letter that CofC recommended NABA’S FY 1964
     budget request be cut by $1.2 billion “and that a total of $4,512,-
     OO0,OOO be appropriated for NASA programs for Fiscal 1964.
     We believe this amount will adequately provide for a continuation
     of our national s ace program and will enable the space agency t o
                             R
     meet the establis ed goal of a manned lunar landing by the end of
324             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

   this decade. The amount we recommend will give the space agency
   an approximate 25% increase in appropriations over Fiscal 1963,
    which is the maximum growth rate we believe can be sustained
    and supported within the economic as well as scientific and techni-
    cal capabilities of the nation . . . .” (Text, Av. WE., 8/26/63,21)
August 26: President Kennedy appointed Willis M. Hawkins, Jr.,
   vice president and general manager of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.,
   to position of Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research and
    Development, replacing Finn J. Larsen who resigned July 31.
    (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/63)
 Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) ,in Miwiles and Rockets interview,
    advocated selling space boosters to foreign countries. Noting
    Scout and Thor boosters already were available to European
    countries, he said Atlas also should be made available, under these
    conditions :
       “One, that they pay for the vehicle-I don’t think we should
                       ___
    give it away.
       “Two, we would need to launch it for them. . . . Third. what-
    ever sec‘mies surround the launch vehicle and/or other devices,
    all of this would be handled by U.S. personnel . . . .
       “In my opinion, other nations are not as interested in advancing
    scientific exploration as they are in embarking on programs to ad-
    vance their own economic position. And in this instance I say
    it’s fine for us to cooperate by selling to them a booster or what-
    ever other paraphernalia they need.
       “As these countries become more involved in space programs,
    it may be they will be desirous of buying Saturns or Centaurs.
    We don’t necesssrily need to stop at Atlas. I think the whole high-
    thrust field of boosters is a tremendous market with great poten-
    tial.
       “. . . we should do this through an agency of the U.S. govern-
    ment, probably through the Defense Department or NASA. What-
    ever profit might be involved does not go to NASA, does not go to
    mD-it goes to private industry, to those who make the Atlas or the
    Saturn or Centaur. This money gets back into the economy. It
    provides jobs. It stimulates the U.S.’s gross national product,
    causing our overall economy to grow and expand . . . .” (M&R.
   ‘8/26/63,21)
  M&siles and Rockets quoted Moscow radio as announcing that
    U.S.S.R. would attempt orbital rendezvous of two spacecraft “in
    the very neaz future.” Soviet announcement said earlier tandem
    flights of Vostok spacecraft were part of the rendezvous program
    but attempts to link them during flight had not been planned.
     (iK&R,8/26/63, 9)
            s
  U.S. Arm announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired and con-
    trolled rom Kwajalein Island in mid-Pacific, recently made suc-
    cessful interception of target vehicle launched by Titan I ICBM
    from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (DOD Release 1170-63)
  General B. A. Schriever, AFSC Commander, received the General
              H. “Hap” Arnold Aviation Gold Medal Award at na-
    tiona convention of Veterans of Foreign Wars, Seattle. (AFSC
    Release 38-R-65)
                                                                                                             325
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

August 97‘ :The Rev. Dr. 0. Frederick Nolde, Director of Commission
   of the Churches on International Affairs, said in report to World
   Council of Churches’ Central Committee that a joint US.-
   V.S.S.R. lunar exploration program would “avoid the menace
   of military use” of space by either country. Dr. Nolde’s proposal
   was part of an analysis of nuclear test-ban treaty which he said
   would provide a “new and more romising atmosphere” for peace.
   (Price, N.Y. Eerald Trib., 8/28&3)
 Thermonuclear researchers at LRC reported on devices able to measure
   temperatures in excess of 400,OOO degrees. In recent tests, Lewis
   apparatus recorded an electron temperature of 20 volts, or about
   420,000° F, in an experimental helium plasma. (mc Release 63-
   71, Lewis Chronology, 8)
August 28: NASA launched Little Joe I1 booster rocket with dummy
   payload simulating ’size and weight of Apollo command module
   and escape tower in flight test a t White Sands Missile Range, N.M.
   The LJ-II attained 24,000-ft. altitude and mach 1.1 speed, im-
     acted about 47,000 ft. downrange instead of planned 35,000 ft.
    gecause destruct s stem did not respond to ground command
                               H
   signal. This was rst launching of LJ-n and was a flight quali-
   fication test to verify performance of w-II before using it to
   t s Apollo command module. 100 sec. of telemetry was recorded
    et
   and five of the six test objectives were achieved. (NASA Release
   63-193; Aw. Wk., 9/2/63,20)
 Senate and House passed H.R. 7500, bill to authorize NASA appro-
     riations for F Y 1964. Senate and House both adopted the con-
   Serence committee’s bill authorizing $5,350,820,400 total ; of which
   $4,119,575,000 was for research and development, $713,060,400
   for construction of facilities, and $518,185,000 for administrative
   operations. (OR,    8/28/63,15298-303,15268-270)
 Hughes Aircraft Co., prime contractor for SYXCOICT II communica-
                                                                                                             hsA
             ootn11;to                      tha                                 n - h”t ; n m
                                                                                     ;’ “ .     rnto1l;to
    t;r\nn                 nnnnv.nnrvl             o-vnnhvnnfimo
                                                                                       ” ’&
    u*u-i.                                                                                                   *u
                                                                                                              .u
             13ubbi11.-,                                                        VI
                                            CllU   dJ l l ” . ‘ l ” l l ” U U
                           ‘CIIIIVUII~L.U                                                       VIULUlllCV


   accumulated more message time than all other communications
   satellites combined. SYNCOM n was launched July 26, maneuvered
   into 24-hr. station Aug. 15. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/28/63, 306)
 House Resolution 504 to create a select committee to investigate
   expenditures for research programs conducted by or sponsored
   by departments and agencies of the Federal Government was
   reported to House floor from House Committee on Rules. (CR,
   8/28/63,15297-98)
 Portions of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, tele-
   cast by nationwide networks within U.S., were transmitted via
               II communications satellite to Europe. ( B - V
                                                            C ST ,
   TELSTAR
   8/28/63 ; Wash. Post. 8/30/63,5)
 13 security guards at NASA Wallops Station, Va., set up picket lines
   in strike for higher wages. (AP, Wash. Eva. Star, 8/28/63)
 USAF SAC crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas ICBM from
   Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (DOD Release 1188-63)
August $9: I n ceremony celebrating establishment of new Australian
   tracking stations near Carnarvon and Canberra, NASA Deputy
   AdministFtor Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented scale model of
   85-ft.-diameter tracking antenna to Australian Ambassador Sir
326           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    Howard Beale. Carnarvon station was being established for
    Proiect Gemini and xvould also monitor Ogo and Oao unmanned
    satellites. Canberra station would be a portion of Deep Snace
    Network which tracks space probes to moon and planets. (NASA
    Release 63-195)
dugust 29: Monorail rocket sled attained mach 5 speed along missile
    test track at Holloman AFB in recent test, AFSC announced, highest
    known speed ever reached by a monorail sled. Fired in two
    stages with Cajun and Cherokee rockets, the test vehicle reached
    3,753 mph before being stopped near end of seven-nile track.
    Attachment of “flow separation spike,” similar to needle on nose
    of jet fighter aircraft, reduced air resistance and thus increased
    speed. T o brake the sled, spike was flipped away from front
    of sled when peak speed was attained, thus increasing air drag
    by a factor of four. Sled was then caught by several lengths of
    tied-down nvlon restraining straps. Major test objectives were
    accomdished. (AFSC Release 37-74-72)
 At meetinq of American Institute of Biological Scientists in h i -
    herst, Mass., Max D. Lechtman of M a p a Corp. presented report
    by team of researchers predicting use of certain bacteria in life-
    sunnorto systems of future manned spacecraft. One means of
    supplying oxygen to astronauts on long-duration flights would
    be electrolysis of water-breaking down mater into its oxygen and
    hydrogen cumnonents by electric current. Microbes such as H.
    eutropha and H. ruhladi which absorb hydrogen would be valu-
    able in removing the hydrogen. (Wmh. Post, 8/30/63, All)
  Senate Foreiqn Relations Committee approved nuclear test-ban
    treaty by 16 to 1 vote. Senate debate on treaty was scheduled
    to begin Sept. 9. (Marder, Wnsh.Post, 8/30/63,1)
 USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with two unidentified
    satellites from Vandenberp AFB, calif. (Wash. Eve. Rfar,
    8/33/63; M&R, 9/9/63, 13; Pres. R p t . on Spaee. 1963,1/27/64)
  Special Subcommittee of House Committee on Armed Services, es-
    tablished to investigate research and development in the Armed
    Services, met in executive session. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/136)
 Minuteman ICBM launched from Vandenberg AFB silo on 5,000-mi.
    flight down Pacific Missile Range. Launching w a s condiicted
    by SAC crew. (M&R, 9/9/63.13)
August 3 : NASA announced its Langley Research Center had issued
          0
    requests for proposals for instrumented lunar-orbiter probes which
    would be launched by 1966 to secure tonographic data on the
    moon’s surface. Photographic lunar-orbiters would team with
    Ranger hard-landing spacecraft and Surveyor soft-landing space-
    craft in gathering data meparatory to Apollo manned lunar
    landing. T o be launched by Atlas-Agena launch vehicle, lunar-
    orbiter would contain camera system capable of obtaininq pic-
    tures not closer than 22 mi. above moon’s surface. (NASA Release
                    Release)
    63-196 : L ~ R C
  Marvin W. Robinson mimed position a Denuty Director of NASA
                                             s
    Office of International P r o m m s to serve United Nations w Sci-
    entific Secretary in Secretariat of Cmmmittee on t b Peaceful Uses
    of Outer Space. (NASA Announcement 63-186)
                                                                         327
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

B u p t 30: Reporting on experiments with mice in simulated space
     flights up to 90 days, Chicago researcher Bernard Miezkuc said at
     annual meeting of American Institute of Biological Sciences that
     resistance to infection is critically low on first, fourteenth, thir-
     tieth, and possibly sixtieth da s of flight. Apparently physical
     and psychological stress of ear$ flight could account for l o w e d
     resistance of the mice on first day, he said. Then, after temporary
     recovery, mice build up resistance during flight, with lapses occur-
     ring at periods of about two weeks, one month, and two months.
      (Carey, AP, Wash.Post, 8/31/63)
  USAF launched Titan I ICBM from Vandenberg. AFB in flight some
     5,000 mi. down Pacific Missile Range. (UPI, @‘ash. Post,%/31/63 ;
     M&R, 9/9/63,13)
  Kai Aa. Strand, former Chairman of Northwestern Univ. Astron-
     dmy Dept., succded retiring Gerald M. Clemence as Scientific
     Director of U.S. Naval (4bservatox-y. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/63)
  Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired from Kwajalein Island in the
     Pacific, scored its ninth ‘‘intern t” of ,4.tas ICBM target fired
     from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (ill&. 9/9/63,13)
  DOD announced the direct communication link between Washington
     and Moscow was now operational. (DOD Release)
  USN launched Polaris A 3 from land pad at AHR, in succe~~ful           night
     flight to gather data on guidance,-pqulsion, and thrust vedor
     control and to evaluate re-entry body flight dynamics. (M&R,
     9/9/63, 13)
                                                        r
Augwt 31: Results of industrial survey made b Univ. of Denver
     Research Institute under NASA contract were re eased, survey based
     on questionnaires of 988 companies. Results indimted : (1) trans-
     fers of technology from Government-sponsored research and de-
     velopment to private industries was the most important contribu-
     tion of space-related programs to civilian sector of nation’s
                                                        b&
                    (2)         r&,t& 5 6 ~                        and a nr----
                                                                       -r d i d
     SZO,~.,;.;
     WD of ‘improved materials, processes, and techniques, as well as
     new test and laboratory equipment ; (3) space-related R&D output
     contributed to cust reduction in both commercial manufmturhg
     and fabrication methods; (4)institutional and economic barriers
     exist and must be surmounted in tho transfer process; ( 5 ) time
     lag exists between development of new or improved technology
     whether through industrial or Government-sponsored research
     and its ultimate utilization. NASA Office of Technolog Utilization
     would USB this information to determine ways of accelerating
     transfer of NASA’s        technological advances to civilian/industrial
     community. (NASA Release 63-197 :Text)
  k h e d u l i n g of first manned Apollo flight-a three-man earth-orbit-
     ing f l i g h t f r o m early 1965 to late 1965 or early 1966 reported by
     John W. Finney of New York T i m s . Unnamed NASA official
     attributed 9- to 11-monthdelay to technological difficulties inevita-
     ble in such a complex undertaking. (Finney, NYT. 9/1/63,1,27)
  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun
     announced reorganization of MSFC, designed to strengthen the
     Center’s d u d function of performing in-house R B ~ D monitor-
                                                                 and
     ing industrial contracts. I n Office of the Director, Deputy Di-
328           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,        19 0 3

     rector Dr. Eberhard Rees was designated Deputy Director-Tech-
     nical, and Deputy Director H. H. Gorman, Deputy Director-Ad-
     ministrative. Hans Maus was designated Director of newly
     formed executive staff replacing MSFC Central Planning Ofc. I n
                                                                fie
     second major group, MSFC’S nine technical divisions were formed
     in new Research and Development Operations, with Hermann
     Weidner as Director. Third major group was new Industrial
     Operations, comprised of MSFC elements concerned with work per-
     formed bv industrial contractors, and headed by R Q ~ w ~   Young.
     (MarshallStar, 9/4/63,1,3; N.O. Times-Pic.,       9/1/63)
Augzlst 31 : Research balloon launched by MIT scientists from National
     Center for Atmospheric Research, Palestine, Tex., was lost when
     it sprang a leak at several thousand feet. I t s payload of in-
     struments, designed to obtain data on cosmic rays, was parachuted
                                Wash.Post, 9/1/63,2)
     safely to ground. (TJPI,
  Concluding its two-week meeting at Berkeley, Calif., International
     Union of Geodesy and Geophysics elected as president Joseph
     Kaplan, phgsicist of ucp, to succeed Vladimir V. Belousov,
     Soviet seismologist. Dunng the meeting, the 3,000 delegates laid
     plans for Upper Mantle Project to explore rock layer of the earth
     and for International Hydrological Decade (1965-1975) to study
     earth’s water resounxs and for projects during International Quiet
     Sun Year. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/2/63)
              August: Mockup model of Gemini two-man spacecraft
&.ring
     shipped from McDonnell Aircraft Corp. to NASA Launch Opera-
     tions Center, Cape Canaveral, for tests of ground support q u i p -
     ment at the launch complex. (AP, Wash. Ewe. Star, 8/22/63)
  NASA Director of Aeronautical Research Programs Charles H. Zim-
     merman resigned to accept position with Army Material Com-
     mand’s research and development directorate. Since June 1962,
     Zimmerman directed NASA’s        aeronautical research programs in-
     cluding X-15, V/Stol research, and supersonic transport study.
      (Av. Wk.,9/2/63,24)
  I n first altitude test of AEC’S Project Sand (Sampling Aerospace
     Nuclear Debris), Honest John-Nike rocket carried nuclear sam-
     pler payload to 36-mi. altitude where it was jettisoned and para-
     chuted back to earth. Launch was conducted from Tonopah
     Test Range, Nev., by Sandia Corp. for AEC. Project Sand was
     designed to determine amount of nuclear debris in atmosphere
     23 to 43 mi. above earth and to develop techniques for predicting
     its dispersal in this region. (&‘puce Bun. Daily, 8/27/63, 300)
  In introduction to V.N. Annual Report, Secretary General I Thant
                                                                 T
     said :
        L L . . . the development of cooperation in outer space explora-
     tion and use continued in an encouraging manner, especially in
     the scientific and technical field.
        “The Scientific and Technoloqical Subconimittee of the Com-
     mittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its second se- *
     held in Geneva in May 1963, agreed upon a series of i w andp
     revised recommendations concerning the exchange of information,
     encouragement of international programs, education and train-
     ing, potentially harmful effects of special experiments and the
                                                                    329
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    organization of international sounding rocket facilities. The
    meeting of the subcommittee provided once more the occasion for
    the scientists of the two leading space powers to continue their
    private talks on cooperative space programs.
      c‘The World Meteorological Organization, the International
    Telecommunication Union and the United Nations Educational,
    Scientific and Cultural Organization continued to participate
    actively in the field of peaceful exploration and use of outer space.
      “No agreement was reached on legal problems relating to outer
    space, but a valuable exchange of views took place in the Com-
    mittee and its legal subcommittee . . . .” (Text, CR, 8/27/63,
    15099-103)
During Augwt: The Atlantic Monthly published an article “Why
    Land on the Moon?” by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director, Goddard
    Institute for S ace Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, Director,
                      8
    Office of Space ciences, NASA.
      “These are the specific values of space exploration: the benefits
    of basic research, economically valuable applications of satellites,
    contributions to industrial technology, a general stimulus to edu-
    cation and to the younger generation, and the strengthening of
    our international position bv our acceptance of leadership in a
    historic human enterprise. The current discussion of these values
    of the space program has served the United States well in direct-
    ing its attention to questions of national purpose. But, however
    we may try to break the program down into its elements and to
    attempt a detailed balancing of debits and credits, the fact
    remains that the space effort is greater than the sum of its parts.
    It is a great adventure and a p a t enterprise, not only for the
    United States but for all humanity. W e have the power and
    resources to play a leading role in this effort, and it is inconceiv-
    able that me should stand aside.
       “Scimtifir adminictrztcw zsk . . . caii -iie aiT~ri:tliw cmi 01
    the space program in technical manpower? Their concern is
    heightened by the fact that federal activities in defense, space,
    and atomic energy together consume nearly half of the science
    and engineering talent available in the United S a e . But is
                                                          tts
    the space agency the major consumer of trained manpower within
    this federal complex of technical agencies? In actuality, NASA
    will be using six percent of the national manpower pool in science
    and engineering through its contracts with private industry, plus
    an additional one percent in government laboratories. I f the
    space program has substantial value, this is not an overwhelming
    drain.” (Text)
  Dr. Simon Ramo, Vice Chairman of Board of Thompson-Ramo-
    Wooldridge, Inc., said in Air Force and Space Digest article:
    “The landing of men on the moon needs to be understood by the
    American people merely as a specific framework on which is
    built a broad research program to explore many areas of science.
    Space is new and special; it is only now that we have the ability
    to enter a re on of the universe previously denied to us, except
                    f-l
    for viewing rom a distance through the insulation of our atmos-
    phere. Nevertheless, without a definite task, a broad space pro-
     741423 -22
330                                               19 6 3
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

      am of this size would be very inefficient, would wander and
             redundant, unwieldy, and confused. We need to agree
   &me
   that what counts most is advancing science on a broad front . . . .
      “. . . the addition of a human passenger and observer to a
   total space effort is a necessary ingredient. An ideally laid-out
               . . . requires emphasizing broad research aims in all
      proTm
   of t e sciences . . . . How can we justify a large national space-
   research program whose true objective is scientific discovery
   a c r w all the spectrum of science if we are going to leave out
   thelifesciences . . . .
      “It is essential then that the public should understand that the
   program they are buying is not just a man-on-the-moon program.
   Like an iceberg, the greater art of the program will be unseen.
                                 P
   Space exploration will be engthy and continuing, requiring
   patient backing as a long-term venture . . . .” ( A F & Space
   Digest, 8/63, 49f)
Dwring August: Peak power output of 50w from pulsed gas laser dem-
   onstrated by Orlando Div. of Martin-Marietta Corp. At higher
   power levels the company predicted application of the laser in
   optical radar system. ( A u . Wk.,8/19/63,34)
 Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received 1962 Gold Medal of French
    Association Pour 1’Etude et la Recherche Astronautique. Colo-
   nel Glenn accepted the award “on behalf of myself and the thou-
    sands of persons here and abroad who have made these space
    flights possible.” (,4u. Wk.,  8/12/63,109)
 COSPAR re-elected M. Maurice Roy, member of French Academy of
    Sciences and professor at Ecole Polytechnique in Paris as Presi-
    dent for 1963-66. (A&AE, 8/63, 116)
 S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite Center of
    U.S. Weather Bureau, was awarded first Astronautics Space
    Research Medal of British Interplanetary Society. (A&AE,
    8/63,119)
                         SEPTEMBER 1963
September 1: Theory of “hypersonic organcqntheeis,” cn?&ion of
     organic molecular compounds by giant explosions, offered a a   s
      clue to origin of life on earth by Adolph R. Hochstim, re-
     searcher of Institute for Defense Analysis and National Bureau
     of Standards. Hochstim said 1,000-yd.-diameter meteorite would
     have exploded with tremendous force upon impact, transform
                                                                    Y
     molecules of earth’s atmosphere, its water, and meteorite itsel
      into heavy organic compounds. S n e theoretically such com-
                                         ic
     pounds muld be formed by meteorite impact ‘‘on any
     which contains any type of atmospheric and liquid pillmet    ae”
                                                                   s,
      Hochstim warned, space probes “sent to a planet on a crash land-
           may on impact produce complex chemical compounds which
    YWI 1 need to be discounted when searching for a s g n of life in
     the vicinity of the planet.” (Myler, up^, Wash.Post, 9/1/63, A3
  I n speech to American Psychological Association, Dr. Phil1 IJ.
     Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical LsBbra-
     tory and editor of Science, repeated his view that there were no
     predictable economic advantages to the exploration of the moon
     or possible subsequent flights to Mars. Much of the justification
     for manned lunar program w s national prestige, he said, but
                                     a
     “the half of the world that is undernourished could scarcely the
     expected to place a higher value on landing on the moon than on
      filling their stomachs.” (Barbour, AP, W s . Eve. Star,
                                                    ah
     9/2/63 )
  With launching and recovery of 120-ft. balloon, Balloon Research
     Center at Palestine, T x ,completed its cosmic-ray study project.
                             e.
     Today’s balloon floated to more than 10,OOO-ft. altitude to collect
     cosmic-ray data. (UPI, N P T , 9/3/63,4)
September 6: Two Bi ht tests of M-2 wingless lifting bod conducted
                                 Center, wrth Milton 0 T iom son as
     by NABA Flight s-rch
     test pilot. Towed to 13,OOO-ft. altitude by          aircrak M-2
     glided each time to landing on Rogers Drg Lake bed in a few
     seconds over three minutes. These were sixth and seventh air-
     tow flight-tests of M-2 in series to investigate man’s ability  ~




     control M-2 during low-speed operations, particularly during
     landing haw. (meReleasa 17-63 ;M&R,9/9/63,14)
            P
  Results o NABA research project reported: 18 species of .c?rth
     bacteria survived in “Mars jam” in which atmospheric conditions
     of Mars were simulated. One type enlarged itself by four or five
     times in the Martian environment. (MdR,    9/2/63)
  m c announced establishment of field 05ce at NASA Manned Space
     craft Center, headed b Col. Daniel D. McKee (usm), to serve
                           9
     as central m c point o contact at MSC. ( m c Relase 38-R-76)
                                                             331
332            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

September a: Recently approved program by NASA-USAF Project
    Gemini Program Planning Board called for about 12 USAF experi-
    ments to be included in later Gemini flights, John Finney re-
    ported in New York Times. Board was reported to have
    concluded it could make no recommendations on USAF pilots
    participating in Gemini until DOD clarified its position on mili-
    tary requirements for a manned space flight program. (Finney,
    NYT, 9/3/63,1,15)
  Reported that one example of space flight experience vitally bene-
    fiting other Government projects was adoption of Mercury spa.ce-
    craft and landing maneuveis to the escape and survival projection
    system for F-111 (TFX) tactical fighter aircraft. I n emergency
    escape from F-111, entire two-man crew compartment and section
    of aircraft’s wings are separated from aircraft; drogue parachute
    then deploys and pulls out large Mercury-type parachute which
    lowers compartment t a landing. Like Mercury spacecraft,
                              o
    ejected compartment contains environmental life-support system
    and necessary survival equipment. (Cook, Wash. Daily News,
    9/2/63)
  Results of Harvard Business School poll of U.S. industrialists on
    how they viewed America’s space program, published in Haruard
    Business Rewiew, indicated that industrialists expect a consider-
    able payoff from space in terms of tangible benefits to our planet
    and think that the space program is “a great energizing force on
    our society.” (Greenough, Boston Morning Globe, 9/2/63)
September 3: Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Chairman of
    Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of House
     Committee on Science and Astronautics, sent letter to all Com-
    mittee members and to Panel on Science and Technology, saying :
    “The Subcommittee will explore plans and programs to accom-
    plish the best orientation and use of scicnca and its resources . . . .
     [For example], what standards may effectively be applied to
    determine the need and the priority for scientific research, how
     much may be evaluated as conforming with national scientific
    policy and goals, and what proper levels ma be established for
    basic, applied and developmental research.’’ ?NASA Leg. Act. Rpt.
    11/17)
  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced Belgian astro-
    physicist, Dr. Francois V. Dossin, working at GSFC on a National
    Academy of Sciences fellowship, discovered faint comet about 5’
    from sun during July 20 solar eclipse. Dr. Dossin made Seven
    camera-plate exposures of comet from Pleasant Pond, Me., dur-
     ing 60 sec. of total eclipse. H e used blue-green filter to bring out
    the light of carbon molecules in the comet. Microscopic exami-
    nation of developed plates showed a diffuse image emitting the
    light of molecular carbon. (GSFC Release)
  National Science Foundation announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. would
    conduct cooperative cosmic-ray study in Antarctica, on IQSY proj-
    ect. From one station, VHF radio signals would be beamed at
    ionosphere; some of the signals would be scattered downward by
    ionosphere and recorded at other stations. By studying changes
    in reception of radio signals, scientists can take indirect measure-
                                                                                    333
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    ments of cosmic rays. Antarctic region is especially suited for
    such measurements because cosmic rays are guided by earth’s
    magnetic lines of force which converge in polar regions. (Finney,
    NYT,9/3/63)
September 4: Aembee 150 soundmg rocket launched from F .Church-
                                                            t
    ill, Can., with nuclear emulsion payload to study very-low-
    energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Payload reached 150-mi. alti-
    tude, was recovered from an inland lake approximately 90 mi.
    from launch site. Instrumentation and nuclear emulsions were
    in excellent, condition, but analysis of nuclear emulsions would
    require considerable time. Experiment was project of NASA God-
    dard Space Flight Center. (NASA Rpt. of Sounding Rkt.
    Launching)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced issuing requests for pro-
    posals for vacuum chamber to generate space environmental con-
    ditions for use in thermochemical tests. Chamber would per-
    mit MSC engineers to study function of propellant equipment, heat
    rejection, and energy collecting devices during long periods of
    space flight. (MSC Release 63-144)
  According to Soviet lunar-exploration timetable published in Hun-
    garian magazine Lobogo, U.S.S.R. planned first manned circum-
    lunar flight for 196445, first manned lunar landingj for 1966-68,
    and first “bmpora      laboratory” on moon for 1968-70. Article
    said manned V o s t g flights had “virtually accomplished 80 per
    cent of a space rendezvous maneuver, lacking only the coupling of
    the two spaceships.” Next step after orbital rendezvous should
    be trip to moon. Abstract of article, which
    26 issue of Lobogo, w s published in
                          a
    cations Research Service of De t. of
                                                   P
    nical Services. (Schmeck, NY ,9/4/63)
  Urging a “breakthrough” by CAB and F - ~ A“toward more economical
                                                                               -..-------
                                                                       “ nF mmmorrial
                                              tfi O A y-*.6”& - c ”
                                                    A-~nmn
                          1‘2 n n - n n - w
           nc ;n
    nnrrmGn  .                                                        FQ~WD
                                                                      ‘e”.
                              yU”NU“6wL       wI
    “ywlCUC.I”IW    111   A”                                              ”L



    aircraft, Sen. Thomas J. McIntyre (D.-N.H.) pointed out that in
                   s
    1958 “the assage of the Federal ,Qviation Act provided the basis
    for such [ s i g n ] studies. . . . Originally, of course,such studies
    were the province of the National Advisory Committee for Aero-
    nautics, set up as early as 1915. Senator Ralph Flanders said,
    in 1955:
       ‘‘ ‘There is not an airplane flying in this country today-cer-
    tainly not a military one-the design of which does not depend
    to some depee upon scientific investigations of the NACA.’”
    (CR,   9/4/63,15444)
 Gemini astronauts would learn how to “apprehend” mother vehicle
    traveling in space on a special trainer in a darkened hangar-high
    structure now bein erected a t Manned Spacecraft Center’s Clear
                                $
                                !
    Lake home. (xsc pace New8 Roundup,1/8/64)
September 5 : NASA announced SYNCOM 11 communications satellite
    achieved perfection of orbit probably unparalleled by any other
    previous satellite. At more than 22,000-mi. altitude, orbit varies
    from absolute circle by no more than 4.5 mi. Orbital period-23
    hrs., 55 min., 54 sec.--’;s only 10.09 sec.shorter than mean sidereal
    day. Virtually stationary over 55th meridian of west longitude,
334            ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 3

                                                 that it would take nearly
      SYNCOM II isdrifting eastward so s l o w l ~
    a month to move a single degree. Drifting will be corrected pe-
    riodically, and the communications satellite can be expected to
    remain on station and operating for more than two years. (Wash.
    Ewe. Star, 9/5/63)
September 5 : At NASA H . D. Brainerd Holmes, former Director of
    NASA Manned SpaceQlight, was presented NASA Medal for Out-
    standing Leadership by NASA Administrator James E. Webb.
     (NASA Release 63-199)
  Dr. Edward Teller, Univ. of Calif. physicist, declared a t symposium
    on “open space and peace” held at Stanford Univ. that surveil-
    lance from spa,ceof every part of the world should be made legal.
     Noting that “open skies” policy was first proposed in 1955, he
    stressed that today the security of U.S. and Free World depend
    in “a most vital fashion on information obtained from Russia.”
     Surveillance from space should be conducted “publicly, freely and
    in the interest of the peace of our nation.” (Davies, N Y T ,
    9/6/63 10)
            60.
  Boeing        announced rendezvous and docking in space can be
    achieved by pilot with little, if any, assistance from instruments.
     Findings were based on three months of experiments m-ith rendez-
    vous-docking simulator in preparation for Project Gemini. (Ma-
    comber, San Diego Union, 9/5/63)
September 6: President Kennedy signed NASA authorization bill for
    F Y 1964 (PL. 88-113), authorizing NASA $5,350,820,400 for the
    fiscal year. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/141)
  NASA and WD announced agreement for NASA use of nsm-developed
    Agena launch vehicles, replacing Feb. 1961 agreement under
    which NASA used Atlas-Agena and Thor-Agena vehicles for
    Ranger, Mariner, and Alouette projects. Signed by NASA Asso-
    ciate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and AFSC Vice
    Commander Lt. Gen. Howell M. Estes, Jr., agreement provided:
    USAF will be responsible for design, en ineering, and acceptance
                                             7
    testing of basic Atlas and Thor vehic es and Agena D staqes,
    with NASA buying these from USAF;      NASA will have responsibility
    for all its mission modifications to basic vehicles; NASA will launch
    its Atlas-Agena vehicles from Complex 12 at AMR and USAF will
    conduct all Agena launch operations from PMR; technical and
    administrative control of 11 remaining NASA Agena B stages
    transferred from USAF to NASA. Atlas-Agena vehicles for Project
    Gemini were covered by separate NASA-USAF agreement. (NASA
    Release 63-198 ;DOD Release 1212-63)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced signing of definitive
    contract valued at $7,658,000 with Kollsman Instrument Corp. for
    guidance and navigation equipment for Apollo spacecraft’s wm-
    mand and service module. ( MSC Release 63-147)
  NASA Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newel1 said in ad-
    dress at dedication of Stedman Hall of Science, Central Methodist
    College, Fayette, Mo. :
       “We are now laying the groundwork for whatever role we may
    have to play in space in the future. W e are developing the ability
    of the United States to use space and to operate in space either as
                                                                           335
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,              1963

      it may choose to do voluntarily or may h d itself compelled to do
      in its own defense. This is the capability that w e shall have from
      the development o i the ability to investigate scientific.ally with
      satellites and space probes, from space applications, from the abil-
      ity to perform manned space flight and manned space operations,
      from the vast complex of manufacturing and assembly plants,
      launching complexes, t r a c k q and telemetering facilities, and
      from the invaluable experience that this initial stage in the space
      program will give us.
          “This is the most significant point about the present era in space.
      This is the most krmortant a s m t of the Dresent activitv i         n
      space . . . . ( T e x t j
                                                       A
                                         A                             I

                      ”
S e p t e d e r 6: U ~ A Flaunched Atlas-Agena D from Pt. Arguello with
      unidentified satellite. (M&R. 9/16/63.11-12)
  USAF announced launchinh two Atl& ICBM’S from’pxa. (AP, Wash.
                                 -
      Eve. Star, 9/7/63)
September 7: Second birthday of Michoud Operations, NASA facility
      in Louisiana used for fabrication of Saturn I. Saturn IB. and
      Saturn V rocket stages. To date, NASA had awakded $739 malion
      in contracts which will be carried out primarily at Michoud, and
      some $41 million had been spent on rehabilitation and modifica-
      tion of plant and construction of new facilities. More than
   ‘ 7,800 persons are now working at Michoud, most of them em-

      ployees of NASA contractors. (Marshall Star, 9/11/63,1,2)
  French plans to orbit four-pound “Satmos” satellite in 1964 revealed
     by unnamed French Government officials. To be launched by
     Army’s National OiEce of Space Research using four-stage
      Ek%nice rocket, satellite would provide data on re-entry from
      outer space. (UPI, NPT, 918163,422; M&R, 9/16/63,12)
  Cal Tech reported new study of meteorite records going back 260
      years has been undertaken by geochemist Harrison Brown, mho
      wniild i i ~ eplprtrnnic cnmpiitws tn m a p metcnritp patterns.
      (A&AE, Nov., 1963,ll)
I‘9eptember8; USAF announced establishment of worldwide network
      of 19 riometer (relative ionospheric opacity meter) stations for
      monitoring cosmic noise and absorption of galactic radiation in
      the ionosphere. (NANA, Denver Post, 9/8/63)
  I n news interview, John W. h k q aerospace engineer for Booz,
            r
     Allen A plied Research, Inc., reported on conclusion of six-month
     study o feasibility of launching rockets from aircraft,, study con-
      ducted for CSAF Special Weapons Center with cooperation of
     CSAF Officeof Aerospace Research. Suggesting that cost of US.
     space launchings could be reduced 40 per cent by employing air-
     craft instead of launching pads, Locke said :
         “Results from the study indicate the B-58 can be used as the
     prime launch vehicle. A four-staqe rocket like the small version
      of the Scout missile, weighing 14,000 pounds, will provide the
     desired performance with minimum development effort.
         “The air launching of even larger space vehicles is both feasi-
     ble and acceptable and may be done economically.” (Copley
     News Service, N.O. T i m s - P k a y w n e ,9/8/63)
336            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

September 9: Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA
    Wallops Station carried 70-lb. instrumented payload to 106-mi.
    altitude, payload impacting in Atlantic Ocean 87 mi. downrange
    after 6 min., 40 sec. flight. Payload contained instrumentation
    to d d r m i n e altitude and intensity of electric current systems in
    the ionosphere. New method of altitude determination during
    rocket flight was also tested. Flight was in preparation for elec-
    trojet program to be conduoted from India later this year. (Wal-
    lops Release 63-81 ; NASA Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
  Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Co. announced successful demonstration
    of new method of cooling high-pressure hydrogen rocket-engine
    chamber. P&W spokesman sald that “SrUCCeSSful demonstration of
                 during this company-sponsored firing was a research
    breakt rough on high-pressure hydrogen rocket engines . . . .
    The high pressure concept is the next step in increasing the per-
    formance of hydrogen fueled rocket engines.” P&W is producer
     of RGlO liquid hydrogen rocket engines for Saturn S-IV stage
    and Centaur upper stage booster. (Space Bus. Daily, 9/9/63,
    356 ; Hartford Courant, 9/9/63)
  Clarence A. Syvertson, NASA Ames Research Center scientist, said
    in paper presented at Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery
    Symposium at Edwards AFB that future spacecraft based on N-2
    lifting body design could satisfy requirements for maneuvering
    re-entry vehicles on missions from near-earth orbit and on return
    from manned Mars missions. With lift-drag ratio of over one,
    M-2 lifting body allows use of maneuvering technique to solve
    critical heating problems of re-entry. Choice of M-2 rather than
    spacecraft covered with heavy ablative material could save con-
    siderable spacecraft weight. (Ames Release 63-34)
  James T. Koppenhaver resigned as Director, Office of Reliability and
     Quality Assurance, NASA. Deputy Director John E. Condon was
    appointed Acting Director of the Office. (NASA Announcement
     63-198)
September 10: FAA announced six industries had notified FAA of their
     intent to submit proposals for design competition in national pro-
    gram of Government assistance to industry for development of
     supersonic transport airplane. (FAA Releaze 63-81)
September 11: Aerobee 150A launched from NASA Wallops Station
    carried instrumented payload to approximately 102-mi. altitude
    in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen in conditions
    of radiant heating and zero gravity. Radiant heat measurements
    were as predicted, and there were 4 min. of zero-g time. Experi-
    ment was conducted for NASA Lewis Research Center, responsible
     for NASA development of liquid-hydrogen-propelled rocket en-
       ‘nes. (Wallops Release 63-83; NASA Rpt. of Sounding Rkt.
    Eunching )
  At luncheon meeting with NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh
    L. Dryden, Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoli A. Rlagonravov re-
    ported to have suqqested that it might be desirable to discuss POS-
    sibilit of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar expedition.
     ( B a d e t t , Wash. Eve Star, 9/17/63 ; Simons, Wayh.Post, 9/18/63 ;
    Finney, NYT, 9/18/63,11)
                                                                     337
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

September I 1 ;House passed (336-0) H. Res. 504 to create select com-
     mittee to investigate expenditures for research programs con-
     ducted by or sponsored by Government departments and a encies.
     Committee would submit its final report by Dec. 1,1964. {peaker
     of the House appointed nine Representatives as members of the.
      Committee, with Rep. Carl Elliott (D.-Ala.) as Chairman. Rep.
     Elliott, principal sponsor of the resolution ointed out that 90
        er cent of Government research is e o n d u c d b y or sponsored by
     gve agencies : DOD, NASA, HEW,AEC, and National Science Founda-
     tion; “. . . more than 75 per cent of these research and develop-
     ment dollars are spent on projects conducted b private research
                                                      B
      organizations, institutions and universities un er Federal grants
      and contracts.” (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/143; OR, 9/11/63,
      15867ff)
  Speaking a t Symposium on Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recove
                                                                       T
      at Edwards AFB, NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Wels
      said :
         “. . . It is worth keeping in mind that irrefutable facts and
      events demonstrate that the Soviets are conducting a vigorous
      space effort, and the evidence is strong that this program includes
      a manned lunar trip.
         “Let me emphasize that we should be making a v’ orous effort
                                                            7
      to go to the moon and that we should continue to o so even if
      the Russians delete such an objective from their space program.”
         Dr. Welsh listed some major reasons for manned lunar project :
         LL (1) There is no other place so near in space where we can test
      the equipment and the men for future space travel.
                                                                    8z
         “(2) Such a clear ob’ective as that of the lunar project
                              B;
      impetus, order, and e ciency to the program . . . .”
      outstanding masons he listed were national prestige, economic
      spin-off, defense spin-off, and scientific advancement. (Text)
                                Cmter 31L1eEd mEstFAciie:: of p m a
  X a S A ME””d spye.c+
      nent Center fmlities at Clear Lake was 75 per cent complete.
      First large personnel move was scheduled for October. (xsc
      Release 63-150)
  I n ninth month of strike against Florida East Coast Railroad,
      members of Order of Railroad Telegraphers picketed NASA con-
      struction site a t Merritt Island. Union alleged NASA was m p t -
      ing building materials delivered by railroad line. 865 construc-
      tion workers from 14 craft unions refused to cross picket lines;
      next day, 1,500 workers were absent. (Au. Wk.,           9/16/63, 38)
  USAF announced routine launching of Atlas ICBM from Vandenberg
               (UPI, Wash. Post, 9/12/63)
      AFB.
  USAF announced plans to test fuel cell in space by sending new type
      of electrical power system into orbit in a satellite within next
      few months. Working model of the fuel cell, developed by Allis-
      Chalmers Manufacturing Co., was displayed at AFA convention
      in Washington. (Finney, NPT, 9/12/63,14)
  I n formal statement of policy, Air Force Association declared
      Senate ratification of nuclear test ban treaty would entail “unac-
      ceptable” risks to security of U.S. and Free World. Statement
      also said :
338           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

       “One area of military technological potential in which this
    nation obviously is making less than a maximum effort is military
    space . . . . We must exploit military space t extend and
                                                        o
    preserve our deterrent strength, to control and inhibit those who
    would use their power a g k v e l y to dominate life on earth. All
                            P
    of our national space e orts, including purely scientific explora-
    tory programs, must ba measured first against this yardstick. The
    national interest must be the prime purpose of every national
    program . . . .” (AFA Statement)
Septenzber 11: A $3.5-million spaceship simulator to train crews for
    space flight, space intercepts, and orbital rendezvous at AFFTC,
    Edwards AFB, has been ordered by AFSC, the command revealed at
    the Air Force Association meeting, Washington, D.C. (AFXC
    Operational Highlights, 13)
September f2: Department of Labor’s second annual William F.
    Patterson Memorial Award presented to NASA Langley Research
     Center “in recopition of apprenticeship program excellence.”
     (Newport News h i l y Press, 9/12/63)
  Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in letter to Air
    Force Association President J. B. Montgomery regarding AFA’S
    Statement of Policy on nuclear test ban treaty : “. . . I recognize
    the right of the Association to express itself but the resolution is
    so immoderate and based on such misinformation as to disregard
    completely the best interests of the United Stakes, as well as of
    the Air Force . . . .” H e also canceled his appearance at AFA
    reception in his honor. (Letter/DoD Release)
  General Curtis LeMay (c/s USAF) said in add-        to Air Force As-
    sociation, Washington, that USAF was ‘(making a concerted effort
    to maintain a mixed force of manned aircraft and missiles and,
    for the longer term, vehicles that could operate in space. The
     Secretary of Defense . . . has directed that we continue our
    studies of follow-on manned, strategic vehicles that can counter
    threats and survive in the varied plateaus of aerospace opera-
    tions . . . .” (Text)
        General B. A. Schriever (USAF) said that during the nexti‘ten
     to fifteen years aircraft technolo promises to make major ad-
                                      ?
    varices which will provide signi cant improvements in range.
     speed, and versatility.” As examples,.he cited use of laminar flow
     control which “promises to make possible a significant increase in
    the subsonic range and endurance of large aircraft”; technical
     progress in such areas as “aircraft configuration, high tempera-
    ture structural materials, and propulsion systems” which will
     “make feasible the development of a great variety of advanced
    types of aircraft, ranging from conventional design to V/Stol,
     variable geometry, and paraglider configurations.” (Text, A-N-
     AP JournaZ & Reg., 9/21/63,18)
        Lt. Gen. T. P. Gerrity (USAF) told AFA Industrial Associates’
     Luncheon that “there is a recognition of our future mixed force
     needs and new manned strategic systems are currently under con-
     sideration” and spoke of threat of a “manned aircraft gap.”
      (A-N-AF J o u m t & Reg., 9/21/63,19)
                                                                      339
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

September 13: Sunflower turboalternator failed after 4,328 hours-
    longest operating time to date. Sunflower is a 3-kilowatt solar-
    collector power system being developed for NASA by Thompson
    Ram0 Wooldridge. (Lewis Chronology, 8)
September 13: SYNCOM II and m y I linked Rio de Janeiro and La-
    gos, Nigeria, in 20-min. voice conversation, first operation employ-
    mg both communications satellites in single communications
    circuit and world’s frt three-continent telephone conversation.
                           is
     Signal began from USNS Kingsport in Lagos harbor, then to SIT-
    COM 11, which sent it to Lakehurst, N.J., p u n d station, then by
    overland wire to Nutley, N.J., ground station, then ~ ~ R E L I over-
                                                                      AY
    head which sent it to Rio de Janeiro ground station. NASA God-
    dard Space Flight Center engineerS monitoring the conversation
    declared quality of transmission to be good. (QSFC Release G.17-
    63; AP, W s . Post, 9/14/63; N.Y. H e d Td.,9/14/63)
                ah.
 NASA issued procedures on decontamination of lunar-landing space-
    craft and planetav-landing spacecraft, based on recommendations
   .by NAB-XRC Space Scienm Board made public this data
       B c u e sterilization procedures employed on previous Ranger
         eas
    lunar spacecraft-particularly     heat c y c l e w e r e suspected of
    directly contributing to Ranger mission failures, NASA lowered
    decontamination requirements for current Ranger spacecraft. I t
    was now on1 r uired that microbes on Rangers be “reduced to
    a minimum3 2egarding lunar probes, Space Science Board
           “. . . The lunar surface with its high tem ratures, intense
    said:
                                                       %    h vacuum is a
    ultra-violet radiation, paucity of moisture, and
    most unfavorable environment for roliferation o terrestrial or-
    ganisms . . . .” It recommended %.S. “. . . minimize contam-
    ination to the extent technically feasible . . . [and develop] a
    sterile drilling system to accompany an earIy Apollo mission to
    return an uncontaminated sample of the lunar subsoil . . . .   7,

                        f9r XES !ZI?diF rnissioI?s reytirec!thzt sna-0-
             p””ePp”-s                                                C’
                                                                       “”
       A!.
        T!
        P
        *
    craft be sterilized and that this Xmntamination be effectively
    achieved without jeopardizing spacecraft reliability. Regarding
    Mars probes, Space Science Board said : “. . . The contamination
    of Mars through the impacting of nonsterile probes from the
    Earth could destroy an opportunity to carry out a meaningful
    search for life forms on Mars with remote detectors. This op-
    portunity is unique and its loss would be a catastrophe . . . .” It
    recommended U.S. “. . . accord the highest priority to the pre-
    vention of the biological contamination of Mars until sufficient
    information has been obtained about possible life forms there so
    that further scientific studies wl not be jeopardized . . . .         n
                                       il
    (NASA Release 63-200; NAS-NRC Release; NAB-NRC Space Probe
    SteriZisation )
 Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter disclosed seeing twin tails on one
    side of sun’s corona during solar eclipse July 20. The twin-tailed
    corona did not appear in photographs Carpenter made of the
    eclipse while flyin in DC-8 jetliner with other scientific observ-
                      If
    em. (O’Leary, mu Post, 9/14/63)
                           tn
340           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

September 13: NASA Manned S acecraft Center had begun training
                               R
    ETASA’S 16 astronauts in tec niques of water and land parachute
    landings. I n preparation for safe parachute landings in low-
    altitude abort during Project Gemini launching, astronauts were
    towed to heights of 400 ft. suspended under pre-inflated canopy,
    then cut lwse for free descent to earth. Towing was by power
    boat for water descents and truck for land descents. (MSC Re-
    lease 63-151)
  NASA Lewis Research Center awarded a $48,131,315 contract to

                                                         L
    Aerojet-General Gorp. for redefinition of Snap-8 Systems for
                                                           nap-8 is de-
    Nuclear Auxiliary Power) development program.
     signed to provide 35 kilowatts of on-board electric power to
    future spacecraft. (Lewis Chronology, 8)
  USAF announced most promising and practical method for protect-
    ing spacecraft against meteoroids appeared to be the “particle
     wall” concept: a layer of tiny metallic particles trapped by an
     electrostatic field would be used to cover surface of the space-
     craft, absorbing impact of space particles. Study of this con-
    cept was completed by Fundamental Methods Associates, for
    AFSC Research Technology Div. (DOD Release 1233-63)
  Air Force Association presented Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper the
     David C. Schilling trophy for the year’s most significant aero-
     space achievement in field of flight-his 22-orbit Project Mercury
     space flight MA-9. ( MSC Space News Roundup, 0/18/63,8)
Septc-mber 14: US.-Scandinavia approval of Rlmiorandnm of Un-
     derstanding for testing of NAsa-launched experimental commu-
     nications satellites announced by NASA and Scandinavian Commit-
    tee for Satellite Telecommunication. Vice President Lyndon B.
     Johnson, on official tour of Scandinavia, received in Copenhagen
     the Danish Government’s note of approval, making the Memo-
     randum effective: Norway had approved Memorandum in note
     dated Sept. 11 and Sweden, in note dated July 25. Under agree-
     ment, Scandinavian Committee would provide ground station to
     receive multichannel telephone or telegraph signals tranymitted
     from U.S. via orbiting communications satellite. (NASA Re-
     lease 63-205)
  Discussing the National Space Program before Iowa City Daily
     Press Association in Des Moines, NASA Associate Director of
     Plans and Program Evaluation Addison M. Rothrock said :
       “The prime objective of . . . [the manned space flight] pro-
     gram is to land men on the moon before the end of the decade.
    The scope covered by the program is much broader than this.
     It is in fact the research, development and operation of a series
    of research manned spacecraft that will determine for us man’s
    ability to operate in space. By focusing on the moon-landing
     we have set a goal that insures we develop all basic phases of
     the operation of manned spacecraft. I cannot emphasize this
     too strongly.
       “By the time our three astronauts leave for the moon-landing
     we as a nation will have accumulated 2000 flight hours in earth
     orbit of manned craft. To indicate to you the significance of
     this number-we have a of now less than five flight hours of
                               s
                                                                    341
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,          19 6 3

    manned aircraft a t speeds in excess of Mach 2.5. . . . I n them
    2000 hours we nil1 have orbited the earth some 1300 times. M n    e
    will have gone to and from craft in orbit. We will have ren-
    dezvoused and insmcted craft and transferred men and material
    between craft. We mill have maneuvered the craft both in re-
    gards to the attitude of the craft as has been done with Mercury
    and the Orbiting Solar ObservatoT and in regards to changes
    in the flight path as has been done with Mariner I and Syncoms.
                                                          1
    These are the things that must be done and will be done in the
    development, operation, and functioning of manned craft in
    space. . . .” (Text)
September 14: Univ. of Tennessee announced USAF had provided 400
    acres at Tullahoma, Term., as site for a Univ. of Tennessee space
    institute. State government has appropriated $1,2tiO,OOO for con-
    struction of first buildingp. ( N Y T , 9/15/63,54)
  ITS. and 1T.S.S.R. were both awarded three gold wings (first prize)
    at first World Festival of Aeronautic and Space Films, sponsored
    by F k d h t i o n Aeronautique Internationale and held 1 ~ .   Deau-
    ville. Among U.S. +nners were “The Mastery of Space” and
    “The X-15 Story.” ( N Y T ,9/17/63,35)
September 15: NASA announced EXPLORER XVI metmroid-detection sat-
    ellite, launched Dec. 16, 1962, had ceased transmitting usable ex-
    perimental data on July 25, 1963. Throughout its 71/2 months
    of transmitting useful data, EXPLORER XVI fulfilled all its primary
    objectives. The satellite reported these results (one mil equals
    1,OOOth of an inch) :4 penetrations of one-mil beryllium-copper;
                            4
    11 penetrations of two-mil beryllium copper; 6 penetmtions of
    one-mil stainless steel; one penetration of tvo-mil copper; and
    oneBnenetration of three-mil copper. There were no penetrations
    of five-mil beryllium-copper or six-mil stainless steel. One
    cadmium-sulfide cell was penetrated in such a way that sunlight,
                                                                   ----
    snturntd it E d refidered it ir?qs!”h’e.      ! b e thRZ ‘‘”,””” mate-
                                                               G tw
                                                                 -w
    aroid hits were recorded by microphone impact sensors which
    covered about one-tenth of total exposed ex riment surface.
    These sensors did not measure penetration. ~ A S A        Release 63-
    203 ; LaRc Release)
  Third command and data acquisition station i Tiros meteorological
                                                    n
    satellite CDA system became operational, the Fairbanks, Alaska,
    station joining those a t Wallops Island, Va., and Pt. Mu-, Calif.
    CDA stations receive cloud-cover photographs and other data from
    orbiting Tiros sqtellites, rela them to Weather Bureau’s National
    Weather Satellite Center, &&land, Md., for analysis. (NASA
    Release 63-206)
  Dr. W. E. Morrow, Jr., of MIT’S Lincoln Laboratory, told Inter-
    national Scientific Radio Union in Tokyo that Project West
    Ford had “demonstrated that a significant communications capac-
    ity between large ground terminals can be prox-ided by a dipole
    belt so diffused as to be barely detectable by optical astronomers
    and virtually undetectable by radio astronomers.” He disclosed
    that only about half of the 400 million released dipoles had
    prored effective as signal reflectors, but the project “has already
    fulfilled virtually all its major objectives.” (Simons, Wash.
    Post, 9/16/63 ;space Bus. D d y , 9/16/63,388)
342            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

September 26‘: AFSC announced it lmnched more than 60 spaa experi-
     ments in FY 1963, encompassin following areas of study : aurora
     borealis; infrared mtrum of L e n a engine plume; variations in
                        T
     earth’s magnetic fie d ; effecrt of space environment on materials;
     impedance of near space ; air density at satellite altitudes ; earth’s
     albedo (whiteness) ; altitude of ozone h y e r ;radio waves from out-
     side solar system; emissions from upper atmosphere; thermal elec-
     tricity; and space radiation. Spacecraft were launched with
     Atlas-Agena and Thor-Agena launch vehicles from Vandenberg
     AFB and USAF facilities at Pt. Arguello.          (Spnce Bay. DaiZy,
     9/17/63,400)
  Addressing National Conference on Citizenship in Washington,
     Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said :
        “No one can foretell with certainty the tremendous import this
     broad technological revolution may have. But its implication
     is really much more broad and deep than a single reference to
     space, for space accomplishments are but one fruit of a greater
      advancement. There have been matching broad advances in
     many technical fields that have affected, and will continue to
     affect every facet of life from our homes, to automobiles, to medi-
     cine, to buildings, to roads, and to education. History has shown
     that such surges of advancement are times of greater opportunity
      to mold the future . . . .” (Text, CR,9/16/63, A5799)
  I n a speech at the 1963Corporate Leadership Dinner, Detroit, Michi-
      gan, Robert W. Sarnoff, Chairman of the Board of NBC, said:
         “Within the past quarter century alone, scientific research has
      more than doubled the inventory of human knowledge.
         “The simple fact that we have shortened the distance between
      research and product development has itself altered and enriched
      American life immeasurably, and has created a potential for
      raising the living standards of people everywhere . . . .
         “Historically, man’s adaptation to new circumstances has pro-
      ceeded by fits and starts, aided by a generous allotment of time
      in which to accomplish massive transformation. But now science
      and teohnology are pumping a new form of quick-change fuel
      into the lifestream of civilization, and the time is past when we
      might count upon years of grace in which to alter concepts and
      methods to suit a differing environment. Today the un-
      precedented rate of change we experience-and can anticipate-
      is a fact unique in human experience, calling for more rapid and
      drastic accommodations than have ever before been required.”
       (Text)
  Two contracts were awarded by NASA Lewis Research Center to
      study possibility of “floxing” the Atlas booster. If feasible, the
      mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen might increase the
      Atlas payload capability for earth orbit by as much as 88%.
       (Lewis Chronology, 4)
September 27: Opening of U.N. General Assembly transmitted via
      RELAY I and SYNCOM 1 to Europe and Africa.            (NASA Release
                              1
      63-207)
  Addressing International Northwest Aviation Council in Edmonton,
      Alberta, Deputy Director of NASA Office of Educational Programs
      and Services James V. Bernard0 said: “The destinies of all na-
                                                                  343
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    tions are inextricably enhwined with aeronautics and space ex-
    ploration. Aviation-r       perhaps more appropriately, aerospace
    activities-will continue, on an ever-increasing scale, to have pro-
    found effects upon the lives of all people.
       “The frontiers of science and technology are limitless. The
    years ahead will bring about not on1 tremendous changes, but
                                           K
    also an increased and unquenchable t irst for knowledge of the
     unknown beyond our earthly atmosphere. These years ahead will
    also witness, I’m sure, another great revolution in education, one
    which will give us a continuity and sequence in science and mathe-
    matics, from the kindergarten through the college graduate school.
    As the revolution takes lace, great care must be exercised by the
                            P
    architects of the curricu um that we achieve a necessary balance.
    We must tsach our young p e o p l d c e the future lies with
    them-the physical sciences so that they can achiere our national
    goals in science and engineering. But we must also teach them
    the humanities so that they can use these achievements for man’s
    betterment. The two great branches of learnin must be blended
    into the b s possible educational program.” ( A d )
              et
September 17: AFX announced installation of experimental Snaptype
    reactor in its Western Test Stakion, Idaho, as first step in new
    series of reactor-destruction tests. Ts series would simulatecon-
                                           et
    ditions of “several conceivable, though unlikely, accidents that
    could destroy [such] a reactor.” (AP, NYT, 9/18/63,16
  Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center hrector,
    said in speech before National Rocket Club in Washington that
    suggestions of US.-U.S.S.R. joint lunar landin         rogram were
    impractical. Such exchange of manpower, knowfsge, and funds
    could be of some benefit, he said, “but I tremble at the thought of
    the integration roblems we could expect . . . . I really have
                     t
    mixed emotions, ut I’m speaking only as a engineer, not a an   s
                                                  n
    international politician . . . .” (NYT, 9/18/63, 11; mc
    ReleaSe)
  The Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BNEWS), developed
    by the Electronic Systems Division, became fully operational with
    turnover of the third station at Fylin dales, E n land. The other
                                                   (3
                                         %
    two are located a Clear, Alaska, an Thule, reenland. (AFBC
                       t
    Release 312-R-114,1/1/64,3; A&AE, Nov., 1963,ll)
  NASA signed contract with North American Aviation for studies of
    Apollo spacecraft modifications to permit its being used as a spacs
    science laboratory for missions up to one year. Contract was
    awarded by Manned Spaoecraft Center. (Space Bus. MZy,
    10/14/63, 76)
  Field Enter rises Educational Gorp. and Life Magazine a n n o u n d
             P
    signing o four-year contracts with 16 NASA ast,ronautsfor their
    personal stories; Field Enterprises acquired nevspaper Syndica-
    tion and book rights, Life, the magazine rights. (AP, NYT,
    9/18/63,15)
  National Capitol Section of AIAA announced it was sponsoring con-
    struction of full-scale copy of Wright brothers’ airplane which
    made man’s first powered flight. Replica would be presented to
    Kill Devil Hills, N.C., Wright Memonal Museum a 60th anniver-
                                                        t
    sary program on Dec. 16. (AIAA/NCSRelease)
344           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 6 3

September 17: USAF launched Titan I ICBM with dummy nuclear war-
    head from Vandenberg AFB. (M&R,         0/23/63,10)
Xeptember 17-19 : Technical session on supersonic transport aircraft
    held at NASA Langley Research Center, with representatives of
    Boeing Co. and Lockheed California Co. reporting on results of
    their feasibility studies performed under LaRc contract. Con-
    tractor reports indicated two of the four AST concepts studied
    appeared to be most promising for commercial design : (1) design
    using principle of variable-sweep wing to rovide good flying
    characteristics at low speeds needed for lan$ing and take-off as
    well as for efficient supersonic cruise-concept evolved by scien-
    tists and en ineers of Lam; (2) design using fixed delta wing
                 Ei
    mounted we1 aft on long fuselage with canard control surfaces-
    concept evolved out of research cunducted by NASA Ames Research
    Center. (NASA Release 63-210 ; Lam Release 9/19/63)
September 17-93: Symposium on applications of the Theory of Func-
    tions in Continuum Mechanics, sponsored by International IJnion
     of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, held in Tbilisi, 1J.S.S.R.
    Dr. Adolf Busemann, Research Staff Scientist of NASA Langley
     Research Center, represented the Center and NASA at the sympo-
     sium. (LaRc Release)
September 18: One-year anniversary of orbiting of TIROS VI meteoro-
    logical satellite, its year-long operational lifetime setting new
     record for weather satellites. On July 31, 1963, TIROS VI dis-
     covered first hurricane (Arlene) of 1963 season in tropical Atlan-
     tic ; altogether, TIROS VI photographed two hurricanes in Atlantic,
     two tropical storms in eastern Pacific, eight typhoons in central
     and western Pacific, as well a sand storms in Saudi Arabia and
                                     s
     ice conditions in southern and northern hemispheres. Along
     with TIROS v it supported Mercury space flights of Astronauts
     Schirra and Cooper. National Weather Satellite Center issued
     about 600 weather advisories around the world based on some of
     the 63,000 cloud-cover pictures from TIROS VI. (NASA Release 63-
     209 : Commerce Dept. Release W B 63-11)
  Sen. Hubert Humphrey (D.-Minn.) said on Senate floor that U.S.
     “should take the initiative, at this Session of the United Nations
     General Assembly, to create a constructive and conciliatory cli-
     mate which could lead to a serious discussion between the United
      States and the Soviet Union of the basic political issues of the
     cold war.” Of the five issues he proposed, two dealt with space
     exploration :
        “We should make clear our willingness to cooperate with the
      Soviet Union and with other nations in the field of outer space.
      The whole question of exploration of outer space and of the law
      that will govern outer space are ripe for further discussion and
      bold new actions . . . .7,
        Commenting on New Yo& Tims report that Soviet Acade-
      mician Anatoli A. Blagonravov had “suggested that it might be
      advisable to discuss the possibility of cooperating between the
      United S a e and the U.S.S.R. in the assault on the moon,” Sen-
                tts
      ator Humphrey urged : “Despite the technical problems that
      might be involved in such a cooperative venture, it is my view that
                                                                   345
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,      1963

    such proposals on the part of Soviet officials should not be hos-
    tilely rejected. Rather they should be given careful considera-
    tion." (CR,9/18/63,16536-37)
September 18: GSFC selected two companies for negotiation of contracts
    pertaining to Nimbus weat,her satellite. $252,000 contract to Gm-
    eral Electric Co. called for development of operating p d u r e s
    for Nimbus control center as well as training of personnel to
    o erate the center. $165,000 contract to RCA Electron Tube and
    &miconductor Div. required contractor to furnish solar cells for
    Nimbus satellites and Nimbus operational system. (CSFC Release
    G-19-63)
  USAF launched Thor rocket with delta-wing re-entry payload from
    AMR, first flight test in Project Asset (Aerothermod namic-
    Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests). sayload
    reached 35-mi. altitude before re-entering atmosphere a t 10,900
    mph speed and landing about 1,000 mi. southeast of Cape Canav-
    eral. Recovery efforts were not successful. Good data, on tem-
    peratures and pressures of the payload were obtained during the
    20-min. flight; the various materials of the payload were sub-
                                       ,0'. (AP, NYT, 9/19/63, 8)
    jected to re-entry heat up to 400F
  Army Corps of Engineers awarded NASA contract to Westinghouse
    Astronuclear Laboratory for estimate of power needs of a manned
    lunar base and design of nuclear generator that could be sent to
    the moon for such a base. Data would be used by N A ~ A n evalu-
                                                               i
    ating feasibility of lunar base. (DOD Release l255cs3)
September 19: SYNCOM II %-hour communications satellite used to
    relay ocsanogra hic data from research vessel Geronimo in Gulf
    of Guinea off l f r i c a to National Oceanographic Data Center
    in Washington, which compared the data with its records and
    sent back to the Geronim the deviations to correct errors. Dem-
    onstration via BYNCOM II was erformed to determine PraCtiCa-
    hility of pmviding rewarch s f i p s quickly with information to
    correct errors. Line of transmission: from Geronimo to Kinge-
    port in Lagos harbor, to SYNCOM II some 22,300 mi. above Atlan-
    tic Ocean, to ground station a t Lakehurst, N J ,along ground
                                                     ..
    lines to NODC, and return. (NASA Release 63-212)
September 19-22!: Conference on Outer S ace, sponsored by St. Louis
                                          8
    Univ. and Columbia Univ., held in t. Louis. 75 persons from
     13 states represented business, industry, education,. professions,
    science, labor, Government, and the press at the t h r d Midwest
    Assembly. ( S t .Louis Post-Dispatch,9/8/63)
       NASA Administmtor James E. Webb said in Sept. 19 address:
          . . . as a nation we are going through a new and vital experi-
       LL

    ence in achieving the maste of space. We have undertaken
                                  7
    to perform the largest job o research, of development, and of
    manufacture ever mounted by this or any other nation. There is
    required here the mobilization of the best of science, of engineer-
    ing, of industry, and of government. The technical job is i       n
    itself staggering. Yet for American society perhaps the greater
                                                                  T?"
     significance lies in the fact that the objective of this pm
    is fully as much to gain knowledge as to secure concrete o 1%-
    tives; that it is bemg carried on in peacetime without the
     741-823 -
             2
             3
346                                                  1963
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    im &us of war; that, while insuring national security, its cen-
       Y
    tra purpose is to secure the peaceful uses of space for all man-
    kind; that NASA is a civilian agency; and that it necessarily will
    require many years of sustained and costly effort. We have in
    fact set ourselves a hard challenge of national pu ose and will:
                                                            ?
    to sustain such a program through all of the trou les and diffi-
    culties that are inevitable in a research and development effort,
    an effort whose failures as well as. its successes are set before
    the world to see. This is a difficult undertakin ; but if we suc-
                                                        f
    ceed in these ways, then we will have accomp ished much and
    learned more as a free society . . . .” I n interview following
    his address, Webb commented on that day’s proposal by Soviet
    Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko for summit meeting of lead-
    ers of the 18 nations articipating in Geneva disarmament con-
                           6
     ference. Webb said romyko’s U.N. speech was the most recent
    example of growing awareness of U.S. advances in space tech-
               “. . . The image of America as a can-do nation in space
      nolofy-
    has een increasing rapidly, and the Russians cannot fail to be
     influenced by that image.” (Text; St. Louis Post-Dispatch,
    9/20/63)
September 19: USAF announced two 1%-lb. Tetrahedral Research
     Satellites (TIW) had been ejected into orbit from an unidentified
     orbiting satellite earlier in 1963. Twin satellites were second and
     third of series; first TRS was launched in 1962. Primary pur-
     pose of TRS experiments was investigation of radiation damage
     to spacecraft solar-power systems and evaluating methods of
     protecting the solar cells from Van Allen belt radiation. Valu-
     able data obtained by the five radiation-damage experiments in
     each satellite were transmitted back to earth and received by
     NASA Minitrack telemetry network, cooperating with USAF in the
    project. (DOD Release 1260-63; TRS Fact Sheet)
  Quoting President Kennedy’s Inaugural Address, in which he said,
     “Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of
     its terrors. Together let us explore the stars . . .,” New Pork
     T i m s editorial stated :
        “When the President spoke these words, there was far more
     reason to think his idea an impractical one than there is today.
     Of course there are difficult problems still in the way of serious
     Soviet-American cooperation on a manned space flight. But
     f,he financial, political and scientific advantages to both sides of a
     joining of forces in this area would be so great that, every oppor-
     tunity should be seized to explore this possibility with the So-
     viet Government. Moscow’s feelers in this direction should be
     followed up, not rebuffed out of hand . . . .” ( N Y T , 9/19/63,
     26)
  USAF announced issuing Requests for Proposals for studies of
     manned orbital space station. From the bidding industries USAF
     will select three contractors to conduct parallel four-month studies
     “to define characteristics from which a space station could be
     designed to demonstrate and assess quantitatively the utility of
     man in space for military purposes.” (DOD Release 1261-63)
                                                                       347
               ASTFtONATJTICS lLND AERONAUTICS, 1963

September 20: Addressing U.N. General Assembly, President Ken-
    nedy listed results of U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations :
       “We have, in recent years, agreed on a limited nuclear test-ban
    treaty, on an emergency communications link betwean our capi-
    tals, on a statement of principles for disarmament, on an 111-
    crease in cultural exchan e, on cooperation in outer space, on
                                f
    the peaceful exploration o the Antarctic, and on tempering last
    year’s crisis over Cuba . . . .
       “Finally, in a field where the United States and the Soviet
    Union have a special capacity-the field of sp-there           is room
    for new cooperation, for further joint efforts in the replation
    and exploration of space. I include among these possibilities
    a joint expedition to the moon.
       “Space offers no roblem of sovereignty; by resolution of this
    Assembly, the mem rs of the United Nations have foresworn
                         ?le
    any claims to territorial rights in outer space or on celestial bodies,
    and declared that international law and the U.N. charter will
    apply. Why, therefore, should man’s first flight to the moon be
    a matter of national competition?
       “Why should the United States and the Soviet Union, in pre-
    paring for such expeditions, become involved in immense dupli-
    cations of research, construction and expenditure? Surely we
    should explore whether the scientists and astronauts of our two
    countries-indeed, of all the world-cannot work together in the
    conquest of space, sending some day in this decade to the moon,
    not the representatives of a single nation, but the representatives
    of all humanity.
      “All these and other new steps toward peaceful coo ration
                                                                 Ell
    may be possible. Most of them will require on our part            con-
    sultation with our allies, for their interests are as much involved
    as our own, and we will never make an agreement at their expense.
                           ~ y ~ i!or?g zr?dcgrpfld neptiat.ions. And
                                    re
      “?;I=t =f therr,
    most of them will require a new approach to the cold war-a
                                        x
    desire not to ‘bury’ one’s adversa but to c o m p t a in a host of
    peaceful arenas, in ideas, in pro uction, and in service to all
   humanity.
      “The contest will continue, the contest between those who en-
   vision a monolithic world and those who believe in diversity, but
   it should be a contest in leadership instead of destruction, a con-
   test in achievement instead of intimidation. Speaking for the
   United S a e of America, I welcome such a contest. For we
              tts
   believe that truth is stronger than error, and that freedom is more
   enduring than coercion. And in the contest for a better life, a11
   theworldcanbethewinner . . . .       97

      In addition to urging US.-U.S.S.R. negotiations, President
   Kennedy urged U.N. to work on five major projects, among them
   ‘‘a global system of satellites [which] could provide communica-
   tion and weather information for all corners of the earth.”
    (Text, Wmh. Post, 9/21/63, A10)
 Commenting on Preside.nt Kennedy’s proposal for joint US.-
   U.S.S.R. lunar exploration negotiations, NASA Associate Admin-
   istrator Dr. Robert C . Seamans said in Houston press conference
   that the proposal did not mean Soviet cosmonauts would fly in
348                                                  19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     Apollo spacecraft. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Deputy Associ-
     ate Administrator, compared a cooperative moon program to
            erative exploration of Antarctica-U.S. and Soviet scientists
                the continent together but, he said, “they get there in
                 shi s.” (Rurnett, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/22/63)
September 81 : 8 p p e r sta e (S-IV) for Saturn SA-5 rocket arrived
     at Cape Canaveral aEoard modified Stratocruiser aircraft. TO
     be test-flown late this year, SA-5 would be first Saturn testing
     live upper stage. (Marshall Star, 9/25/63,1)
  TIROS VII meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Debra, fourth
     hurricane of season, headed north in Atlantic southeast of Ber-
     muda. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 9/23/63)
  Unnamed White House spokesman disclosed that President Ken-
     nedy first mentioned possibility of joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned
     lunar exploration to Soviet Premier Khrushchev during their
     June 1961 meeting in Vienna. Premier Khrushchev neither ac-
     cepted nor rejected the proposal at that time. (Simons, Wash.
     Post, 9/22/63, A B ; N Y T , 9/22/63, 1 )
  British and European r e s headlined President Kennedy’s pro-
     posal for a joint 17.8-G.S.S.R. lunar expedition, while Soviet
     news media ignored that portion of the President’s address. (UPI,
      Wash. Post, 9/21/63, A10; Reuters, N Y T , 9/22/63,23 ;UPI, N Y T ,
     9/22/63,34)
  NATO announced US. Prof. Courtland D. Perkins had been elected
     chairman of NATO’s      Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research
      (AGARD) . (Reuters, Waah. Po&, 9/22/63, A15)
Xeptember 21-29 : Worldwide press reaction to President Kennedy’s
     U.N. speech of Sept. 20, proposing joint manned lunar landing
     effort :
        “. . . The very reasons which impelled the powers to reach a
     test ban treaty-a combination of common sense and a recognition
     that costs mere going up by geometric progression-should now
     bring them to combine a space program.” (London Times)
        LL. . . The horizons opened by the President . . . were vast.”
      (Paris Aurore)
        LL. . . Benefits from such a joint effort militate in favor of this
     second major step to develop the improved international relation-
     ship already stemming from the agreement on the limited nnclear
     test-ban treaty.” ( N Y T )
        “. . . Will excite world-wide attention . . . eminently sensible
     sug@&ion . . . national advantages to be derived by the first
     nation to the moon are great, in a political and propaganda con-
     text, but they are lesser than the advantages that all mankind
      will derive from the extension of human knowledge that is goin
     to be involved in the effort to reach the moon . . . .” ( W a s f
      PO&)
         “. . . Stirred the imagination of the world . . . tend to open
     up the closed society of the U.S.S.R.” (Wash.Star)
         ‘L. . Kennedy envisages an incredibly bold scientific advance
             .
      [and] accepts as possible a degree of collaboration between two
      opposing systems . . . which would have seemed incredible only
      a few months ago.” (Lmdon Daily Express, N Y T , September
     22,1963)
                                                                       349
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

September 23: SYNCOM II communications satellite relayed transmis-
     sion of speech and teletype between Fort Dix, N.J., and moving
     ship K k g s p o r t about 4-0 west of L g s Nigeria. This was first
                                                    ao,
                                      mi.
     such transmission via a communications satellite to a moving
     ship a t sea. This was first in series of experiments designed to
     test shipboard equipment and reception in fringe areas. (NASA
     Release 63-213)
  u * announced launching unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D
   s
     launch vehicle from Vandenberg AFB. (AP, NPT,9/25/63, 14)
  President John F. Kennedy wrote a letter to Rep. Albert, Thomas
     (D.-Tes.) :
       "I am very glad to respond to your letter of September 21 and
     to state my position on the relation between our great current
     space effort and my proposal at the United Nations for increased
     cooperation with the Russians in this field. I n my view an ener-
     getic continuation of our strong space effort is essential, and the
     need for this effort is?if anything, increased b our intent to work
                                                     6
     for increasing cooperation if the Soviet overnment proves
     willmg.
        "As you know, the idea of cooperation in space is not new.
     My statement of our willingness to coo rate in a moon shot was
                                               lp"
                            r
     an extension of a licy developed as ong ago as 1958 on a bi-
     partisan basis, wit particular leadership from Vice President
     Johnson., who was then the Senate Ma'ority Leader . . . . Our
                                               B
     specific lnterest in cooperation with the oviet Union, a the other
                                                                    s
     nation with a major resent capability in space, was indicated
     by me to Chairman d r u s h c h e v in Vienna in the middle of 1961,
     and reaffirmed in my letter to him of March 7,1962. . . . So my
     statement in the United Nations is a direct development of a policy
     long held by the United States Government,
        "Our repeated offers of cooperation with the Soviet Union have
     sc fzy n""l l n n r l rrnla l i m i t 4 mcnanEec --- mxnlts . - Bat a I
                                                                          s
              d                                       and
            r".
            '"
             ".                              *- r -
                                                 -
                                I
                                -
                                -
                                -
                                .
                                .
                      "'
                       "J
                                                          *-----
     said in July of this year, them are a good m y barriers of suspi-
     cion and fear to be broken down before we can have major progress
     in this field. Yet our intent remains: to do our part to bring
     those barriers down.
        "At the same time, as no one knows better than you, the United
    .States in the last five years has made a steadily growing national
     effortinspace. . . .
        "This great national effort and this steadily stated readiness to
     cooperate with others are not in conflict. They are mutually
     supporting elements of a single policy. We do not make our space
     effort with the narrow purpose of national aggrandizement. We
     make it so that the United S a e may have a leading and honor-
                                             tts
     able role in mankind's peaceful conquest of space. It is this great
     effort which permits us now to offer increased Cooperation with
     no suspicion anywhere that we speak from weakness. And in
     the same way, our readiness to cooperate with others enlarges the
     international meaning of our own peaceful American program in
     space.
        "In my judgment, therefore, our renewed and extended pur-
     pose of cooperation, so far from offering any excuse for slackening
     or weakness in our space effort, is one reason the more for moving
350           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

     ahead with the great program to which we have been committed a     s
     a count for more than two years.
        (‘so X e position of the united sae is clear. If coop-
                                                tts
     eration is possible, we mean t cooperate, and we shall do so
                                        o
     from a osition made strong and solid by our national effort in
     s ace. f f cooperation is not possible-and as realists we must
       P
     p an for this contingency t-then      the same strong national effort
     will serve all free men’s interest in space, and protect us also
     against possible hazards to our national security. So let us press
     o n . . . . ” (Letter,9/23/63)
September $ ’ Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator,
                3:
     said in Mit3si2es and Roclcet.y interview that Soviet Academician
     A. A. Blagonravov had informed him that “once the two nations
     have landed instrumented payloads on the Moon discussions of
     cooperation in a manned lunar-landing program should begin.”
     Dr. Dryden added that “it’s the first time they have indicated
     interest in a joint effort.
        “The climate has changed. I t is somewhat more favorable.”
      (iK&R,9/23/63, 14)
  USAF announced launching Titan I1 ICBM fmm underground silo in
     test flight from Vandenberg AFB. (AP, N Y T , 9/25/63,14)
  France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales announced France
     would send a cat into space from rocket launching site in Sahara.
      (Renters, Wnsh. Post, 9/24/63)
  First child born to space traveler-Tanya Titov, daughter of Maj.
     Gherman Titov (VOSTOK IT orbital space flight) and wife Tamara.
      (AP, N Y T , 9/25/63,8)
Reptember 24 : Subcommittee of House Committee on Appropriations
     voted to approve $5.1 billion appropriations bill for NASA in F Y
     1964, $250,820,400 less than NASA authorizations bill. Rep. Olin
     E. Teague (D.-Tex.), Chairman of Manned Space Flight Sub-
     committee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said
     President, Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar
     flight mas “bound to hurt” chances of full appropriations being
     passed bv House and criticized idea of joint project as imprac-
     tical. (Finney, N Y T . 9/25/63,1,15)
  First public showing of guidance and navigation system for Apollo
   - manned space flights, the briefing conducted at MIT’S Instrumen-
     tation Laboratory, in charge of the system design and develop-
     ment for NASA. ( N Y T . 9/25/63; Wash. E v e . Star, 9/25/63)
          briefed prospective bidders on two-phase program definition
  A ED
   FS
     of a standardized space guidance system (SSGS),aimed at develop-
     ing single system capable of providing guidance and control for
     launch vehicle, for orbital injection, and for actual spacecraft
     mission performance. Phase One would study various missions
     and analyze hardware requirements ; Phase Two would investi-
     gate means to develop hardware based on Phase One concepts.
      ( M d R ,9/9/63,16 ; MdR, 9/30/63,18)
  After lengthy debate, Senate voted (80-19) to ratify nuclear test-
     ban treaty, initialed by U.S., V.K., and U.S.S.R. on July 25 in
     Moscow and prohibiting nuclem tests in the atmosphere, in space,
     and under water. (OR,       9/24/63,16909)
                                                                  351
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

September 24: I n his Wmhington Post wlumn, Walter Lippmann
    said :
       “The President has made his suggestion of collaboration in
    going to the moon at a time when there is some improvement
    in U.S.S.R.-U.S.A. relations. It happens also to be a time when
    there is a grow      doubt among American scientists and among
                    ”f
    the people genera ly a b u t the commitment to put an American
    man on the moon by the year 1970.
       “The President’s proposal at the U.N. is, it seems to me, ex-
    cellent even if the joint effort proves to be technically and polit-
    ically impracticable. It is excellent because it may offer an hon-
    orable way to correct the mistakes of our original commitments
    about going to the moon.
       “There were two big mistakes. One was the commitment t          o
    put a man, a living person mther than instruments, on the moon.
    The other mistake w s to set a deadline-1970-when          the man
                          a
    was to land on the moon . . . .” ( W a d . Po&, 9/24/63)
  Senate passed (77-0) Defense appropriations bill for F Y 1964,
‘0

    totaling $47,339,707,000. This was $258 million more than passed
    by House and $1.4 billion less than Administration request. Bills
    would be sent to conference committee for compromise. (CR,
    9/24/63,16972; NPT, 9/25/63,1)
  At International Atomic Energy Agency conference in Vienna.,
    AW Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg said a,$cultural        and indus-
            x
    trial ap lications of radioactive isotopes 111 U.S. had approxi-
    mately oubled in past five years and that “we look for perhaps
    an increased trend in the next five years.” (Underwood, NPT,
    9/25/63,14)
  U.S. Army conducted successful test-firing of Pershing ballistic
    missile from Black Mesa, Utah, to impact point within White
    Sands Misile Range. N.M. Test was part of current overland
    m - & mG+fi&d -adei ~                  ~ ~ ~ & i t i ~ F -.  ~”
                                                                 f-
                                                                 i
                                                                 ln
     i:                                                ~                   A

    1282-63)
  DOD Iaunched unidentified satellite from PXR employing Thor-Agena
    D launch vehicle. (Pre8. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
September 25: NASA launched two-stage A e r o k 150A sounding
    rocket from WaIlops Island, Va., with 185-lb. payload of US.-
    Japanese instrumentation to measure electron density and tem-
    perature in the ionosphere. Payload was lofted to 139-mi. alti-
    tude and no recovery operation was involved. Purpose of experi-
    ment was to compare simultaneous measurements made by two
    different methods: instruments supplied by NASA Goddard Space
    Flight Center and radio-frequency resonance probe developed by
    Japan‘s Radio Research Laboratory. (Wallops Release 63-85 ;
    NASA Release 63-211)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before annual meet-
    ing of Texas Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Asmiation in Houston,
    quoted President Kennedy’s proposal for US.-U.S.S.R.negotia-
    tions toward joint lunar exploration :
       “The President’s statement has captured the imagination of the
    peoples o the world. I n itself, cooperation in space activity be-
             f
    tween the great antagonists of the Cold War is a thrilling pros-
352           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   pect. But the significance of this possibility is not limited to
    space; rather, it lies equally in the fact that, cooperation in space
    is one more step toward cooperation on Earth, toward the banish-
    ment, of t.he fear of the annihilation of life as we h o w it.
       “The President’s st,atement received weight and conviction from
    the fact that the United States has a powerful space capability ;
    and from the fact that this Nation is well on its way to achieving
    preeminence in t,hisnew environment.
       “This national strength in space represents a massive and pm-
    ductive effort on the part of the United States during the past five
                               potential value is only now beginning to
    years, an effort whose -                                    -     -
    emerge . . . .
       “While proceeding with the develonment of the launch vehicles
    and s p k r a f t of the future, more than 90 per cent of it under
    contract with American industry, we have also learned the essen-
    tials of space operations, and achieved a degree of reliability
    which has produced many specific achievements in space.
       “In 1958, the United States had five successful flights, but for’
    each success we had two failures. By 1961, out of 54 flights, the
    success ratio was 83 per cent. I n the first eight months of this
    year every NASA launch has succeeded, with the exception of one
    small Scout rocket launched from Wallops Island . . . .’, (Text)
September 25: E u ene Wasielewski, Associate Director of NASA God-
    dard Space Fgght Center, in address before Scientific Research
    Society of America in Paoli, Pa., emphasized accomplishments
    of NASA during its first five years :
       “While it is easy for me to say that NASA has, as an organization,
    launched over 50 satellites, of which 30 were put into orbit by
    Goddard . . ., I am sure that you must all realize the tremen-
    dous research and development effort that was required to put
    khese spacecraft into orbit.
       “Certainly Goddard . . . owes much to the successful develop-
     ment of the Delta launch vehicle which has given us 20 SUCCBSS~G
    in 21 shots . . . .” (Goddnrd News. 10/7/63. 61
  Louis B. C. Fong, Director, Office of Technology Utilization, ad-
    dressing the American Management Association, Inc., said :
                activities in space operate across all of the interfaces in
       “NASA’s
    the total transition process which starts with basic research and
     advances through applied research, development, engineering de-
    sign, test and fabrication to ultimate production. Industry must
    be ready to determine in which phase it should act and direct
    space technology to an industrially oriented goal.
       “Resistance to new ideas and new technologies is part psycho-
    logical ; a good deal of it is practical when new expenditures have
    to be justified to stockholders in terms of an upward sales curve.
    Often it is ecpnomic, since to implement a new technology may
     result in a tremendous impact upon a way of life of a major in-
    dustry-eg., oil vs. coal, transistors vs. tubes, solid state physics
    vs. conventional circuit design, diesel vs. s t e m engines, etc. . . .
       “Companies must organize to accept this data; must be geared
    to use what is helpful ; must work to break down the barriers be-
    tween one division and another. For economic survival, the time
                                                                   353
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    lag can no longer be accepted as standard operating procedure in
    the laboratory-to-consumer cycle . . . .
       “The accepted business patterns of the past must change if you
    singularly as a company and we collectively as a national business
    enterprise are tostay in the race.” (Text)
8eptember 25: Sixty Eastern and Western scientists meeting at 11th
    Pugwash Conference on disarmament and world security en-
    dorsed President Kennedy’s proposals for international scientific
    cooperation in space and other areas. The scientists also proposed
    U.S., U.K., and 1J.S.S.R. conduct joint study of seismic phenom-
    ena, with hope that this study would lead to banning of under-
    ground nuclear tests. Coderees endorsed appeal of Soviet
    Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko for agreement barring
    orbital atomic weapons. (Binder, N Y T , 9/26/63, 11)
  Study memorandum identifying U.S. “stamp la ” inserted in Com
    gresslonal Record by Sen. Frank E. Moss ?!.-Utah). In the
    memo Frank Ballard, principal engineer of Sperry Utah Co.,
    noted Communist bloc has issued at least 18 postage stamps
    identifying Soviet space successes, whereas U S . has issued only
    two stamps associated with its space program, and these in limited
    editions. “. . . I n the face of the existing world struggle, it is
    imperative, even urgent, that we utilize all available media of
    communication to advertise the forces of democracy. The U.S.
    ‘stamp lag’ is self-evident. We must engage in a vigorous pro-
    gram calculated for optimum utilization of the vast potentialities
    of the U.S. postage stamp. As a start, I should like to suggest a
    chronological documentation of the entire space program begin-
    ning with the suborbital flight through individual Mercury
    orbital fliqhts. Gemini and ,4pollo . . . .” (Study Memorandum,
     CR, 9/25/63,17044-45)
  Communist China’s press agency Hsinhua announced that more than
     i,nnn C h i n P ~ fnrpip- c.cientids met in Peking to d e b r a t e
                     2nd
    establishment of center for the World Federation of Scientific
    Workers devoted to the “advancement of science in Asian, African
    and Latin American countries.” ( N Y T , 9/26/63, 5)
September 26: NASA announced first television experiments via
    SYNCOM n communications satellite had been conducted. Test
    pattern Pipals sent Sept. 23 were followed by TV pictures Sept.
    24 and 25 ; because of bandwidth limitations, no audio was sent.
    Officials of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center said transmissions
    were of good quality. Transmissions originated at Fort Dix,
    N.J.,  ground station, were sent to SYNCOM II 22,300 mi. above the
    earth, and retrammitted to A T ~ T  ground station a t Andover, Me.
     (NASA Release 63-216)
  Rep . Albert Thomas (D.-Tex.) made public a letter from President
    Kennedy written in reply to the Congressman’s request for clarifi-
    cation of the President’s position on U.S. lunar landing goals in
    light of his proposals for 1J.S.-U.S.S.R. joint program. I n his
    letter President Kennedy said :
        “This great national effort and this steadily stated readiness to
    cooperate are not in conflict . . . .” Rather, they are “mutually
     supporting elements of a single policy.
354                                               1903
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

        “In my view an energetic continuation of our strong space
    effort is essential, and the need for this effort is, if anything,
    increased by om intent to work for increasing cooperation if the
     Soviet Government proves willing . . . .
        “If cooperation is not possible-and as realists we must plan
     for this contingency, too--then   the same strong national effort
    will wrve all free men’s interest in space, and protect us also
     against possible hazards to our national security. So let us press
     on.” (UPI, NPT, 9/27/63,2)
September 3 : James T. Dennison, of NASA Technology Utilization
               6
     office, said in paper delivered at annual meeting of National
     Association of Business Economists, Cleveland :
        “. . . We suggest that the greatest contributions of our gov-
     ernment’s aerospace programs to the business economy have been
     the psychological boost of setting for ourselves an utterly im-
     possible oal and then buckling down to reach it. And this ad-
               f
     venture as come at a time when there were those who cried
     that our democratic capitalistic economy was sluggish, that we
     were being outdone by overseas and overland competitors, that
      gloom was here and that doom was close at hand.
        “The challenge of the exploration of space, of putting our
     fellow man safely into a desperately hostile environment, has
     provided a spur to great se ents of our American business
                                  Ei”
     economy. And that s ur wil be keeping us on the jump until
                             ph
   . we get those men to t e moon and back, and, then perchance,
     take off for Mars.” (Text)
  On his 66th birthday, Pope Paul V I recognized 175th anniversary
     of Georgetown Univ. bv a special address broadcast to U.S. via
                II communications satellite. (NYT, 9/27/63, 9; N   B
                                                                   C
                                                                   -
     =TAR
     TV, 9/26/63)
  USN launched Polaris A 3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S.
      Observatkm Island using completely new eject launch system.
      (WD Release 1301-63)
September %-October I :xIvth International Astronautical Congress
     held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries
     attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and tech-
     nical subjects were presented. (Program)
        Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of NASA Biotechnology and
      Human Research, and Chairman of IAF Bioastronautics Com-
                 resented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci
      mittee, dp U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and
      discusse
      compared US. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up
      Project Mercury MA-9 fli ht, he said :
         “The performance of &ordon Cooper proved in detail man’s
     integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This
      a w m lishment of the Mercury program is of major significance
          cf
      as it oes indicate that much more dependence can be placed on
      man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft com-
     bination . . . . Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has
      proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in
      a new environment. His senses and ca abilities are little changed
                                           P
      in space. At least for the duration o Cooper’s mission (a total
                                                              355
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

of 34+ hours) weightlemness affecting the normality of his judg-
ment, orientation and other human functions in space was no
problem . . . . (Text)
                ”
   Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology.
He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their
spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts,
since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the
U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run,
human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of
learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text)
   Four papers by Soviet scientists presented a t IAF Congress indi-
 cated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most
complex and m d urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers
reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue,
and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev,
and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts)
   At IAF Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of HIT told Mia-
siles and Rockets that joint lunar landing was possible within five
years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance
were used with a Soviet rocket. (M&R, 9/30/63,26)
   Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet
scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling
of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin ac-
knowledged that rendezvous technique mas “extremely complex”
and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communica-
tions, o tics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock sev-
 eral ingvidual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform
from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the
moon.
   Le J o u M du Dimamhe reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s pre-
diction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the
U.S. (Sc.    W.G., lQ/’?/!33, %; Le bcvrr.rmc?&I. Birnnnrh~:
                                                           9/29/63,
22)
   Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of
 Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at
IAF luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program
would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply
than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon
he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was
necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned.
 (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63)
   Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of NAGA oficeof space
Sciences, said in IAF address :
    “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space ex-
ploration has been the development of automated spacecraff,
Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful appli-
cations of space flight thus far have been made possible by auto-
mated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their
 many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many
branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, atti-
tude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and
 structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of
 light weight, high efiiciency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed
356            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

      reliabilit and quality . . . .” H e then reviewed automated
               9
      s acecra t already flown or currently under ’development by NASA.
      p.ext,
September 26: Dr. Max Tishler, President of Merck, Sharp & Dohme
    Research Laboratories, received the 1963 Chemical Industry Medal
    of the American Section, Society of Chemical Industry, in Hous-
    ton. I n his acceptance speech Dr. Tishler discussed growth of
    Federal support of basic research, concluded : “Industrial re-
    sesrch+nce devoted exclusively to the romotion of economic
    growth-has       become predominantly a bovernment-dominated
    institution for protecting the Nation’s security and exploring
    the solar system.
         “The question is being asked with increasing ersistence
                                                             P
     whether we are devoting a disproportionate amount o our scien-
     tifk and technical resources to the Government’s objectives. It
     has been pointed out that between 1954 and 1961 three-quarters
     of the increase in scientists and engineers engaged in research and
     development was absorbed by the defense and space programs,
     and that the programs on the drawing boards of these same
     agencies will require as many scientists during the next decade as
     all our institutions of higher learning will graduate during the
     same period . . . . How far and how long can this situation
        rogress without damaging our country’s capacity to maintain its
     [road leadership in research ?
         “The Defense Department and the space agency have countered
     these concerns with predictions of spinoffs for the civilian economy
     from developments financed by them. So far, the evidence for this
     contention is unpersuasive. Whether or not the prophecy will
     come true does not alter the unrelenting fact that too little atten-
     tion is being paid to the long-range effect on the civilian economy
      and to the manner in which we have been using tax money to
      divert our scarce scientific and technical resources into such crash
      projects as the race to the moon. Our Government has been prone
      to act a if these resources are either unlimited or can be ex-
               s
      panded indefinitely by appropriating dollars. Neither proposi-
                       . . . .” (Text, CR, 1/15/64, Al43-145)
     tion is w &
 8eptember f l : NASA EXPLORER XIV satellite progress report indicated
      no usable scientific data had been obtained from the scientific sat-
      ellite since mid-August. I n its ten months of operation since
      launch into highly elliptical orbit Oct. 23 1962, EXPLORER XIV sent
      back more than 6,500 hours of data from the six onboard scien-
      tific experiments to chart boundaries of earth’s magnetosphere,
      measure particle population and energies of electrons and pro-
      tons, and determine how magnetic fields influence these particles.
      3,700 hours of data had been processed through computers and
      scientific analysis was continuing. (NASA Explorer XIV Prog.
      Rpt. No. 6)
   Press briefing on contractinq procedures for Lunar Orbiter space-
      craft held a t NASA Hq. Contract for five Lunar Orbiters would
      be first major NASA contract on basis of incentives, with contractor
      sharing cost savings and/or penalties. Objectives of incentive
      contracting were to assure greater reliability of products and
      meeting of scheduled deadlines. (Press Briefing Transcript)
                                                                        357
                                                        1963
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

S e p t e d e r 97: USAF launched Scout vehicle from Vandenberg AFB
      with undisclosed payload. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 9/28/63)
  USAF announced awarding $3,000,000 original definitive contract to
      Lockheed Propulsion Co. for research and development of solid
      propellant motors for the large solid booster program. (DOD Re-
      lease 130443)
September 27-October 10: NASA displayed models of manned and un-
      manned spacecraft in lobby of NASA Hq. building, part of fifth
      anniversary observance. (NASA Release 63-214)
September 28: First birthday of ALOUE~TE I (“topside sounder”)
      satellite, built by Canada and launched by NASA into orbit Sept. 28,
      1962. ALOUETTE was still functioning well and transmitting
      ionospheric data to 13 telemetry stations around the world.
          NASA launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket with
      instrumented payload to 645-mi. altitude from Wallops Station,
      in experiment to compare rocket-borne measurements of ion and
      electron temperatures and densities with similar data obtained
                        Measurements were taken by the rocket pa load
      by ALOUED.
                                                                      i
      in the ionosphere 10 min. before ALO-          passed throug the
      region and made its measurements. Data were telemetered to
      ground receiving stations and no recovery operation was involved.
      Flight was follow-on to similar experiment conducted July 2,
      results of which indicated close agreement in measurements.
      During the first year of operation, ALOUETTE I orbited the mrth
      4,981 tunes, executed 12,900 commands, and provided 2,060 hours
      of telemetry transmissions. (OSFC Historian; NASA Release 63-
      211; Wallops Release 63-87; Goddard New$, 9/23/63,1)
  Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Sta.-
      tion with U.S.-Japanese experiment to measure electron tempem
      tures and densities in the ionosphere by two different methods:
      Langmuir probe, supplied by NASA Goddard Space Flight
                                                           d P V P l 0 p d by
      centerj and rslnin-hp?lXy nr*nanre pr&,
      Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo. 185-lb. payload reached 141-
      mi. altitude and transmitted approximately 8 min. of telemetry
      before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 71 mi. f r o m launch site.
      Data obtained from the daytime experiment were compared with
      data obtained from similar experiment conducted at night, three
      days earlier. (NASA Releases 211 and 218)
   Navy sKm-1, air-cushion Hydroskimmer, developed by Bell Aero-
      systems for speeds up to 80 mph, went through its paces at Lake
      Erie. (A&AE,Nov., 1963,ll)
  Unidentified USN satellite placed in orbit with Thor-Able-Star
      launch vehicle launched from Vandenberg AFB. Satellite was first
      to be completely powered by nuclear generator, a 27-lb. Snap-SA
       (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) which mill prdduce 25
      watts of power continuously for five years. Press sources un-
      05cially identified the satellite as TRANSIT V-B. The Navy
      later disclosed that a second satellite weighing 120 lbs. had been
      launched pickaback style along with the 160-lb. nuclear-powered
      satellite. This sun-powered satellite carried several radiation
      detectors and six transistors in a test of means of protecting these
      devices from radiation damage. (Finney, NYT, 9/15/63, 75;
358           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    Hill, NYT, 10/1/63, 1, 76; Av. Wk.,        10/7/63, 37; Wash. Post,
    l/l0/64)
September 2%; Article by commentator St,mislav Kondrashov, f r t    is
    published mention in U.S.S.R. of President Kennedy’s proposal
    for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in lunar exploration, appeased in
    Soviet magazine Za Rubezthom. Article said :
                                ...     is pushing to the forefront the
       “American propaganda
    President’s idea of sending a joint Soviet-U.S. team to the moon.
       “In lavish headlines American newspapers describe the gran-
    diose character of the project, although it seems it is somewhat
                   ..
    premature..
       “Leaving aside judgment of the President’s lunar project, it
    should be noticed that the hard emphasis on it is hardly worth-
    while.
       “It distracts attention from joint earthly exploits directed at
                                                     . . .” (UPI, Wash.
    attaining peace and reduction of world tension.
    Post, 9/29/63)
  Discussing President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar
    cooperation, James J. Haggerty, Jr., said in Amy-Navy-Air
    Force Journal and Register article :
       “The big question . . . is how far along are the Soviets in a
    moon program and which mode of approach did they select?
       “. . . if the Soviets have adopted one of the approaches we
    have discarded, any cooperative arrangement would require pro-
    gram reorientation on the part of both nations of such magnitude
    that the only imaginable result is complete chaos, compounded
    of the basic difference in approach, the language barrier, differ-
    ing technological philosophies and engineering standards.
       “Even if the U.S.S.R. is already proceeding on the same lines
    as the U.S., i.e. the lunar orbit rendezvous mode, there are dif-
     ferent methods of attaining the same end and it is extremely un-
    likely that their systems development parallels our own in every
    detail.
       “It is possible of course that the cooperative program consist of
                                                               r1
     joint funding, a single lunar launch base and a common
    astronauts, with the technical differences being resolved t rough Of
    the use of one spxecraft/launch vehicle combination without al-
    tering current developmental lines. But which one? Who gets the
     program management? One can see a political and technical
     argument over the ‘Apollostok’ (or should it be ‘Vostapollo?’)
     which would leave the moon safe from assault for a t least a
    couple of decades.” (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/28/63,14)
  Communimtions Satellite Corp. set 1966 as target date to &art com-
     mercial oDeration of global satellite communications network.
     (A&AE, Nov. 1963,ll)
  Sermon by Dr. Duncan Howlett, Washington Unitarian minister,
     was quoted in Washington Post. On June 18,1961, Dr. Howlett
    said :
       “Why can we not boldly propose now a cooperative moon-shot,
    built and manned by Russian and American scientists? Why can
     we not send a capsule to the moon with a Russian and an Ameri-
     can inside it; and when they get there let them claim the moon-
                                                                    ..
    not for Russia, not for the United States, but for humanity? .
                                                                  359
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       “We can claim space for humanity or we can make i t a battle
    ground to which to extend the ancient quarrels of earth. Which
    shall it be ? There is but one choice before us. We can try to make
    the exploration of space a coo erative venture. We cannot suc-
    ceed unless we try . . . . (&aser, Wash. Post, 9/28/63)
                               ”
September B;The International Academy of Astronautics, at regular
    meeting, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper to succeed Dr. Frank
    J. Malina as President of the Academy. Dr. Draper is one of the
    world’s leading space engineers, engaged in the solution of prob-
    lems of guidance and control of space vehicles. His latest and
    largest undertakin is the design of the guidance-navigation
    system to be use$ aboard the Apollo spacecraft, which is
    to carry man to a Moon landing and a safe return. He is Head
    of the De artment of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the Massa-
             f
    chusetts nstitute of Technology, as well as Director of the x r  r
    Instrumentation Laboratory, in which capacity he leads a team of
    1,800 scientists, engineers and technicians. (m Release 17,
    10/1/63)
 Trevor Gardner, former Assistant Secrehry of the Air Force for
    WD (1955-56) and advocate of increased funding for ICBM de-
    velopment, died a t his home in Washington. (AP, NPT, 9/30/63,
    29 1
  The Iven C. Kincheloe Award was presented by Mrs. Dorothy
    Kincheloe to the seven original Mercury astronauts as the high-
    light of the Seventh Annual Awards Banquet of The Society of
    Experimental Test Pilots held at Lancaster, Calif. The award
                                       r
    is presented annually for the reco ition of outstanding profes-
    sional accomplishment in the con uct of flight testing. (Space
    News Roundup, 10/16/63)
September 98-29: Open house at NASA Wallops Station, Va., in ob-
    servance of NASA Fifth Anniversary (Oct. 1 ) . Approxmately
    8,OGO pcr’”G”s vi’”itd the f d i t y . ,Yd!!=ps Re!!es%%6-     scd
                                                              ”
                                                              4
    63-89)
September 29: Argo D-4 sounding rocket launched from Wallops
    Island, Va., in experiment to measure vertical distribution of ion-
    ospheric parameters simultaneously with overhead passage of
    ~ m m m topside sounder satellite. The rocket reached 644.6-
               I
    mi. altitude and all experiments functioned normally, but telem-
                                                        about 7 min. of
    etry system failed at approximately 12 min.
    re-entry data were not obtained. (NASA Rpt. of S.Rkt. Launch-
   jng)
e Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aero-
    nautics and Space Council, interviewed in Washington Post mag-
    azine, Parade. Asked “with all our needs on earth, can we afford
    to spend $20 billion to go to the moon ?” he replied :
       “We can’t afford not to spend it. Only the US. and the
    U.S.S.R.have the resources for extensive space exploration. If
    we are to lead the free world and insure our own security, we
    must be first in space. This does not rrzc;n that we must neglect
    other urgent needs. We have ample resources to explore space
    and do the other things, as well.”
360                                             19 6 3
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

       Asked “What is our ultimate destin in space?” he replied :
                                        3
       “I don’t know, nor does anyone e se. Columbus didn’t find
    what he was looking for, but I think we’re all pretty glad that he
    took that voyage. Einstein, when he produced the formula .
    E=MC2, didn’t h o w that it would change the course of history.
       “I am sure of one thing-the benefits which will flow from our
    venture into space will be beyond anything any of us could
    imagine.
       “Until now, in space, no shot has been fired in anger. Thank
    God. My hope is that, in the years ahead, the conquest of space
    will encourage peaceful co-operation among nations and become a
    substitute for war.
       “In the hostile environment of space there are challenges
    all mankind must share. W e a l l nations, that is-should go out
    there together, hand in hand.” (Parade, Wash. Post, 9/29/63)
8eptember 30: Francis W. Reichelderfer retired ~LSChief of U.S.
    Weather Bureau, succeeded by Robert M. White. (Wash. Post,
    10/1/63)
  AEC announced that “signals from a Department of Defense Satel-
    lite launched recently from Vandenber AFB, by a Thor-Able-Star
                                        B
    missile are being transmitted success ully with electricity from
    a nuclear power source developed by the AEC.” The device,
    SNAP 9-A was boosted into space by a launch crew of the Air
    Force Space Systems Division’s 6595th Aerospace Ts Wing.
                                                           et
     (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan. 1964; A&AE, Nov. 1963,
    11)
  Tiros meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Flora in the
    Atlantic off northern coast of South America. (UPI, Wash. Post,
    10/1/63)
  NASA Flight Research Center announced refinement of tracking data
    showed Joseph A. Walker reached record altitude of 354,200 ft.
    in his X-15 flight of Aug. 22, 3,200 ft. higher than preliminary
    figureprevious1 announced. (NASA Release 63-219)
                   K
  AFSG announced t e development of a new pressure suit by ASD,
    Wright-Patterson AFB, for X-20 Dyna-Soar pilots. The suit
    would permit more freedom of movement than its predecessors
    and could be worn for 36 hours without discomfort. (AFAYC
    0peratbnu.l H@?&ghts, 13)
  Address on Research and Development and the Federal Budget,
    by BOB Executive Assistant Director William D. Carey, inserted
    in CongresskmuJ Record by Rep. John W. McCormack. Carey
    said :
       “ . . . Government’s part in the research and development
    business has now reached the point where it commands attention
    because of its sheer size and propensity for growth. From here
    on, we will have to be more choosy in what we do, and better
     prepared to supply answers to questions about marginal costs
    and benefits. The budget this year for research and development
    is a husky $15 billion. Its growth potential dwarfs anything
    else in the budget. Someone has figured out that the doubling
    t h e for research and development as a fraction of national in-
     come is only 7 years, and that if this continued for 30 years
    research and development would rise to one-half of the national
    income.
                                                                       361
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

                                                                 .
         . . . it is my view that the difficulty here is . . one of
       U

    organizing research about research, of developing more adequate
    insi hts into cost-benefit relationships, of illuminating our value
        P
    ana ysis so that we can with greater confidence strike a balance
    between being first in high energy accelerators and beiig first
    in education and in decent living and job opportunity. I do not
    think that Government alone can reach these answers, but per-
    haps Government can-and indeed I believe it must-be as pro-
    portionately lavish in stimulating this kind of intellectual inquiry
    as it has been in endowing Science and technology . . . .” ( e t    Ts,
    OR,9/30/63, A6108-09)
September 30:Columnist David Lawrenm wmte that many billions of
    space research dollars could be more beneficially used tor develop
    bg the vast uninhabitable areas of the earth to accommodate big-
    ger populations. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/30/63)
  In Mi~aileaand Rockets editorial, William J. Coughlin offered five
    answers to President Kennedy’s rheturical question, “Why, there-
    fore, should man’s first flight to the M o be a matter of national
                                             on
    competition?” Coughlin’s reasons: “ e a s it is important to
                                              Bcue
    the survival of the United S a e that we develop the science and
                                   tts
                 which giver; us the capacity to send a manned expedi-
    kh”oloF
    tion to t e Moon and back . . . ; because there is national p m -
    tige at stake . . . ; because it is i m p r t m t , to our military secu-
    rity . . . ; because we are engaged m an economic war with the
                      .
    Soviet Union .. ; [and] because we believe in finishing what we
    start.” (M&R,9/30/63, 86)
During September: NASA Research Advisory Committee on Missile
    and Space Vehicle Structures issued its conclusions regar
                                                                      2
                                                                      3
    space structures problems of the 1970’s. Committee conside
    structural problems arising from need for larger spacecraft,
    reusable spacecraft, highermentry velocities, ints tion of nu-
    clear and/or electric prngi!?:                                    grezter
                                       system spz..y-$’Lxi
    spacecraft maneuvera 1 1 y Report stressed multipurpose
    minimum-weight structures emphasizing maximum efficiency for
    lowest material cost. (Av.     Wk., 9/16/63,71)
  In Washington ceremony, Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col.,
    USMC) presented U.S. flag he carried during orbital space fli ht
    in FRIENDSHIP 7 to Marine Corps Assistant Commandant Lt. &n.
    Charles H. Hayes. Flag would be placed in Marine Corps
    Museum. (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/28/63, 8 )
  Thirt NASA astronaut candidates underwent hysical examinations
                                                   P
       8
    at chool of Aerospace Medicine. Final se ection mould be made
    next month. (M&R,9/2/63,12)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $30,500 contract to Whirl-

                           r   and develo ment of feeding system for
    pool Corp. for desi
                                          P
    four astronauts for ong periods o time, first hardware fabrics-
    tion for space station simulation facility. (U&R, 9/9/63, 9)
  JPL awarded Aveo Corp. Research and Advanced Development Div.
     an $83,000 contract for study of entry and landing of balliskic
    capsules on Mars and Venus. (M&R,             9/2/63,12)
  NASA issued “Reliability Program Provisions for S ace System
                                                             4
    Contractors,” set of guidelines to strengthen and mi y reliability
     741-623 - 4
              2
362           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    and reliability assurance methods in spacecraft and launch vehicle
    development. This was companion to and consistent with revi-
    ous NASA ublications “Quality Program Provisions for i p a c e
    Systems dntractors” and “Inspection System Provisions for
    Suppliers of Space Materials, Parts, Components and Services.”
    (NPC 250-1).
During Se tember: NASA awarded $39,000 grant to Amateur Rocket-
          P
    eers o America (ARA) to produce educational and safet materi-
    als kits for young people interested in rocketry. ( M a r s h Star,
    10/2/63,10)
 Hughes Aircraft Co., NASA contractor for Syncom communications
    satellite, outlined design features of military synchronous com-
    munication satellite for USAF Space Systems Div. and Aerospace
    Corp. (Au. Wk.,     9/9/63,23)
 Laser for space communications was patented by A F scientist Janis
    A. Sirons. (A&AD, Nov., 1 9 6 3 , l l )
 Soviet press reported refined flight parameters for VOSTOK III and
    VOSTOK IV manned space flights: VOSTOK III apogee, 234.6 km.;
    perigee, 180.7 km.; period, 88.33 min. VOSTOK JV apogee, 236.7
    km. ; peri ee, 179.8 km. ; period, 88.39 min. (Xpace Bus. Daily,
    9/9/63,355)
 Reduction of France’s 1964 civilian s ace budget from $70 million
    to $48 million announced in Paris Y ly General Aubiniere, Presi-
    dent of Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, who explained reduc-
    tion was part of France’s economic austerity program. (M&R,
    9/30/63, 18)
 I n an article in the September issue of Aerospace magazine, Vice
    President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out some of the many
    advanta es to be gained from the lunar project :
        “. . . %he lunar project has forced us to develo many com-
                                                       f
    petences which have military as well as non-mi itary signifi-
    cance. These are competences which we would have been slow
    to develop were it not for this national moon objective. For
    example, rendezvous technique so basic to our moon project is
    essential to detecting and examining other spacecraft which may
    be hostile. Life protective measures are essential to a useful
    police force in space for maintaining the peace. Powerful rock-
    ets, reliability of space equipment, development of control and
    guidance systems, experience with manned spacecraft, etc., are
     all s in-offs from the lunar project, which help build our defense
        t
    capa ility.” (Text, Aerospace, Sept. 1963)
 Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aero-
     nautics and Space Council, compared U.S. and U.S.S.R. space
     achievements in General%Zectric Forum:
        “1. U.S. has put about 4 times as many payloads into earth
     orbit (approximately 130).
        “2. U.S.S.R. has put substantially more weight into earth orbit
     with its smaller number of payloads.
        “3. U.S. space applications in weather, communications, and
     navigation have been impressive. U.S.S.R. has potential in these
     fields but not accomplishments.
        “4. Both nations have obtained remarkable amounts of scien-
     tific data, with no measurable advantage to either country.
                                                                     363
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

      “5. U.S.S.R. has operational more powerful rockets than U.S.,
   while the U.S. is developing more powerful ones than any known
   to be in U.S.S.R.
      “6. U.S.S.R. is ahead in manned space flight.
       “7. Since the race began ratio of successe~ failures has been
                                                     to
   comparable. I n 1962, U.B. had one payload launching failure
   for each five s u m . ” ( G E F m m , 7-9/63,23)
During September: NASADeputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L Dryden
   said in Generd E h t r i c Forum interview :LL. . . There is no ques-
   tion that setting definite technical tasks before people does moti-
   vate them. For instance, war efforts nerallv p m i d e goals and
                                            T
                              x
   accelerate p”gress--jet       mpulsion, e ectroni’cs, miniaturization,
    and other technological a vanm. Along the same line, one of the
   major byproducts of space research has been a revitalization of
    education, getting people interested in scientific knowledge
    again-and particularly important, getting young people i n k -
   eeted in science and tschnology.” (GE Forunt, 7-9/63,20)
 Results of Research Institute of America’s survey of more than
    1,400 businessmen on U.S. goals and national olicy, published
                                                       $
    in General Electric Fcmm, revealed 2170 wnsi ered present ex-
    penditure on space fully warranted, 41% considered it probabl
    fully warranted, 27%-probably not, and 11%-not warranted:
    Other replies:
                                                         be level of space
       To “In years immediately ahead, what 8-
    expenditure, in relation to am?” 6% said “sharply higher than
    present expenditures, 16%-a little higher, 38%--remsin at about
   the p r d n t ratio, %%-a little lower, and 16%-sharply lower.
       To “Assuming that national policy in the immediate future
    corresponds to your answer above, do you believe that the U.S.
    will exceed the Russians in space achievements by 1970?” 38%
    said probably will exceed the Russians, 44o/o-will approximately
   q i i n l them, n n t j 18%-p&p_b!y mill E& -11-1 +ham
                                                 A’
                                                 “
                                                 .-
                                                  -     CALu--

       Asked to identify a statement closest reflecting their opinion on
    what space policy should be, 6 6 5 checked the statement “Our
   prime objective should be to sustain a prudent and orderfy pro-
    gram of scientific rogress in space achievements with little re-
    gard for who leaI f s in this or that particular aspect of space
    technology.”
       Asked about the military role in the U.S. space program, 16%
    replied it should be greater, 67%-about the same, and 17%-
    smaller. ( G E F m m , July-Sept. 63,3139)
                         OCTOBER 1963
October 1: Fifth anniversary of NASA. Ceremonies throughout the
    week included open house a t Wallops Station, Va., Sept. 29 and
    30; Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington;
    Project Mercury Summary Report Conference at Manned S ace-
    craft Center, Houston, Tex., Oct. 3 and 4; and NASA Fifth Apnni-
    versary Banquet in Washington Oct. 5.
       I n its fifth year of spate operations (October 1,1962-October
    1,1963), NASA launched 12 orbital, deep space, and manned space
    flights, of which 10 were successful, 1 partially successful, and
    one unsuccessful. The X-15 rocket research aircraft set a new
    altitude record of 350,000 ft. and began its follow-on flights in-
    volving space research. The Mercury program added a 6-orbit
    flight and was concluded with a 22-orbit flight. Among other
    successful flights were four scientific satellites, two communica-
    tions satellites, the first and second synchronous-orbit communi-
    cations satellites, and another weather satellite. The fifth scien-
    tific lunar probe (RANQER v) was unsuccessful and led to a
    reworking of the remaining Ranger probes.
        Project Apollo flight testing was begun.
        I n its five years of space operations, NASA had launched a
    total of 68 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of
    which 39 were successful, 9 partially successful, apd 20 unsuc-
    cessful, for an overall average of 2% successes for every failure.
    The rate of improvement ranged from 1 success per failure in
     1958-59 and 1959-60, to 2 to 1 in 1960-61, to 5 to 1 in 1961-62,
         12 1 in 1962-63. (HHR-14)
  At NASA Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony, held at
    Smithsonian Institution, 23 individuals were singled out for
    outstanding contributions to the civilian space program. Vice
     President Lyndon B. Johnson stated that U S . space policy was
    clear: “With or without cooperation from any other country,
     we are going to the moon, and we are going to make that trip as
     soon as we can. . . . We would like to do this through inter-
     national cooperation. Leaders of both parties have sought co-
     operation under two administrations. The moon represents our
     major space goal for this decade, and if cooperation is possible
     we are willing to share this goal as well as others.”
        NASA Administrator James E. Webb summarized the five years
     of space achievements and looked ahead: “From the first two
     IJnited States satellites, Explorer I and Vanguard I, launched
     early in 1958, we learned that the earth was slightly pear-shaped
     rather than being the sphere it had been thought to be. We
     also learned that the earth was surrounded by a zone of radia-
     tion, called the Van allen Belt after its discoverer Dr. James
     Van Allen.
      364
                                                                 365
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

      “In addition t these first satellites of scientific signifimce,
                         o
    we have orbited highly successful weather and communication
    satellites, probed the area of Venus, put men into orbit and
    brought them safely back to earth, and sent thousands of sound-
    ing rockets into space to study the earth’s environment. From
    these and other experiments installed in more than 100 satellites
    and deep space probes, we have succeeded in vastly expanding
    knowledge and understanding of our own planet earth and of
    the solar system of which it is a part . . . .
      ‘‘hoking ahead throu h the remainder of this decade, we have
                            5
    set our sights on a tru y global weather satellite system, ad-
    vanced communications and navigation satellites, space observa-
    tories for astronomical and solar studies, and a manned expedi-
    tiontoexplorethemoon . . . .     7,

       Awards were presented by Mr. Webb, NASA Deputy Administra-
    tor Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Associate Administrator Dr. Robert
    C. Seamans, Jr. Ei ht cash awards totaling $12,200 were divided
                        f
    among 14 NASA emp oyees for inventions and scientific and tech-
    nical contributions: Robert L. Trimpi, m, $3,000; Charles H.
    N c b l l a n , MRC, $2,000; James H. Schrader, W C , $1,500; Jesse
    M. Madey and Xopher W. Moyer, OSFC, $1,500 shared; James B.
    Newman, FRC, $1,200; Hershel M. Nance, MSFC, $l,OoO; Lee B.
    Malone, Charles E. David, and Harold R. Lowery, MBFC, $1,OOO
    shared; and Frank L. Clark, Charles B. Johnson, Wayne D.
    Erickson, and Roger I. Buchanan, ~ R C $1,000 shared.
                                                 ,
       The NASA Medal for Exceptional scientific Achievement went to
    Dr. Dean R. Chapman, ARC, for his research on tektites; t o Dr.
    Ernst D. Geissler, IKBFC, for contributions to Mercu -Redstone,
                                                            ’9
    Saturn, and Nova boosters; and to Dr. John C. Houbo t, formerly
    of Law, for work on lunar orbit rendezvous.
       The NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership was presented to
    tT..”J..” z. Den!%=, m c ; a=?l Dr. Tdkr I I s e z ~ z a n and or.
                                                                 n
    WIlQ.lLW


    William A. Mrazek, MSFC.
       The new NASA Public Service Award, given to rsons not em-
                                                      II”
    ployed by the Government, was presented to Jac N. James and
    Robert J. Parks, JPL, and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft
    Corp., Ca Canaveral. (NABA Releases 63-217,215; Wash.post,
    10/2/63; %ebb, Text; Program, Honor Awards Ceremony)
October 1 :NASA Administrator James E. Webb appeaxed on Voice of
    America, “Press Conference USA.” Speaking of Pkdenk. Ken-
    nedy’s proposal for a joint US.-U.S.S.R. lunar program, Mr.
    Webb said: “. . . after the ratification of the test ban and one
    da after Mr. Gromyko proposed that we a
                                                 F
    o r i t multi-megaton weapons, the President ollowed with a sug-
                                                         not to put
    gestion that had five elements. Most people have centered on
    only one of them.” The five elements were (1) measures against
    war by accident or miscalculation; (2) measures against surprlse
    attack; (3) measures to curb the nuclear arms race; (4) exchange
    of information and persons; (5) U.S. consent to Gromyko’s
    proposal to negotiats an agreement not to orbit large nuclear
    weapons
366           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

       “And then he added a a sixth item, we should also explore, now
                                s
    mark you, he said expbre, possibilities for cooperation in manned
    space flight and then set a clear indication that he was not think-
    ing of a limited exploration, that rather he was thinking of a
    broad exploration . . .,that we could even go step by step to the
    planning of a joint expedition.”
       Speaking of the preparations for the President’s U.N. speech,
    Mr. Webb said: “. . . I myself personally attended a meeting in
    the White House called by Mr. Arthur Schlesinger, perhaps a
    month ago, to consider things that the President might want to
    discuss at the United Nations. And I did myself on the day before
    Mr. Gromyko’s speech have a long talk with the President, maybe
    35 or 40 minutes, about the whole space program in which we dis-
    cussed this. And I think I should say that he had his office phone
    me in St. Louis on Thursday afternoon after Mr. Gromyko made
                 h to read me the language that he then decided he would
        SF
    use, ecause it seemed such a natural follow-on to Mr. Gromyko’s
    his
    y p o s a l . ” (Text)
Octo er 1 : I n a ceremony coincident with NASA’S fifth anniversary,
    Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of NASA’s          Langley Research
    Center, presented a model of a Mercury space capsule to the new
    municipal aerospace park in Hampton, Va. (Newpoh News
     (Va.) Times-Herald, 10/1/63,13)
 George Low, NASA’s         Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight,
    speaking at an AIAA-NASA symposium on interplanetary explora-
    tion in Palo Alto,. Calif., spoke of two areas of possible U.S.-
    U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned lunar flight: (1) a series of
    jointly programed space probes to survey the lunar surface prior
    to a manned flight ; and (2) exchange of information on problems
    of reentering the earth’s atmosphere at 25,000 mph. (San
    Francisco Chronicle, 10/2J63)
 h Mars Excursion Module ( MEM) would be the best means of land-
    ing men on Mars, according to Temple Neuman of Philco Corp.’s
    L4eronutronicDiv., which had just completed a study of the sub-
    ject under NASA contract. The MEM would carry two men, house
    and feed them for 40 days, and enable them to bring back 800 lbs.
    of equipment and samples, for a gross vehicle weight of about
    55,000 lbs. (Spnce Bus. Daily, 10/2/63, 12)
 Aerobea 150 sounding rocket was fired by NASA from White Sands
    Missile Range, N. M., the 235-1b. payload to take observations
    of ultraviolet light and the sun’s corona. ( QSFC Hist. ; AP, Wash.
    Post, 10/2/63)
 Definitive contract for research and development of a paraglider
    system for landing of Project Gemini spacecraft was awarded
    by MSC to Space and Information Systems Div. of North Ameri-
     can Aviation, Inc. The contract set paraglider RBD a t $20,015,100,
    of which $10.8 million had already been spent under a letter con-
    tract issued about one year ago. The other landing system bein
                                                                      8
    developed for Gemini is by parachute, similar to the one use
     in Project Mercury. Paraglider would be designed for land
    landings, parachute for water landings, although both systems
    have eventual capability for land and water landings. (MSC Re-
    lease 63-159)
                                                                 367
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICLI, 1963

October I: Marcel Nicolet of the Belgium National S a e Research
                                                    pc
    committee was the winner of the Gugganheim International
    Astronautics Award at the banquet of the International A&m-
    nautics Federation in Paris. Nicolet had, in early 1961, sug-
    gested the existence of the helium layer between the oxygen-
    nitrogen atmosphere and the hydrogen upper atmosphere, later
                                                            x
    confirmed independently by R. E. Bourdeau, E C. Whip le, P. C.
                                                .
    Donnelly, and S. J. Bauer, using EXPLORER v ion trap ata.
                                               m
                        Y    rin attended the XIVth IAF banquet
      Cosmonaut Yuri
    dressed in civilian clot e . (Cf. R. Jastrow, ‘‘Results . . . ,
                                                                  99
                              s
 Robert F. ix, president of Continental Airlines, speaking to an
   12/18/61&
   aviation group of the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, p m
   posed that the US. join with Fwnce and Great Britain to d          e
   velop a mach 2.2 commercial airliner and that at a later date those
   countries join the US. in developing a s a n e s s e l t t n a i m
                                              tile-te-iainu
   mach 3 airliner: “If our country can propose a joint effort with
   the Russians to reach the moon, we certainly should be able to
   entertain the idea of joint development of a supemnic transport
   with two of our best friends.” ( WdZ St. J o u d , 10/2/63)
 First transpolar nonstop flight from Capetown, South Africa, to
   McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, was made in a skiquipped ( - 3     21 0
   Hercules aircraft by Rear Admiral James R. Reedy (USN). The
   14-hr.-31-min. fight covered 4,700 mi. and crossed the entire Ant-
   arctic continent, inaugurated Operation Deep Freeze 64, the
   Navy’s logistic support of U.S. Antarctic research. (DOD Release
   1313-63)
 Value of weather Tiros satellites in giving advance warning of
   tropical storms was underscored b Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D.-
   Fla.): “Yesterday’s discovery of kurncane Flora is a prime
   example. . . . Through the efforts of the US. Weather Bureau,
   using data supplied by a weather satellite? warnings were issued
   a bare 3 hours before the 110-mile-an-hour winds hit the islands
   [of Trinidad and Tobago]. Because of the 22-mile-an-hour for-
   ward speed of the storm, little or no warning would have been
   possible without the quick work of U.S. weathermen and their
   new ally, the satellite. While the damage was extensive, untold
   lives were saved and property damage prevented by the advance
   warning.” ( CR,10/1/63,17456)
 Polaris A-2 was successfully fired by the Navy from the U.S.S.
            Jackson. (M&R,
   And~ew                       10/7/63,u))
 Nuclear test ban treaty had caused cutbacks of two DOD space nuclear
   propulsion projects--.Orion and Pluto, accord‘ to F. C. Diluzio,
                                                 3
   staff director of the Senate Aeronautical an Space Sciences
   Committee, speaking at a press conference in Albuquerque, N.M.
   Project Orion, conceived in 1957 by Dr. Stanislaw Ulam, would
   have provided propulsion through a series of controlled atomic
   explosions. Project Pluto would employ a nuclear reactor to
   propel a missile through the lower Ievels of the earth’s atmosphere
   at supersonic speeds. (Wash. Eve. Stur, 10/2/63)
368           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

October 1 : The Astrophysical Journal reported that explosion of
    galactic core of M-82, galaxy some 10-million light years from
    earth, was photoaaphed by 200-in. Mt. Palomar telescope last
    Spring. (A&AE, December 1963,5)
October 1-3: Youth Science Congress, sponsored by NASA and the
    National Science Teachers Association, was held at GSFC. Fea-
    ture event was presentation of 25 award-winning research papers
    by high school students from Washington, D.C., Md., Del., Pa.,
    and N.J. (GSFC Release (3-20-63)
October 2: The Russian ~ e o n l eheard of President Kennedy’s U.N.
    proposal for joint US.-U.S.S.R. 1umr exploration for first time.
    Pravda reprinted without comment Walter Lippmann’s column
    praising the President’s proposal. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/2/63)
 Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.), Chairman of the Senate Foreign
    Relations Committee, stated on the Senate floor that he favored
    space exploration but considered the present large space budgets
    “an unwarranted diversion of resources from the Nation’s most
    pressing needs.” He favored President Kennedy’s proposal for
    joint US.-V.S.S.R. lunar exploration for two reasons : “First,
    it would greatly reduce the costs of space exploration, releasing
    funds for important domestic programs, such as education, em-
    ployment, urban renewal, and conservation of resources ; second,
    it would further reduce world tensions by opening up a significant
    new area of Soviet-American cooperation.” (CR,10/2/63,
     17598)
  Talks at U.N. between East and West on agreement not to orbit
    large nuclear weapons were termed promising by Secretarv of
    State Dean Rusk and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gro-
    myko. Said to be the most important discussions since the
    negotiations on the nuclear test ban treaty, the talks also dealt
    with exchange of observers between East and West to reduce
    possibility of surprise attack and with nondiscemination of nu-
    clear weapons. ( N Y T , 10/3/63, l ; AP, Waah. Post, 10/3/63)
 USAF and Martin Co. engineers reportedly adopted a tight engineer-
    ing review system in the number and types of changes in the Titan
    I1 missile to the man-rated Titan I1 booster for Gemini flights.
    System is intended to improve reliability by holding changes
    down to fewest possible and seeing that each of these contributes
    to overall reliability. Modifications that have been made include
    the necessary structural changes to accept the Gemini capsule,
    redundancy in certain key systems, and a malfunction detection
    system that would alert the flight crew to possible trouble.
     (Space Bus. Daily, 10/3/63,20)
 Dr. Karl G. Cruderlev, senior scientist at USAF’S Aerospace Research
    Laboratories, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, was presented MID’S
    highest civilian award, the DOD Distinguished Civilian Service
    Award. Award was for contributions to transonic flow theory
    and other problems in aerodynamics and mathematical physics.
     (OAR Release 10-63-1)
  Space Busineas Daily reported that Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,
    NASA Associate Administrator, “said flatly this week that he would
    resign rather than become involved in a technical bog-down
                                                                               369
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    caused by U.S.-Soviet co-operation on a lunar flight.” I n its
    Oct. 4 issue, the same publication said that NASA had officially
    “denied” the report as being “flatly untrue in language, con-
    cept and fact” and asserted that Dr. Seamans was “‘enthusi-
    astic’ ” over the possibility of a joint program. NASA spokesman
    told the publication that Dr. Seamans had been addressing a
    group on Capitol Hill, had spoken of technical obstacles to lunar
    cooperative program, and had said ‘‘ ‘in a joking manner’ ” that
    the problems would be so ditficult “as to require NASA to find
    someone to replace him.” (Space B w . Daily, 10/2/63, 9;
    10/4/63. 26)
October 3 First official Soviet comment on President Kennedy’s pro-
           :
    posal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar cooperation came from Russian
    news agenc Tass. While not identifying the proposal with the
    President, $ass said: “Maybe it is too early to discuss now the
    question what is better-to combine a Soviet rocket with an
    American spaceship or to include an American in the Soviet space
    crew, but first steps in cooperation cannot but give satisfaction.”
    A few hours later, Cosmonaut Pave1 Popovich made an unsched-
    uled talk on Moscow Radio, calling for a %ommon effort by the
    peoples of all states of our planet” to solve the earthly di5culties
    that hinder man’s flight to the stars. (Wash. Post, 10/4/63)
 Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) charged that President Kennedy
    had completely reversed US. space olicy in his U.N. speech of
                                                    i)
     Sept. 20 by shifting the objective o the manned lunar landing
    from one of international competition and world p e t g to one
                                                           rsie
    of cooperation with the Russians. He opposed the new
    but said it offered justification to cut back the manned
    program and substitute cheaper unmanned
    10/3/63,17666)
 Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson quoted in article in Wmhing-
                                                                                 -
                                                              n m6 -.
                             u A thn mn.,nna I . . . . ~ ~
     trim n,z. N . , ~ . . ~
          ”U Y                s                                -
                        nC.
             Ny                                               y. “ .
                          wu
                           u
                          UUJ        ”IlU I U U I I L I -
    ”“l”       I. YWO           “L                          luA**L   *U”UU’~


        “To default would be as catastrophic as if we had defaulted ex-
    ploration of the atom.” (Text)
 I n commenting to the Senate Committee on Government Operations
    on the bill (S.1577) authorizing the General Services Adminis-
    tration to “coordinate and otherwise provide” automatic data pro-
    cessing equipment for all Federal agencies, NASA noted that on
     June 30, 1963, NASA had 118 general-pu se digital computer
                                                            Y
    systems, of which only seven were used fu 1 time for administra-
     tive purposes. The rest were used in science and engineering
     tasks. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/158 cont’d)
 Thomas J. Watson,, Jr., chairman of the board of International
     Business Michines Co . speaking at the 46th annual meet-
    ing of the American%&ncil on Education in Washington,
     D.C., expressed concern about the current course of education.
     “That concern has its origin just 6 years ago tomorrow. It was
     the day that the Soviet Union p u t Sputnik I in orbit. DO YOU
     remember the thoughts which flooded in on us that day?
     Thoughts of emba,rrassmeht-dismay-conmay-concern. . . . We could
     even try to say that SateIlites were just stunts, that Sputnik was
     a silly hunk of iron. But try as we would to whistle m the dark,
370           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   Americans final1 had to reach the conclusion that the Russians
                    (I
    had outdistance us at least temporarily in the exploration of
    space, a pursuit which in our century might well become as im-
      ortant as the exploration of the oceans had been in the time of
    8olumbus and Magellan.”
       Mr. Watson pointed out that the impact of sputnik on educa-
    tion “has thrown the sciences and the humanities badly out of
   balance. . . . I n the fiscal year of 1961, of all Federal funds
    for basic research, the physical and biological sciences got 97
    percent.
       “There are many traditional reasons for reemphasizing the
    humaniti-which        today are more important than ever.
       “In the first place, a thorough grounding in the humanities
    is vital training for many leaders who can wisely manage people
    as well as sufficiently manage machines. This need exists in uni-
    versities, in public service, and in business.
       “Secondly, as our planet continues to shrink, we will more and
    more have to become citizens of the world. We must acquire a
    better understanding of the language, history, and culture of
    people of other lands. With present day mass-destruction weap-
    ons, this understanding is not just desirableit’s vital.
       “Finally, the greater our skills in the humaniti-in      literature
    and the a r b t h e greater our capacity for a constructive use of
    leisure time, which is bound to increase a machines lift old bur-
                                                   s
    dens from men’s shoulders and minds.
       “On this sixth anniversary of the flight of sputnik, we can be
    sure of one thing; no second sputnik will come along to jolt us
    into action, and do for American education in the humanities
    what the first Sputnik did for American education in the sci-
    ences.” (CE, 11/12/63, A7010-A7012)
October 3: General Accounting Office (OAO) released report on NASA’s
    Centaur booster which was sharply critical of both Government
    and contractor performance. Done a t the request of the House
    Committee on Science and Astronautics and submitted to them on
    March 29, 1963, but not released until Oct. 3, the report charged
    that p r management and program slippage had added $100
    million to the Oost of the program. The most significant charge
    in the report was that NASA and the contractor--General Dynam-
    ics/Astronautics-had in their possession in 1960 data from which
    could have been predicted the failure of the first test flight in 1962.
    The only immediate reply came from Julian Scheer, NASA’s
    Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and
    Policy Planning: “On Sept. 30, 1962, we moved the Centaur
    project from Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville to the
    Lewis Research Center because we knew we had problems. Still,
    we hope to fly Centaur by the end of this year.” (Wash. Post,
    10/4/63 ; Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63,25)
 Reporting under a NASA contract to study requirements for a manned
    mission to Mars in “the unfavorable (1975-1985) time Period,”
    Douglas Aircraft C0.k Missile and Space Systems Div. pro-
    posed a nuclear-chemical four-stage vehicle carrying a seven-
    man crew on a 400-day trip. Mission would begin out of 300-mile
                                                                  371
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    earth orbit : first stage would boost vehicle into Mars trajectory ;
     140 days later, second stage would put vehicle into 300-mile orbit
    of Mars, where for 20 days the crew would study the planet;
    third stage would provide escape from Mars and HO-day trip
    back to earth; fourth stage would provide retrothrust for
    re-entry. (Stace Bus.Daily,10/4/63,27)
October 3-4: Project Mercury Summary Conference held at MSC,
    Houston, Tex. Two days of papers were presented on various
    aspects of Project Mercury as a whole and on the final, 22-orbit
    flight by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper in particular.
       The most controversial point raised during the conference was
    statement on the large amount of faulty or careless manufacture
    and assembly of Mercury spacecraft. On the MA-9 backu
     spacecraft, for example, some 720 discrepancies were record$
    of which 526 were attributable to unsatisfactory workmanship
    and 444 of these required specially scheduled time to c o m t .
     (xsc Releases 63-153-158 ; Project diercllry & u r n w r y )
October 4: Sixth anniversary of launching of SPUTNIK I, the opening
    of the Space Age.
 First flight-rated model of Gemini spacecraft (No. 1) delivered by
    the contractor to MSC Test Conductor at AMR, Paul C. Donnelly,
    the spacecraft to be used for pre-fliqht checkout procedures
    leading to the first Gemini mission. This spacecraft will struc-
    turally simulate we!ght, center of gravity, and aerodynamic form
    of the h a 1 Gemini spacecraft. (MBC Release 63-160)
 NASA selected three companies for negotiations to lead to a contract
    for installation, operation, and maintenance of a technical cum-
                                  Merritt Island Launch Area (MILA).
    munication system in NASA’s
    Eventually the system would link some 50 buildings on the 87,000-
    acre site, includin Complex 39, where Saturn V will be launched.
                      f
    This system wou d be separate from the normal administrative
                sy+t-Zl T & its did tz!cphGre exchzEge. (?<SA P&l-
    td!P_PhAnPI          i
    63-221)
 Weather Bureau stopped its portion of the funding of the Nimbus
    meteorological satellite because the current Nimbus offers an
    operational lifetime of no more than one year. Weather Bureau
    would continue using improved Tiros satellite while cooperating
    with NASA in development of a follow-on satellite with a lifetime
    of several years. NASA said it would continue the development of
    the Nimbus =D models (NASA Release 63-220; Commerce Re-
    lease; Wash. Post, 10/4/63,2)
 An aircraft somewhat similar to the U-2 reconnaissance plane was
    seen by reporters on the flight line a Air Force Flight Test Cen-
                                          t
   ter, Edwards AFB, Calif. Air Force officials identified the aircraft
    as an RB-57F, a drastically modified version of the British Can-
    berra, jet light bomber. Chief modifications visible were two ex-
    tremely long tapered wings similar to those of the U-2, with two
    very large engines mounted on them. Two smaller J-60 engines
    were mounted on the fuselage. The aircraft is used in Project
    Peewee, an environmental studv of navigation and weather equip-
    ment a t high altitude. (AP, NPT,10/6/63)
372           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

October 4: NASA Administrator James Webb spoke in Washington
    before the American Council on Education on the relationship of
    university activity to the space effort :
       “Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of
    Sciences and head of the Department of Physics at the University
    of Illinois, noted recently that he could ‘think of no aspect of
    university activity relating to science or technology which is not
    involved in a fundamental way in the space effort’ . . . .
       “NASA [sponsors] a pre-doctoral training program with the
    ultimate objective of assisting in the production of 1,000 Ph. D.’s
    a year . . .
       “Ithink I can say categorically that the universities with which
    NASA works are not becoming so reliant on federal research funds
    that it is interfering with their traditional role of undergraduate
    instruction. Although the ratio of graduate to undergraduate
    effort in many universities may be increasing, those with which
    we work are not reducing their undergraduate instruction role.
    I n fact, we know that all the major schools are most concerned
    about keeping up with the undergraduate demand.
       “It is worth emphasizing that NASA is attempting to foster a
    broader base of competence in graduate research by awarding
    training grants to institutions rather than to individual scholars.
    Thus the university as an institution is given the opportunity to
    select its own candidates for instruction on its own campus.”
     (Text)
 I n an article in Prauda, V. Golobachev reported that U.S.S.R. was
    filing with the FBdkration Aeronautique International claiming
    new records for the tandem space flight of Cosmonauts Valery
    Rykovsky and Valentina Tereshkova June 14-19,1963. U.S.S.R.
    was claiming eight new records for the tandem flight : for VOSTOK
    v (Bvkovsky), duration of orbital flight, 119 hours; distance, 3,-
    326,000 km. (2,063,377 mi.) ; these represented four new records,
     since they were records not only for orbital flight but for any type
    of flight. For VOSTOK VI (Tereshkova), four records claimed for
    women in orbital flight: duration, 71 hrs.; height, 231 km. (144
    mi.) ; distance, 1,971,000 km. (1,224,720 mi.) ; maximum weight
    orbited, 4,713 kg. (10,390 lbs.). Total maximum thrust for each
    flight was listed as 600,000 kg. (1,322,760 lbs.). (Prauda.
     10/4/63, AFSS-T Trans.)
 Federal Communications Commission ( FCC) ordered that TV chan-
    nel 37 in the U.S. be reserved for exclusive use of radio astronomy
     until Jan. 1, 1974. FCC said it would urge Mexico and Canada to
    take similar action and would recommend world wide reservation
    of the channel at the world conference on space communications
     convening in Geneva on Oct. 7. (Wash. Daily News, 10/5/63)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate
     Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, wrote a letter
    to NASA Administrator James E. Webb asking for a explanation
                                                           n
    of the statements made at the summary conference on Project
    Mercury that there had been poor workmanship on the Mercury
    spacecraft, according to William Hines, in the Washington
    Evening Star. H e was also reported to have inquired about
                                                                    373
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    a remark attributed to Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of BIBC. that
    industrial shortcomings included outright falsification, citing an
    instance where a component used “ ‘black iron where there should
    have been stainless stsel.’ ” (Hines, Wash. Eve.Star, 10/4/63)
October 4: Atlas F ICBM was launched by USAF from Vandenberg AFB,
    but Mew up during liftoff. (m,        NPT, 10/8/63,28)
                                                  ,
October 5: Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) minority member of
    the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, asked that the
    Committee investigate alleged wasta in the space program to de-
    termine how much money has been wasted, by whom, and whether
    some projects have fallen so f a r behind that money earmarked for
    them in the F Y 1964 budget can be cut out because it cannot be
    spent within the fiscal year. He requested that the investigation
    be undertaken immediately so that it can be finished before Con-
    grerjs takes h a 1 action on the NASA budget. (“roan, Wash. D d y
    News, 10/5/63)
 NASA Fifth Anniversary Banquet held in Washington, D.C., spon-
    sored by Aerospace Industries Association, American Institute of
    Aeronautics and Astronautics, and Aviation/Space Writers b
    ciation. Dr. James Doolittle, last Chairman of the NACA, served
    as Master o Ceremonies. After speaking of the tangible achieve-
                f
    ments of NASA, Dr. Doolittle said: “Just as well known, to this
    audience at lea+, are the less tangible achievements of NASA’s   last
    five years. I think, however, that they bear reemphasizing.
       “Irefer first of all to the rapidly growing competence and effec-
    tiveness of the Government-industry-university am tean-a.n
    American space team that simply did not exist Tve years ago.
                                                          i
    Today, the team is a valuable source of national strength, pres-
                                                                nness of
    tige, and security.” Other factors mentioned were
                                                           ??
    the NASA program,” “inspiration which the astronauts o our space
    program have given to our youth,” and that diilicult achievement,
    ‘‘8 blnnrpd p r q p m ” (CR,lO/S/63, A6327)
       Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Sen-
    ate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, called on the
    banquet guests to assist in ttin a $5-billion-plus budget passed
                                ?. .
    by Congress. He added :             yet’s remember that there mould
    be no basis for the modest space research agreements the United
    States has with the Soviet Union if this country had not demon-
    strated to the Russians the p a t strength of our space p r o p m .
    We bargain-and must continue to b r a n f o
                                              agi-rm a           ition of
                                                            8“
    strength and those who criticize space spending shoul not over-
    look this fundamental point.” (CR,10/9/63, A6333)
       Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary o the National
                                                         f
    Aeronautics and S ace Council, made five main points a b u t the
                       R
    space program: “t e space s u m of this count have been
    truly remarkable”; “This is a national program”; ‘ T i is also an
                                                          L?s
    international p r o p m ” ; “This is a growing and nnanent pro-
                                                        E
    gram”; and “This is no time for complacency a u t our s p m
    competence.” (Text)
       NASA Administrator James E. Webb took time in his remarks
    to comment on the impression that NASA was dissatisfied with in-
    dustry in the s p m program. He suggested that it was faulty re-
374           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    porting to pick one page of criticism out of a 443-pa report that
    essentially spoke of industry’s “ ‘great job.’ ” R s . Post,
                                                               ah
    10/6/63)
October 5: On the eve of its fifth anniversary, NASA had run into a
    patch of “attack by partisan politicians, budget-cutters, those who
    want the milita to have a stronger rale in space, mismanage-
    ment sleuths, a x ersons confused by President Kennedy’s bid
    for a joint U.S.-U.8.S.R. moon venture,” Howard Simons claimed
    in the Washington Post. He cited NASA’s          budget troubles, with
    the $5.7 billion request already cut to a $5.3 billion authoriza-
    tion, another $200 million already cut by a House Appropriations
    Subcommittee, and even further cuts threatened in the full Com-
    mittee. NASA Administrator Webb, Simons said, had blamed
    budget problems on House Republicans, charging that they “ ‘are
    following a political line trying to make the President’s pro-
    gram look foolish-‘Nuts,’ as Eisenhower called it. They have
    moved to the position that military activities in space are the
    only ones worthwhile.’ ” Under mismanagement charges, Simons
    listed the CAO report on the Centaur program and the NASA charges
    of substandard workmanship by industry in the Mercury pro-
     gram, which in itself implied, according to Simons, a NASA admis-
     sion that it had not supervised industry effectively. (Wash.
    Post, 10/5/63,4)
  Speaking on Cuban television from Havana, Soviet Cosmonaut Val-
    entina Tereshkova said that she was a member of the team of
     Russian cosmonauts chasen to make the trip to the moon and that
     Yuri Gagarin headed the team. She said she would propose that
     a Cuban woman be included on the team. The Russian plan for a
     moon flight was described by Miss Tereshkova: the manned cap-
     sule would be launched into earth orbit, where it would rendezvous
     with an unmanned tanker spaceship; then another rocket would
     be launched from earth and tow the manned-vehicle-tanker combi-
     nation to the moon. (AP, Wash. Ewe. rStar, 10/5/63)
  A change in the political climate in the last few months had NASA
     in trouble on its fifth anniversary, according to John Finney of
     the New York Tirnes: The trouble m l l y began when scientists
     began to question the validity of the manned lunar landing. “The
     approach being urged by the scientific critics is a step-by-ste pro-
                                                                  B
     gram calling first for lunar investigation by instruments an then
     a manned program that would not divert resources from other
     fields of scientific research.” It m a s this apnroach that mas being
     followed until May 1961, when President Kennedy declared the
     high priority goal of a manned lunar landing in this decade.
        “Increasingly, the attack on the space budget is taking on a par-
     tisan tinge, and the Administration in turn is reacting in a parti-
     san manner. It is significant, for example, that in the House Ap-
     propriations sdxommittee the votes to cut the space budget were
     strictly along partisan lines with the exception of Clarence Can-
     non . . . .” (Finney, NYT,10/6/63)
  Aerospace manufacturers on the West Coast indicated they had no
     interest in a study commission made up of reprwentatihs of
     the companies, the two big anions-United Auto Workers and
                                                                 375
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 63

    International Association of Machinists-and           Government.
    Such a commission had been recommended last year during wage
    negotiations and endorsed by Prof. George W. Taylor, of the
    Univ. of Pa., who was President Kennedy’s representative. The
    proposal was endorsed by the two unions on Oct. 4. The com-
    panies were reported to fear that such a commission would be
                                                             ,and that
      d u d e to industry-wide bargaining, which they op
    Lvernment representatives would be partial to l a c (Lang-
       th, NYT, 10/7/63,22)
    Tl
Octo er 5 : In Rome, Pope Paul V I w i v e d several hundred delegates
    from 30 countries attendi the Sixth International Co+           of
    Aeronautical and Space%edicine. Among those received was
    Prof. Vasily Parin of $he U.S.S.R. (NPT, 10/6/63, 25)
October 6: The Hall of Science building at the New York World’s
    Fair will not be ready to open for at least a month after the
    Fair opens on Apr. 22, 1964, the New Pork Times reported.
    Contests over whether the site should become a permanent science
    museum, the belated discove thak pilings had to be driven to
    support the foundations, an? the rasultmg incmxsed costs of
    the building have all delayed construction. (Sullivan, NYT,
    10/6/63,1)
 ~ s is experiencing a.n increasing manpower shortage as it moves
        c
    into high gear on Project Apollo, John Finney of the New Pork
    Times reported. Particularly s c f ~ r c am topflight engineers
                                              ~
    needed to oversee large systems and subsystems. MSC hopes that
    its manpower ceiling will be raised this year from the present
    3,500 to around 5,500. (Finney,NPT, 10/6/63, 71)
 &nstruction of the new ~ s - M n e Spacecraft Center at Hous-
                                  4a n d
    ton, Tex., was 75% complete. The first contingent of 80 people
    would move into the new quarters over the weekend, with general
                 scheduled for June 1964. (MSC Release 63-166; Fin-
    -UP7
    ne , N P ,10/1/63)
 Dr. k u g h L. Dryden, NASA Deput Administrator, speaking in
                                      K
    Cleveland, Ohio, before the eight annual Inter-Church World
    Peace Seminar, said that possible US.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on
    space exploration would bog down in the Soviet’s extreme security
    measures. Their security mwsures toward their space program
    were as stringent as that of the US. in regard to nuclear weapons,
    Dr. Dryden said. Text in CR,10/8/63, A6325)
                       i
 D. Brainerd Holmes, o m e r NASA Director of Manned Space Flight
    and now a senior vice president of Raytheon Co., said in a TV
    interview on ABC that the manned space flight program needed a
    single manager with graat freedom of action. The only way to
    run a large program, he said, “is to put the project manager in
    such complete char . . . that he makes policy with very little
    approval above.” &Pi”,10/7/63,23)
 ~ 0 8 ~ XIX transmissions have been icked up by the Sohio R s a c
                                                               eerh
          0s
    C n e near Cleveland, Ohio. d e Center said that Russian sat-
      etr
    ellites normally have an on-off switch which the Russians can
    activate for transmission as the satellib pssses over Russian
    territory. They theorized that the switch might have stuck,
    causing the satellite to transmit continuously. (ClevelandPlain
    Dealer, 10/6/63)
376           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

October 6 : “Informed sources” in Moscow said that $viet Cosmo-
    nauts Andrian Nikolayev and Valentina Tereshkova were en-
    gaged to be married. (UPI, NYT, 10/7/63)
 Editorial in the Washington Post called the weaknesses in quality
    control mentioned in the final report on Project Mercury “shock-
    ing,” calling for “sweeping revision of control standards previ-
    ously existing in the aeronautics industry.” Tying this into the
    GAO report on Centaur, the editorial concluded, “The NASA re-
    port on Mercury and the GAO re rt alike suggest it may be
    necessary to proceed with more deli eration, caution and control.”
                                        r
     ( Wmh.Post, 10/6/63)
 Announced that transistorized sensory system, Myoelectric, to pro-
    vide astronauts with automatic control during high g was pat-
    ented recently by two Sperry Gyroscope engineers. (A&AE,
    December 1963,5)
October 7: House Appropriations Committee voted $5.1 billion a -
                                                                    T;
    propriation for NABA in FY 1964, $612 million less than the A -
    ministration request and $250 million less than previously author-
    ized by Congress. NASA Administrator James E. Webb said the
    1970 target date for landing a man on the moon could not be met
    unless Congress restored the $250 million cut, either by putting it
    back now or by approving a supplemental request in Jan. 1964.
    Furthermore, Webb said, the F Y 1965 budget would have to make
    up the “shortfall” from the original Administration request for
    $5.7 billion.
       Rep. Clarence Cannon (D.-Mo.) ,Chairman of the Appropria-
    tions Committee, said he had wanted the NASA budget cut further
    to $4.9 billion, that the Subcommittee on Independent Offices had
    wanted $5.3 billion, and that the $5.1 billion represented a com-
    promise. He predicted House approval, said : “Although it’s
    only a token cut, it shows the attitude of the Committee and the
    House towards the space budget.” Rep. Albert Thomas (D.-
    Tex.), Chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee on In-
    dependent Offices, said the cut had nothing to do with President
    Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R.   manned lunar land-
    ing program. “There was simply one big thing. Everybody
    wants a tax cut, and many people want a reduction in spending.
    Of all the spots, this was a good one to cut.” (NYT, 10/8/63,1)
 NASA testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on
    Appropriations on Aug. 19,1963, indicated that at that time NASA
   officials s w little prospect for US.-U.S.S.R. coo ration in
               a
                                                         t?
    manned lunar exploration, William Hines, of the           ashington
   Evening Star, quoted from testimony released today. Dr. Hugh L.
    Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator and chief U.S. space negoti-
    ator, said: “In my discussions with Blagonravov, the question of
    cooperation in manned space fli hts was mentioned in the early
                                    f               that was not prac-
    part, but was pretty well droppe as someth
                                                ”a
    tical . . .” because among other reasons, of “t e v e y high degree
    of classification the Russians attached to their space pro-
    gram. . . .” Summing up, Dr. Dryden said : “I do not foresee in
    the near future any prospects that the Russians, any more than
    ourselves, will see a clear way to co-operate in a manned lunar
    landing.”
                                                                    377
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

              Administrator James E. Webb agreed :“Up to now, there
       NASA
    has been no evidence whatever that we will gain anything sig-
    nificant from it.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63)
October 7 : In OAR Research Review, Louis Block of AFCRL described
    instrumentation pods used on Titan I1 missile launched from
    Ca e Canaveral on Aug. 21,1963. Two 3-ft. by 1-ft. cylindrical
       1
    po s were released into the missile exhaust plume, one a t 300,000
    ft., the second at 600,000 ft. Both carried four infrared spectrom-
    eters to scan the spectral region of the lume and a 3-axis
                                                  P
    magnetometer to record the orientation o the pod as it fell
    through the flame. On the Titan I1 were mounted two radiom-
    eters.and a spectrometer looking duwn the plume from outside
    the flame. Purpose of the experiment was to learn characteristics
    of infrared spectral plume of particular missiles, to learn more
    about Titan I1 performance in terms of fuel combustion mixture
    ratios and engine a c i e n c and to gain data helpful in evaluating
                               F
    effect of telemetry blac out occurring during missile launch.
     (OAR Research Review, 10/7/63,10)
 National Science Foundation appropnations of $323 million were
    voted by the House Appropriations Committee, a cut of $265
    million from the $589 mlllion requested by the Administration.
                                                      rSaUy
    No funds were approved for new programs. S
    naM were two new programs to improve the ation’s scientific   elimi-
    manpower by (1) encoura ‘ng new “centers of scientific excel-
                                   Ed
    lence” in universities that       unrealized potential, and ( 2 ) en-
    couraging more students to go into engineering, mathematics, and
    physical science. (NYT,      10/’8/63,26)
 Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of the House Com-
                                         s
    mittee on Science and Astronautic inserted the Goddard His-
    torical Prize Essay for 196g‘‘Ear y U.S. Satellite Proposah,”
    by R. Cargill Hall-into the C m q r e s s i d Record. Chairman
    &fillerpci~ted i thgt t L b q ~ c Rffnirs we cannot afford to be
                     ~      ~‘            p
    shortsighted or wrong” and asked that proposals of 194649 be
    considered in the li ht of the current discussion on the U.S. space
                          P
    program : ‘What i the United States had launched a satellite in
    1952 or even 1954? Would history have been different! . . .
    Would not the image of the US. in the eyes of the rest of the
    world have been spared the historical blemish of Sputnik, the
    appearance that we were not the scientific and technological
    leader in the world? . . . If we would remain free and maintain
    peace on a small and troubled planet, America had better make
                                                   r
   sure that superior space science and techno10 are on our side.”
       Prize historical essay reviewed proposals y the U.S. Navy’s
    Bureau of Aeronautics and the US. Air Fords RAND COT. for
    for the launching of earth satellites, proposals turned down by
    Department of Defense officials as not having “scientific or mill-
    tary utility.” Goddard Historical Essay Competition k spon-
   sored annually by the National Rocket (hb, Washington, D.C.
     (CR, 10/7/63, A6277-6284)
 FAA announced that its air traffic control s stem would be expanded
                                             9
    to cover most of Continental Air De ens8 Command (CONAD)
    airborne interceptor operations that are made under instrument
    flight rules ( F ) Improvements were expected in air safety
                   IR.
     741-623 -25
378           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    from having the same traffic control system in charge of both air
    defense operations and civil air traffic. (FAA Release 63-85)
October 7 : MiissiZes and Rockets quoted Harrison Storms, president of
    North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div.,
     prime contractor for Apollo program, on proposals that a joint
    U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program would enable U.S. to proceed a t
    more leisurely pace and less expensively : “When is won enough?
     I don’t see anything blocking us now. . . . I f you ut it off it
                                                           B
    will cost more money. You must have the level of e ort capable
    of developing the systems to do the job. I f you go below that
    level, it costs money. . . . When you begin to lower your effort
    it’s not the least capable man who leaves first, it’s the most capa-
     ble. You lose critical talent and you may actually need the same
    or more manpower to reach the same goal at a later date.”
     (M&R, 10/7/63, 86)
 Sen. J m p h S. Clark (D.-Pa.), speaking on the Senate floor with
     regard to various aid-tu-education bills before the Senate, asserted
     a connection between excellence of education and loss of jobs to
     automation. As a case in point he inserted in the Cmgressimd
    Record two N e w Y o r k T i m s articles on NASA’s findings of care-
     less or inadequate workmanship in Project Mercury. “In both
     articles,” the Senator said, “the point is made that workmen on
     the projects do not have the necessary technical skill to complete
    them, in many instances, without the defects which resulted not
     only in serious failures of the end product but also in running
    u a substantial expense to the Government.” (CR,             10/7/63,
     1?847)
 Many U.S. airline officials have grave doubts about the economic
     feasibility of supersonic transport aircraft, the WaZZ Xtreet
    JozLmzal reported. Costing up to four times as much as today’s
     $6 million subsonic jets and carrying no more and probably
     fewer passengers with high fuel costs and crew costs, the aircraft
     are supposed to be able to do more work in less time thanks tu
     their high speed. But many doubt that the one will balance the
    other. ( W d l Street Joulmal, 10/7/63)
 X-15 No. 1 flew to an altitude of 77,800 ft. and a speed of 2,834
     mph (mach 4.21), as Capt. Joe H. Engle (USAF) made his first
     flight in the research rocket aircraft. (NASA Release 63-224;
     Chic. Trib., 10/8/63)
 I t would be two or three years before the U.S.S.R. tried t o land a
     man on the moon, according to Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid
     Sedov in an interview with the Brussels newspaper Le Soir. He
     said the Russians do not yet have a definite system for landing
     a man on the moon but did have the technical ability to do it.
      (UPI, Wash. Post, 10/8/63)
 British enthusiasts are still actively pursuing attempts to develop
     a man-powered aircraft, the National Geographic Society re-
     ported. *4 British industrialist has offered a $14,000 prize to
     the first man to propel himself in the air over a mile-long, figure4
    course, keeping at least 10 ft. above the ground. Some 25 teams,
     including some of Britain’s top aeronautical engineers, are com-
     peting. Best effort to date is over one half mile at 19 mph, flown
                                                                  379
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,        1963

    by a young man whose furious pedaling turned a pro ller on a
    slender-winged, featherweight craft. ( N Y T , l0/7/63r
October 7: The -            industry “could better be defined as the na-
                  m
    tional survival industry,” Stuart H. Clement, Jr., of Hayden,
    Stone & CO., Inc., investment bankers, told the New York Society
    of Security Analysts in New York. “Itprovides national defense
    but, throu h space exploration, it may also provide a substitute
              9
    for mutu ly suicidal nuclear war.” The a e m ace industry is
                                                      \
                     wing in the economy and has the road& future,
    the fastest
    he said. (ET,        10/8/63)
 NASA announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Ana-
    heim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059
    contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment
    for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at MSFC.
    The additional work would include design, manufacture, and in-
     stallation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test p i -
    tion and an acoustical-model test position at MSFC. (NASA Re-
    lease 63-222)
 World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva
              %a
    with dele tes from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary Gen-
    era1 U T ant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar
    communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the
    broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate
    radio frequencies to provide         wth room for future &&lite
    communications needs. ( N Y c 0 / 8 / 6 3 , 16)
 Dr. Hugh L Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, received Harry
               .
    E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution
    to the field of trans ortation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Isc-
                       8nk.       ( t . Invitation, 4/18/63)
                                   L r of
    turer at Syracuse
 Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during th0 weak
    whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen.
                                   =.i.&g & Gz=r,--, Qii&yd ef t p
     &Z-jhe= yanag      (E.-(??&),                                   h_
                                             t

    Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey,
    adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News,10/7/63)
 NANA reported Lufthansa sourea in Germany claim that U.S.S.R.
    is farther along on supersonic transport development than either
    Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the

                                       about the same passenger load
   of 100, and to land a t quite low speeds, probably through the
   use of variable-sweep win . First vemon of the supersonic
                                8“
   transport would be a freig t carrier, not only because it can be
                                                          #r
   introduced with a lower safety factor than a passen r version
   but because the increased friction between Soviet ussia and
   Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to east-
   ern Russia. (NANA, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/&3)
 Atlas D ICBM was launched from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., but
   exploded shortly after launch. (UPI, N Y T , 10/8/63, 28)
 Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynam-
   ics/Astronautics and Rccketdyne Division of North American
   Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using "flax"-a mixture
330           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen-as the oxidizer in the
     Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the
     combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in
     fdr 100-mile high orbits. (LRC Release 63-78, Lewis r y l o a d s
                                                                    hronol-
     om9 9)
Early October: FAA Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that
             studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (SCAT)
     NASA’s
     were not in m r d with FAA thinking-that            they derived too
     much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they rec-
     ommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while
     FAA leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically
     feasible for airline operation. (Au. WL., 10/14/63,38)
 Army announced $213,385,000 contract for continued development
     of the Nike-X antimissile system, awarded to Western Electric
     Corp. Largest single missile contract in Army history, the award
     calls for development and testing but does not provide for pro-
     duction or deployment. (M&R, 10/7/63,18)
October 8 : EXPLORER X N energetic particles satellite had definitely
     ceased useful transmission after almost 10 months of successful
     operation. Scientists at GSFC said trouble began in August, when
     the satellite’s transmitter failed to modulabtranslate instru-
     ment signals into telemetry code-properly. Intermittent modu-
     lation had occurred since then, but little useful data had been
     received. The satellite signal is still useful for position reference.
        EXPLORER xm, launched on October 2,1962, had an initial ellip-
     tical orbit of 61,500-mi. apogee and 173-mi. perigee. After 10
     months, gravitational influence of the sun and moon had changed
     the orbit to 60,220-mi. apogee and 1,280-mi. perigee, with a period
     of about 37 hours. Some 6,500 hours of data were received from
     the satellite. While not all the data had been analyzed, Dr. L.
     Cahill, Univ. of New Hampshire, said a number of new insights
     had already emerged, among them being : earth‘s magnetosphere,
     as shown by mapping charged particles, flared an-ay from the
     earth in an ogival-pointed arch-shape ; confirmation that the
     vector magnetic field changes gently from a dipole confiprat’      ion
     to a radial field at increasing distance on the night side of the
     earth near the equatorial plane; and further evidence probably
     supporting EXPLORER VI’S finding of a ring current flow on the
     night side of the earth. (NASA Release 63-223)
 NASA announced that Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director (Sys-
     tems), Office of Manned Space Flight in NASA Hq., had been named
     Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, at MSC. H e would be re-
     sponsible for the development of the Apollo command and service
     modules and for the lunar excursion module (LEM). George
     Low, Deputy Director (Programs) in the Office of Manned Space
     Flight, would assume the added responsibility for the Systems
     organization. (NASA Release 63-226; MSC Release 63-163)
  I n an editorial entitled “Bungling in Space,” the New YmL Tim8
     referred to Congressional criticism of the space program, NASA’s
     criticism of industry performance in Project Mercury, GAO criti-
     cism of industry and NASA in the development of the Centaur
     booster rocket, and the “aroma of pork-barrel” the Administra-
                                                                   381
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

   tion had allowed to befog the space program: “The disgraceful
   maneuvering to establish multi-million-dollar spate projects-
   whether in Texas or Massachusetts-reflects on the Administra-
   tion, the Congress and the country and undermines popular sup-
   port for the Dropram itself. No wonder the exmnditure of such
   +ast sums hLs b&n meeting so much well-foun&d public resist-
   ance.” (NPT, 10/8/63,40)
Ochber 9: President Kennedv’s news conference. Asked about devel-
   opments on his pro sal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned
                       F
   lunar landing, the resident replied : “We have had no indication
   that the Soviet Union is disposed to enter into the kind of relation-
   ship which would make a joint exploration of space or to the moon
   possible. But I think it is important that the United States con-
   tinue to emphasize its peaceful interest and its preparation to go
   quite f a r in attempting to end the barrier which has existed be-
   tween the Communist world and the West and to attempt to brin
                                                                      9
   as much as we can the Communist world into the free world o
   diversity which we seek . . . .     7,

       Asked whether the question of verification had come up in US.-
   U.S.S.R. talks on an agreement t o ban the orbiting of nuclear
   weapons, President Kennedy said :“. . .there is not an agreement.
   The United States has stated it would not put weapons in outer
   s ace. We have no milita use for doing so, and we would not
    &   so. The Soviet UnionTas stated that it does not intend to.
   We are glad of that. There is no way we can verify that, but we
   are ladtoheartheintention . . . .
       “ i is a matter, i seems to me, that can best be handled not
         hs                  t
   through any bilateral agreement but as a General Assembly mat-
   ter, because other countries ma have the same capability, and I
                                    9
   think every country should dec are that they are not going to put
   atomic weapons in the atmosphere, which could threaten not only
    iiie w u r i i y of a yohxiiiai adversary but our own muriicy, if for
   some reason the weapons should miscalculate and descend upon
   US . . . .” (WaSh. Post, 10/10/63, 14)
 NASA announced the details of a major reorganization of NASA Hq.,
   to become effective Nov. 1,1963. Designed to consolidate author-
   ity and responsibility for major program management and for
   direction of field centers and to realign headquarters management
   of a ency-wide supporting services, the reorganization provided
        B
   the ollowing :Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight
    (Dr. George Mueller) directing the manned space flight program
   and the related centers, ~ F CMSC and LOC; Associate Administra-
                                        ,
   tor for Advanced Research and kechnology (Dr. Raymond Bis-
               ,
   plinghoff) directing the advanced research and technology pro-
      ram and the related centers, ARC mc, L a m , and LRC; and the
   5ssociate Administrator for Space kciences and Applications (Dr.
   Homer Newell), directing the scientific explorations of space and
      eaceful applications ro m and the related centers, OSFC, Wal-
   f o p Station, PLOO, a n 8 g n i s t e r i n g the ,mntract for JPL.
       These rogram managers would report to the Associate Admin-
   istrator, %r. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Dr. Seamans acquired a
   deputy, Walter L. Lingle. A s reporting to Dr. Seamans would
                                      lo
382           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    be four staff functions : Deputy Associate Administrator for
    Industry Affairs (Earl D. Hilburn) ; Deputy Associate Admin-
    istrator for Administration (John D. Young) ; Deputy Associate
    Administrator for Programming (D. D. Wyatt) ; and Deputy
    Associate Administrator for Defense Affairs (Adm. Walter F.
    Boone (USN, Ret.) ).
       Several agency-wide support functions would report directly
    to the Administrator : Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs
     (Julian Scheer) ; Assistant Administrator for Technology Uti-
    lization and Policy Planning (Dr. George Simpson) ; Assistant
    Administrator for Legislative Affairs (Richard Callaghan) ;
    Assistant Administrator for International Programs (Arnold
    Frutkin) ; Executive Director of the Policy Planning Board
     (Paul Dembling) ; General Counsel (John A. Johnson). I n
    addition to his assistant administrator duties, Dr. Simpson would
    also become Associate Deputy Administrator, coordinating the
    staffs reporting to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator.
     (NASA Release 63-225)
October 9: Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched at twilight from
    Wallops Station, Va., with 100-lb. payload to test theories of free
    radical formation in comets. At 95-mi. altitude a flame was pro-
    duced that left a faintly luminous cloud of combustion products
    visible from earth for 10 to 20 seconds. The cloud reflected sun-
    light in the way a comet does. Conducted by Lewis Research Cen-
    ter, the studies would test theories that natural comets are com-
    posed of the materials existing at the time of formation of the
    solar system. A second test was scheduled for the following night.
     (Wallops Release 63-90 ; Space Bus. Daily, 10/11/63,68)
 NASA officials testified before the Subcommittee on NASA Legislative
    Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics
    on the summary report, on Project. Mercury that had accused
    industry of poor workmanship. Dr. George Mueller, Director of
    Manned Space Flight, and his Deputy, George Low, and Walter
     C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and
    Flight Operations, MSC, agreed that the bulk of the 444-page
    report was “a recital of success,” with only one 10-page section
    listin deficiencies. The committee agreed with the witnesses and
         f
    consi ered the matter closed. (#pace Bzcs. DaiZy, 10/10/63, 60)
 Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.-Minn.) spoke on the Senate floor
    about the results of the Senate Committee on Government Opera-
    tions’ five-year fight for more comprehensive, integrated technical
    information programs in Government. The Senator said that
    useful programs were now at last underway in all major Federal
    agencies ; he particularly cited the Science Information Exchange,
    which as of June 30, 1963, had a roster of 75,000 research pro-
    posals and projects in the life sciences and physical sciences. (CR,
    10/9/63,18128)
 By this date, engineering design work on the Apollo spacecraft was
    more than 75 per cent complete and work had begun on fabrica-
    tion of the stainless steel skin and molding of honeycomb alumi-
    num inner walls of the command module at the North American
    hviation plant at Downey, Calif. (Finney, NYT, 10/13/63,80)
                                                                   383
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,          1963

October 9: AEC memo, “Electromagnetic Effects on World Com-
    munications,” described the effects of high-altitude, high-
    yield nuclear explosions on worldwide communications, amordmg
    to S p m e Business Daily. Data had been accumulated from high-
    altitude nuclear explosions in Project Argus, 1958, Operabon
    Hardtack, 1959, and Starfish Prime, July 9,1962. The rn m p d
    said that a 50-megaton blast a t 50-mi. altitude would black out
     communications within a radius of 2,500 miles for as long as a day.
    Such effects had been an area that opponents of the nuclear test-
    ban treaty had argued the U.S. had too little information about
    and that the knowledge was critical for ICBM penetration and anti-
    missile defense. (Space Bus. DaiZy, 10/9/63, 50, 51)
 A “flying carpet” escape system from orbital space stations has been
     advanced by Douglas Aircraft Co. The escape system would be a
    saucer shape that would expand into a blunt-nosed, cone-shaped
    vehicle 25 ft. across at its base. Passing through the atmosphere,
    the vehicle would act as its own brake. Re-entry heatin pmb
                                                              B
    lems would be met by using fabrics woven with filaments o nickel-
    based alloys that can withstand 1,600-degree temperatures
     (Space Bus. Daily, 10/9/63, 52)
 Air Force Systems Command and Air Force Logistics Command
    announced a joint program of data management applicable to
    all Air Force contracts from the two commands. Program calls
    for ti ht data control by project officer, selection of minimum e s
         7
    sentia data, line-iteming each data point in the contract. ( m o
    Release 310-R-87)
 An editorial in the Washington Daily News sup rted the idea that
                                                   g.
    a slower program would not save money in t e long run.
       “. . . today the moon and space programs are in high gear and
    almost $5 billion in prime contracts have been placed with Ameri-
    can industry. Plants are tooled up, scientists are on the job,
    research centers are going up and near Rouston even a ~ i e w   city
    is being built.
       “We are inclined to agree with Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA
    Director ,James Webb and others that a major slash in space
    funds at this st e would not save money in the long run because
                   T
    a stretched-out unar landing program would come to an even
    greater total cost. Mr. Webb, for example, estimates an extra $3
    billion for the additional overhead costs alone of a thre%year
    stretch-out.
       “It was judged two years ago by the President and Congress
    to be in the national interest to place a man on the moon-and
    before the Russians, if possible. I f the reasons were valid then,
                                                 r
    and we think they were, they are valid toda .” (Text)
October 10: Nike-A ache sounding rocket was aunched a t twilight
                    P
    from NASA Wal ops Station in the second of a series of comet
    experiments. At 95-mi. altitude the 100-lb. payload produced
    flames visible from earth and combustion products that lingwed
    after burnout as a faint luminous cloud somewhat similar to a
    comet. The cloud effect was visible for a surprising five minutes,
    compared with less than one half minute the night before. The
    simulated comet was photographed from three ground positions.
     (Wallops Release 63-92)
384                                               1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

October 10: Aerobes 150 sounding rocket was launched from White
    Sands Missile Range, N.M., but sustainer engine failed to ignite,
    dastroying vehicle and payload containing a GFSC nebular spectra
    experiment. (GSFC Historian)
 House passed H.R. 8747, the Independent Offices Appropriations
    for FY 1964, which included the $5.1 billion for NASA recom-
    mended by the Appropriations Committee. Among the amend-
    ments accepted was one which would require Senate approval of
    any agreement that would use NASA funds in support of joint
    lunar exploration with Communist countries. Among amend-
    ments rejected were ones which would have (1) reduced NASA R&D
    funds by another $700 million and set limitations of $597,400,000
     on Project A p l l o and $124,400,000 on lunar and planetary ex-
                    1
    ploration; (2 deleted the facility construction funds for the pro-
    posed NASA e ectronics center ($3,990,000) ; and (3) reduced the
    amount for development of a supersonic transport aircraft from
    $60 million to $500,000.
        An involved debate preceded passage of the bill, most of it
    concerned with the NASA program. Rep. Clarence Cannon (D-
     Mo.), Chairman of the A propriations Committee, was one of
                                                           r
     those opposing passage o r t h e NASA funding. H e a r ed that
     “the appro riation reported out by the committee has een pro-
               fi
     vided large y because of commitments. It is impossible to escape
                                 ’
     the conviction that the ro’ect [manned lunar landing] must
     eventually be abandoned. ,P
        Rep. Albert Thomas (D.-Tex.) led the support of the NASA
     program, arguing that the NASA budget had already been cut $1.1
     billion from that ($6.2 billion) originally presented by NASA to
     the Bureau of the Budget. Another in support of the NASA ap-
     propriation was Rep. George W. Andrew (D-Ala.) ,who read into
     the record a letter from Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of
     MSFC. Dr. von Braun argued that a program as big and complex
     and with such long lead times as the space program must have
     sustained, consistent support year after year. H e stated that of
     the various major expenditures-rockets, capsules, facilities, etc.-
     only the Lunar Excursion Module was being designed principally
     for the manned lunar landing. “All other elements of these pro-
     grams create what we as a nation most urgently need independent
     of our lunar landing effort : A national manned spacefaring cap-
     ability, to sail the new ocean, as the President said.” (OR,
     10/10/63,18260-18309)
  A. Scott Crossfield, first pilot of the X-15 and now an executive with
     North American Aviation, Inc., said in an interview that he
     thought the X-15 “can fly twice as high as its present record
     and probably can go several hundred miles faster than it has been
     flown . . . .” The increased altitude “. . . would be more dif-
     ficult than the extra speed and it would create re-entry problems
     too.” (Tulsa D d y World, €0/11/63)
  The President’s memorandum on patent policy for work performed
     under Government contract was read into the Congressional Rec-
     ord. Written as guidance on patent licy for all Government
                                           6
     agencies the memorandum provided :           the Government would
                                                               385
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    normally acquire rights to inventions made 'in the wum of work
    on a Government contract, exce t when the head of the agency
                                   P
    concerned certified that the pub ic i n t e m t would best be served
    by some other arrangement; (2) in cf~seswhere the Government
    contract calls for buildin on existing knowledge in a field of
                 directly mlate8 to field in which the contractor has
      ""h"o'Y
    an estab ish& nongovernmental commercial p i t i o n , the contrac-
    tor would normally acquire rights to any inventions.
      d
      CR,10/10/63 18320-21)
                                                             C.
octo er IO: NOM heace prize for 1962 went to B ~ i n m Pauling,
                                                    .
    of the California Institute of Technology. It was the second
    N b l Prize for Dr. Pauling, who won the chemistry award in
      oe
    1954 for his the0 describing the fundamental nature and behav-
                                He had been a controversial figure in
    ior of molecular%nds
    the US. for some ears because of his outspoken o p p i t i o n to
    nuclear testing. ( "&,     10/11/63,1)
 The Collier Trophy for 1962 was presented to the seven Project
    Mercury astronauts by President Kennedy in the White House
    Rose Garden :
       " ho this award, which in effect closecs out a particular
        I
            p"
    phase o the program, will be a stimulus to them and to the
    other astronauts who will carry our f a to the moon and, per-
                                             lg
    hapq some day, beyond." (AP, NYT, 10/11/63,18; NAA Release
    10/7/63)
  Department of Commerce asked the National Inventors Council,
    previously concerned with muting the ideas of independent in-
    ventors to DOD, to broaden its activities and advise the Commerce
    Department on all steps the Federal government can take to s ur
                                                                E
    invention and ap lication of inventions. Dr. J. Herbert Ho o-
                    2
    man, Assistant ecretary of Commerce for Science and Tech-
    nology, said application of new ideas was the biggest problem:
                                                       I ~ ~ ~ I &t. T Z ~ E
                                                                    G
    "1 nere is immense misiaum to ne= meth&.
 ....?I




    comes from an invader-from a foreigner to a wmpan ,an indus-
                                                        E
    try or a country. For example, polymers came from t e chemical
    industry to the textile industry. Fluorescent lighting came from
    Europe. The transistor was not developed by a radio-tube manu-
    facturer." (Jones, NPT, 10/11/63, 53)
October 11; NASA De uty Associate Administrator Earl D. Hilburn,
                     K
    speaking before t e Midwest €b@onal Conference of the Society
    of American Military Engineers m Omaha, Neb., described NASA s
                                                         und simulation
    steady increase in facilities and techniques for
    of the space environment in the testing ogpaeecraft: "TO
    date, . . . it has been estimated that the monetary cost of the
    spacecraft environmental test programs has been less than 10
    percent of the irrecoverable wst of the s acecraft launch. It
                                              h       or-Delta launched
    is estimated that the cost of placing a
    spacecraft into orbit is $10 million. Included in the 10 percent
    figure I have just cited is the prorated cost of s a c e ~ r a f test
                                                                     t
    facilities distributed over about 20 launches anI f 10 ywrs of
              (Text)
    time."
386                                                19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

October 11: Douglas Aircraft Go.graduated first class from on-the-job
    training program for potential executives. The six trainees, with
    no previous managerial experience, were assigned full time to
    departments completely different from their prior jobs with the
    company. Acting as staff assistants, they sat 111 on all policy con-
    ferences and later reviewed with the manager in private his rea-
    sons for the decisions made during the conference. W.E. Mas-
    chal, director of management systems for the Aircraft Division,
    said the program differed from other manager rotation plans “in
    its emphasis upon teaching potential managers the decision-
    making process from the excutive point of view.” (Space Bus.
    Daily, 10/11/63, 68)
October 22: Joseph A. Walker, NABA’B senior X-15 pilot and holder
    of the world altitude and speed records for r e r c h aircraft was
    awarded the Christopher Columbus International Prize for bom-
    munication. The award is made by the city of Genoa, Italy,
    each year on Columbus Day. U.S. Ambassador G. Frederick
    Reinhardt accepted the award on behalf of Mr. Walker. (NASA
    Release 63-229; AP, N Y T , 10/14/63,9)
October 13: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, interviewed by the
    New York Herald Tribune, acknowledged that parts of Project
    Apollo were behind the schedule as written two years ago. H e
    singled out on-board power--“we have counted on fuel cells . . . .
    To say that the fuel cell is behind is not an adequate statement,
    but to say that problems have been encountered in solving the
    problems of enough on-board electrical energy to do the job
     would be an accurate statement’-and the Titan I1 booster for
    the Gemini program--“We must know what happens to men and
    equipment under a weightless condition for a week or two. We
     had hoped to get this information a t an earlier. date in making
    our plans for Apollo and future flight missions. We still will
     get it early enough to do the job within this decade.” (Ubell
     and Loory, N . Y . Hernld Tribune, 10/13/63)
  Editorial in the New Pork Timm: “The House of Representatives,
     moved by sheer frustration and a kind of primitive emotionalism,
     occasionally acts in such a way as to undermine its reputation for
     rational lawmaking. The vote to prohibit the use of moon-
     project funds in any cooperative lunar attempt with the Soviet
     Union is a case in point. This restrictive proposition was pre-
     sented without advance notice, received virtual1 no debate on its
                                                     P
     merits, and was then adopted with barely ha1 the membership
     voting . . . . The Congress of the Uniten States should not re-
     lieve Premier Khrushchev from making the decision on coopera-
     tion, or noncooperation, with the United S a e in the explora-
                                                   tts
     tion of space.” ( N Y T , 10/13/63,8E)
October 14.: The concensus of a number of visual experts consulted
     by NASA is that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper did in fact see
     houses, roads, and vehicles from his orbiting FAITH 7 capsule. Dr.
     John A. O’Keefe of GSFC dismissed the theory that the atmosphere
     had acted as a magnifier of the objects. Maximum atmospheric
     magnification would be 1.00002, or a rise of 8.5 ft. Normal
     human visual acuity is normally considered to be one minute
                                                                  387
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    of arc, but under good combinations of illumination and con-
    trast objects of v minute of arc or even smaller can be seen.
                       z
    From 100 miles altitude, this would work out at 30 ft. on the
    rund    . Line or ribbon objects can be seen much more easily,
      own to one-sixth or less the diameter of circular 0bjeet.s. (M&R,
    10/14/63,14)
October 14: The lunar landing research facility was nearing comple-
               a
    tion at Lan ley Research Center. A gantry structure 400 ft. long
    and 250 ft. igh with a 50 ft. clearance would suspend a model of
                                         ,
    the Lunar Landing Module (LEM) sustaining 5/s of the model’s
    weight to simulate the 4/s lunar p v i t and enable astronauts
    to practice lunar landings. (Av.   Wk., lOJ4/63,83)
 NASA Hq. had tentatively approved Project Luster, designed to cap-
    ture lunar dust that was in orbit around the earth, Missilea and
    Rockets reported. Proposed by Ames Research Center, the proj-
    ect is based on the assumption that meteorite impacts on the moon
    above a certain velocity should throw out more than the meteor-
    ite’s own weight in dust. Some of this lunar dust should find
    its way into earth orbit. Ames would launch an Aerobee 150
    sounding rocket to attempt to trap some of the dust. (M&&
    10/14/63,9)
 X-15 flight to test a modification of the vertical tail section was
    postponed. The pilot, Maj. Robert Rushworth (UBAF), called
    o f the flight 15 m. before he was to drop away from the B-52
     f
    mother aircraft. A malfunction had developed in the X-15’s
    inertial guidance system. (AP, Wash. Post,. 10/15/63)
 MSC awarded $lOO,OOO contract to North American Aviation, Inc.,
    for a study of what modifications would be necessary to the
    Apollo spacecraft to use it as a space science laboratory in orbital
    flights lasting up to one year. (Houston Post, 10/15/63)
 Edward Z. Gray was appointed Director of Advanced Studies, Of-
                                                                     A.
    fice of Manned Space Flight, NASA E . s u d i i - D .  i TGlhii~
                                          q,
    Lee, who was joining the Apollo S p a m r a f t $ r o Y m Office,
    MSC. Mr.Gray had been with Boeing Aircraft Co. or 24 years,
    most recently as Development Program Manager of Advanced
    Space Systems, Aero-Space Div. (NASA Release 63-228)
 Total manpower working a t NASA’s      Michoud Operations, of which
    only 244 were NASA employees :8,463. Contractor employees were :
    Boeinq, 4,136 ; Chrysler, 3,207 ;Mason-Rust, 769 ; Rocketdyne, 13 ;
    and Telecomputing Services, 94. (MarshaZZ Star, 10/23/63, 4)
 MSC selected Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. to
    develop detailed theoretical analysis of mechanics involved i      n
    rocket-belt transportation of one man plus a small.load of sup-
    plies or tools in a zero-gravity or lunar surface environment, in-
    cluding capability to ascend or descend steep lunar crater walls.
     (Space Bus. Daily, 10/15/63,81)
 FAA exhibited a device intended to detect bombs carried aboard air-
     craft. The device, displayed a t Dulles International Airport,
    Washington, was based on the principle of the gei r-counter,
                                                          F
     would depend on the willingness of explosives manu acturers to
    mix small quantities of radiative material in their products.
    (FAA Release)
388                                                 1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

October 1 . Astronauts on the five-day manned lunar landing trip
          4:
    would not only pilot the Apollo but would make repairs to mal-
    functioning systems out of a stock of spare parts carried along for
    that purpose. This would be one means of upgrading the reli-
    ability of the entire system and reduce the need for redundancy
    of systems, saving weight and space. (Finney, N Y T , 10/15/63,
    22)
 Dr. Jerome B. Wiener, Director of the White House Office of Sci-
    ence and Technology, appeared before a Senate Appropriations
    subcommittee to request restoration of $245,000 that the House
    had cut from his office’s $1,025,000 budget request. I f the cut
     were not restored, he said, he would have to cut back his 29-
    member staff just as the one-year-old organization was beginning
    to “realize some of the potential foreseen for it as a new innova-
    tion in the Federal science structure.” ( N Y T , 10/15/63, 2 5 )
October 15: Seventeen of the 18-member U.N. Disarmament Com-
    mittee presented a resolution to the U.N. Political Committee of
    the General Assembl banning the orbiting of nuclear weapons
                         P
    and other weapons o mass destruction. This was a follow-up to
    the Oct. 3 announcement of such an agreement among the U.S.,
    U.S.S.R., and U.K. (Brewer, N Y T , 10/16/63, 1)
 NASA launched an Aerobee rocket to an altitude of 123.5 mi. over
    White Sands Missile Range, N.M., with a 245-1b. payload to
    study solar radiation. Three telescopes with automatic camera
    attached to each took x-ray photos of sun at exposures ranging
    from 3/10 sec. to 100 sec. Equipment was designed to obtain an
    optical image of the sun from its own low-energy x-rays and
    would be used in future scientific satellites. OSFC cooperated
    with American Science and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge,
    Mass., in the experiment. The payload was recovered 55 mi.
     downrange. (Wash. Post. 10/16/63; AP, N Y T , 10/16/63, 2;
     NASA Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 11/14/63)
 MIT announced that a laser had been used to observe meteoritic dust

          s
    at hei hts of 35 to 85 mi., with the dust seeming to concentrate at
    50 to 5 mi. It was suggested that the lower layer might be re-
    lated to the noctilucent clouds, since last year’s rocket launchings
    from Sweden suggested that noctilucent, clouds found at that
    altitude could ‘be ice-covered particles of meteoritic dust. The
    higher layer might be at the level where meteors break into dust
    on entry into the earth’s atmosphere. (IVYT, 10/16/63,2)
 Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Science,
    was the opening witness in hearings on the Government’s role as
    a patron of science and technology, conducted by the subcommit-
    tee on Science, Research and Development of the House Commit-
    tee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Seitz said that the period
    of almost unlimited growth of Federal investment in science and
    technology was coming to an end, would have tu level off and force
    some “hard decisions” on choices, and expressed the fear that basic
    science would suffer in competition with more glamorous hardware
    projects. For the most part he thought U.S. science was well
    ahead of Russia, but noted remarkable progress on the part of
    West Germany and Japan. (Finney, N Y T , 10/16/63)
                                                                    389
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

October 15: Second Town Meeting of the World telecast by CSV       BT
                                                                    -
    via TELSTAR II satellite. The subject was “The Christian Revolu-
    tion” and linked in a discussion church leaders in New York,
    b n d m , and Rome. Program was only a partial technical suc-
    cess, since the audio signal for the m a k e r s in Rome was miss-
    ing for most of the prog-ram. (GBB-TV)
October 16: Twin Vela Hotel satellites were launched by DOD from
    Cape Canaveral on an Atlas-Agena vehicle, according to newspa-
    per reports. The two satellites, designed t o detect nuclear explo-
    sions m space to a distance of 100,000,000 mi., were launched mto
    an elliptical orbit of 57,000-mi. apogee, 230-mi. perigee. Some 18
    hours after launch, one of the two satellites received a signal from
    Vandenberg AFB which activated a rocket motor at apogee to kick
    the satellite into circular orbit a t 57,000 mi. On Oct. 19, the same
    was done for the second satellite, so that both would orbit at
    57,000 mi. but always be on opposite sides of the earth. Reports
    also indicated that a third satellite, known as “P gmy” and
                                                           cl
    weighing 2y2 lbs., was included in the launch, woul remain in
    elliptical orbit returnin radiation readings across the depth of
    the Van Allen Belt. Tiis function was said to be completely in-
    dependent of the purpose of the twin Vela Hotel satellites. (Wit-
    kin, N Y T , 10/18/63, 13; Wash. Post, 10/18/63; N.Y. Herah?
    Tribune, 10/18/63 ; DOD Release 1396-63)
 B-58 with u s a crew flew nonstop from Tokyo to London, complet-
    ing the 8,028-mi. flight in 8 hrs. 35 min. for an average speed of
    938 m h. The €3-58 was refueled in midair five times. Previous
    remr of 17 hrs. 42 min. was set in 1957 by U.K.’s W. Hoy, who
    flew a Canberra a t an avera e speed of 335.7 mph. Crew mem-
    bers on the B-58 were Ma’. 8idne G. Kubesch, Ca t. Gerald R.
    Williamson, and Maj. JoL 0. garrett. (Ae. I&.,             10/21/63;
    N Y T l 10/22/63,8)
                                                                  v~pii-
 Poiii;icai Committee of ihe G n i M Xai;orrs & I I ~ I h u ~ L I y
                                                         ~
0

    imously approved a 17-nation resolution to prohibit the orbitmg
    of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction in space.
    Committee chairman, Carl W. A. Schurmann of the Netherlands,
    said: “We are all so happy a b u t this resolution that it will not
    be necessary to take a formal vote.” Previously, only the United
    States and the Soviet Union, under the limited test ban treaty, had
    agreed to such a matter in principle. Resolution would o to
    the General Assembly next day. (Brewer, N Y T , 10/1?/63;
    Wash. Post, 10/17/63)
 U.S.S.R. Ambasador Anatoli Dobrynin told the U.N. that his coun-
    try had a plan for manned lunar flight prior to 1970. This was
    said to be the first official acknowledgment on a political level
    that such a plan existed. (Space B w . Daily, 10/21/63, 116;
    Chic.Tm’b., 11/27/63)
 Maj. Donald K. Slayton (USAF) one of the original seven Mercury
    astronauts and the only one of them who was grounded during
    the course of the project, submitted his letter of resignation to the
    USAF and would join NASA a a civilian pilot qualified for space
                                   s
    flights. (Finney, N Y T , 10/17/63)
390                                                 19 63
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

October 16: Dr. Jerome B. Wiener, the President’s Scientific Ad-
    viser, testified before House Science and L4stronautics subcom-
    mittee on the Federal role in science and technology. He indicated
    that the tremendous surge in development of military weapon
    systems khat had been the principal cause of the 15-to-20 per cent
    increase in the Federal science and technobgy budget each year
    for the last several years would level off. Now the effort would
    shift from military systems to bringing technology “to bear on
    serving the collective needs of our people.” He was concerned
    lest without the defense motive the Nation slip back into indiffer-
    encgbward support of science, particularly the basic research that
    provided the new ideas for further advances. He also said that
    he not only supported the US.-U.S.S.R. cooperative lunar land-
    ing proposal but that he had often commended the idea to the
    President. ( N Y T , 10/17/63; Space Bm. Daily, 10/17/63, 98)
 FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby and Civil Aeronautics Board
    Chairman Alan S. Boyd testified before the Senate Commerce
    Committee Subcommittee on Aviation on the U S . plans for de-
    velopment of a supersonic transport (SST). They agreed that
    the US. must and would win the competition with the U.K.-
    France Concorde. Airlines were even now holding back on pur-
    chase commitments of the Concorde because the U.S. entry
    promised to be faster, carry more passengers, and have more
     range, even though it would be a year or more later in schedule.
    Halaby said three problems were still unsolved: the sonic boom
    level, materials to withstand the heat of mach 2.5 flight, and
    producing a better aircraft at a price competitive with the Con-
    corde. ( Wmh. Post, 10/17/63)
  Soviet Cosmonauts Lt. Col. Yuri A. Gagarin and Junior Lt. Valen-
    tina Tereshkova visited the U.N. in New York. After a standing
    ovation by the General Assembly, Col. Gagarin listed five areas
     in which US.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation was possible : exchange
    of scientific knowledge, tracking, rescue of downed spacemen,
    global weather study, and an international radio communications
     system. Manned space flight cooperation required “certain clari-
     fication,” he said. ( N Y T , 10/17/63)
  AFOAR announced that its scientists at AFCRL had developed a pre-
     cision pressure gauge that would greatly improve accuracy of
     measuring altitude in high-altitude flight. Called the hypsome-
     ter, the new device senses altitude by measuring the boiling point
     of a liquid (butylbenzene) . Testing in a series of balloon flights,
     hypsometer proved 10 times as accurate at 120.000 ft. as previous
     altimeters (240 ft. error as opposed to 2,600 ft.). (OAR Release
      10-63-2)
  Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman of the AEC, was named recipient of
    the 1963 Franklin Medal for the advancement of knowledge in
    the physical sciences. The medal is presented annually by the
    Franklin Institute of Philadelphia. Dr. Seaborg was eo-winner
    of the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1953. (NYT, 10/17/63)
  NASA said it was investigating “possible improprieties” in reports
    that cars leased to NAS.\ by a contractor, Management Services,
    Inc., at Cape Canaveral were being sold after two or three years
                                                                     391
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    use for as little as $50. Some of them had been sold to NASA
    employees, the reports said. ( N P T ,10/17/63)
October 17: U.S.-France Aerobee 150A sounding rocket was launched
    from Wallops Station Va., in cooperative pr
                                                         7
    NASA and the French dational Center for Space tudiesbetween     (CNES)
    to study very low frequency (VLF) radio wave propagation
    in the ionosphere. “he French were developing a technique t o
    measure simultaneously electronic and magnetic VLF field strength
    and electron densities. I f successful the technique would be used
    in a scientific satellite. The 197-lb. payload rose 116 mi. and
    transmitted seven min. of data before impacting 59 mi. down-
    range. This was repeat of unsuccessful attempt two days earlier
    when Aerobee 150A failed on launch. (Wallops Release 63-95)
 W D launched two unidentified satelli4es and Tetrahedral Research
    Satellite (TRS n) using Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. 3-lb. TBS
    11 was to measure charged particle intensity in Van Allen belts.
     (Pres.Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
 NASA and DOD announced joint agreement to ooordinate studies and
    actions concerning a manned orbital research and develo ment
    station. The Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating goard
     ( a m ) would be the means by which the joint appraisals would
                                                                   rm
    be carried out. I f the eventual h d i n g s were that such a pro
    w s required, the NASA Administrator and the Secretary o De-
      a
    fense would submit a joint recommendation to the President, in-
    cludmg a statement a to which agency should have project
                                s
    rssponsibility. If the President agreed to proceed with the pm-
    gram, a joint NASA-DOD hoard would be set up to establish objec-
    tives and approve specific experiments. (NASA Release 63-231;
    DOD Release 1380-63)
 NASA announced that TIROS VI weather satellite was no longer sending
    usable cloud-cover pictures, after 13 months of successful opera-
    tion arid woliit:6 7 , W pii;tiiies. ( NASA F k d e ~ . ~
                                                         SSZSZ)
 By acclamation, the United Nations adopted a resolution barring
    weapons of mass destruction from outer space. A request for a
    rollcall vote by Mexico was ignored. Thus, the attitudes towards
    East-West agreements of Cuba, Albania, and France were not
    revealed on this resolution. (Fleming, L A . Times,Wmh. PO&,
    10/18/63, A-3)
 Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.), Chairman of the Senate Foreign
    Relations Committee, s oke on the Senate floor on the NASA F Y
                             P
    1964 appropriations bi 1: ‘‘There is, I believe, a dangerous im-
    balance between our efforts in armaments and space on the one
    hand and employment and education on the other. The proposed
    appropriation for NASA, in my opinion, reflects this imbalance.
    I believe that is should be substantially reduced. I further be-
    lieve that any funds which are withheld from the space program
    should be reallocated to programs of education and employment
    which are before Congress this year.
       “The question before us, a.I have sr ‘d, is not whether we should
                                              r
    or should not send a manned rocket ship to the moon but whether
    the project is s vital and so urgent as to warrant the indefinite
                      o
    postponement of other national efforts.” (CR. 10/17/63,18777)
392           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

October 18: c o s ~ o 8xx was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R.
    A scientific satellite for “continuing the study of space,” C ~ M O S
    xx was stated to have an apogee of 311 km. (193 mi.) ; perigee of
    206 km. (128 mi.); period, 89.55 min.; and inclination, 65”.
    (KomomoZ&aya Prauda, Oct. 19,1963,1, AFSS-T Trans.)
 NASA announced at MSC the selection of 14 astronauts for the Gemini
   and Apollo projects, bringing the total number of NASA astro-
   nauts to 30. New astronauts were: Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.,
   Capt. William A. Anders, Capt. Charles A. Bassett 11, Capt.
   Michael Collins, Capt. Doqn F. Eisele, Capt. Theodore C. Free-
   man, and Ca t. David R. Scott, all USAF; Lt. Alan L. Bean, Lt.
   Eugene A. Arnan, Lt. Roger B. Chaffee, Lt. Cdr. Richard F.
   Gordon, Jr., all USN; Capt. Clifton C. Williams, Jr., USMC; and
   R. Walter Cunningham and Russell L. Schweickart, civilians.
   NASA announced another contingent of astronauts would be named
   i the fall of 1965. ( N Y T ,10/19/63,9)
     n
 NASA officials testifying before a subcommittee of the Senate Appro-
   priations Committee offered sharply revised estimates on the cost
   of a manned lunar landing. Under questioning from senators,
   NASA Administrator James E. Webb agreed that NASA would
   spend much of the $20 billion normally stated as the cost of
   manned lunar exploration even if there were no program to land
   a man on the moon. When asked how much the manned lunar
   landing would cost over and above other s ace exploration, Mr.
                                                1
   Webb estimated less than $3 billion. NASA ssociate Administra-
   tor Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., estimated $2 billion; NASA Associ-
   ate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. Genrm Mueller
   estimated $1 billion. Mr. Webb and Dr. Seamans had included the
   cpst of unmanned investigation of the lunar surface,. while DT.
   Mueller was counting only the cost of the Lunar Excursion Module
    (LEM) . ( N P T , 10/19/63,1)
 France successfully launched a cat into space onboard a Veronique
   rocket and brought it to a safe landing. (Reuters, Wash. Post.
   10/19/63,4)
 Dr. Edward Teller testified before the House Science and Astro-
   nautics subcommittee studying the role of the Federal govern-
   ment in science and technology. Dr. Teller suggested that the
   Congress devote its main effort to the development programs,
   where most of the Federal money is being spent, but leave the
   selection of basic research projects largely to the scientists be-
   c w this kind of research “deals in the unexpected.” Asked to
     a
   comment on Dr. Wernher von Braun’s statement of the value of
   the manned lunar landing, Dr. Teller answered: “Von Braun is
   a competent technician and a superb salesman. F a r be it from me
   to disagree with him.” (Toth, N Y T , 10/19]63, 25)
 NASA announced it would negotiate a contract with MIT, AC Spark
   Plug Div. of GM, Raytheon Co., Kollsman Instrument Co., and
   Sperry Gyroscope Co., for the development, fabrication, and
   testing of the idance and navigation system for the Lynar Ex-
                  ff”
   cursion Modu e (LEM) of the Apollo spacecraft. These same
   companies already are developing the guidance and navigation
   system for the Apollo command and service modules; the LEM
                                                                      393
               AGTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    system would be as compatible as possible and have as many
    interchangeable parts as possible with the other systems. (NASA
    Release 63-234)
October 18: Air Force biomedical support of Projects Gemini and
    Awllo ineluded : a t School of Aewnaee Medicine. Brooks AFB.
    Tex., studies of physiological effects of exposure to various atmos-
    pheric p n s u r e s and gases, special medical examinations of flight
    candidates, and thermal balance and water requirements for wear-
    ing the Apollo spacesuit ;a t Aerospace Medical h F c h Labora-
    tories, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, studies of effect on men of
    predicted impact velocities for Apollo landing, nutrient require-
    ments, weightless orientation flights for astronauts, and thermal
    evaluation of prototype Gemini spacesuit; at Aeromedical Re-
    search Laboratory, Holloman AFB, N.M., studies on effects of d e
    d e r a t i o n forces on Apollo pilots during recovery. (Space Bus.
    D d v . 10/18/63,108)
  A 3,000-man strike Virtually halted construction at the Nevada Test
    Site, one week after labor and management had signed an a  -
    ment designed to stop such walkouts. Labor Union Local 872 set
    up a picket line that was honored by employees of the rime con-
                                                              H
    tractor, Reynolds Electrical and E n g i n e e q Co. ( P, Wash.
    Post, 10/19/63)
  Soviet scientists in Geneva for the meeting of the World Conference
    on Space Communications presented a background paper which
    stated that the further man vontured into space the more obvious
    it was that certain problems could d y be solved bv collective,
    peaceful cooperation among nations. (Reuters, Wash. Post,
    10/18/63.23)
October 19: I n wnvocation address a the U n i v e d t y of Maine, Presi-
                                       t
    dent Kennedy outlined US. foreign policy. Referring to the
    Cuban crisis of October 1962,the President said :
       (I I
         A year ago it would have ' measy to assume that aii-out war
   w s inevitable-that any v e n t with the Soviets was impos-
     a
    sible-and that an unlimited arms raca was unavoidable. Today
    it is equally easy for some to assume that the cold war is over-
    that all outstanding issues between the Soviets and ourselves can
   be quickly and satisfactorily settled-and that vie nom have, in
    the words of the psalmist, a 'abundance of peace so long as the
                                   n
                          ....
   moon endureth'
       "The fact of the matter is, of course, that neither view is c o m t .
                                                                       ..
   We have, it is true, made sliqht pmgress on a long journey .            .
    We have concluded with the Soviets a few limited enforceable
    agreements or arrangements of mutual h e f i t t o both sides and
                ....
   the world
       "In timw such as these. therefore. there is nothinc inconsistent
    about signing an atmos heric nuclear test ban, on the one hand,
                                 %
    and testing u n d e r p u n on the other; about being willing to sell
    to the Soviets our surnlus wheat while mfusing to sell strategic
    ib?; about probii their interest in a joint lunar landing while
    making a major effort.t master this new environment; or about
                               o
    exploring the possibilities of disarmament while maintaining our
    stockpile of armaments. For all of these moves, and all other
     741423 0 - 6 6 2 6
394                                                      19 63
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

      elements of American and Allied policy toward the Soviet Union,
      are directed a t single, comprehensive goal-namely, convincing
      the Soviet leaders that it is darigerous for them to engage in direct
      or indirect aggression, futile for t h a n to attam t to im os8 their
      will and their system on other unwilling peop!?e.s, a n d L e f i c i a 1
      to them, as well a all the world, to join in the achievement of a
                        s
      genuine and enforceable peace . . . .
         “It is in our national self-interest to ban nuclear testing in
      the atmosphere so that all our citizens can breathe easier. It is
      in our national self-interest to keep weapons of mass destruction
      out of outer space-to maintain an emergency communications
      link with Moscow-and to substitute joint and peaceful explora-
      tion for cold war exploitation in the Antarctic and in outer
             ....
             . Forwithout our making such an effort, we could not
    maintain the leadership and respect of the freeworld . . . .7,
    (Text, A P Wash. Post, 10/20/63, A7)
October BO : Aoviet Cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin and Vdentina
    Tereshkova visited the Berlin Wall at the Brandenburg Gate.
    Later in interview on East Berlin Radio-TV, Cosmonette
    Tereshkova stated :
       “There are married women among our female cosmonauts. A
    friend of mine is married and has children and she has been
    prepared for a space flight in the same way as I was.” Visit
    of cosmonauts to Berlin coincided with East German Parli-
    amentary elections. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 10/21/63, A3)
 DOD was conducting a major R&D program for ground-to-space
    weapons capable of destroying hostile satellites, according to
    Richard Witkin of the New York Times. DOD Director of Re-
    search and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown had been quoted as
    saying that antisatellite defense systems mere thought “important
    enough to put substantial work into” and that ground-based
    weapons seemed cheaper and more efficient than orbital weapons.
    (Witkin, N Y T , 10/20/63,1)
October 21: NASA announced it had selected a fact-finding committee
    to study various geo raphic locations for the proposed NASA
                              8
    Electronics Research enter. Once the committee completed its
    study, the NASA Administrator would make the final decision and
    report his findings to Congress in conformance with P.L. 88-113.
     (NASA Release 63-233)
 NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate
    Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation, ointed out the
                                                              f
    long history of NACA-NASA contribution to aircra t development
    and its continuin research contribution to the supersonic trans-
                         %
    port. Denying t at such a transport would be economically
    unfeasible Mr. Webb said that further improvements were at-
    tainable during the aircraft’s development : “Reduce fuel re-
    serves by 17%; Increase airplane lift-to-drag ratio by 7% ; Re-
    duce engine specific fuel consumption during cruise by 3%;
    Reduce en ne weight by 15% ; Reduce airframe structure weight
                 p’
    by 5%.     f all of these gains can be achieved simultaneous1
                                                                             8
    the payload can be increased 34% for a given weight aircra
    designed to fly 4,000statute miles.” (Text)
                                                                   395
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

October 21 : National Academv of Sciences b n its centennial series
   of scientific meetings in Washington. (NPT, 10/22/63,23)
 Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate
   Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking a t the
   Women’s National Democratic Club in Washington, said the space
    age was “one of the great movements in human h s o y . . . .
                                                          itr
    Our ability to maintain the peace and deter aggression depends on
                        at least abreast--of any other nation in space
   keeping ahead-r
    technologg.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/22/63)
 NASA spokesman was quoted by diissiles and Rockets as saying that
    NASA would switch many of its satellite programs from the Delta
   launch vehicle to the Thrust Augmented Delta (TAD). TADwould
    use the Delta second stage with the rss~~-develo@Thrust Aug-
   mented Thor (TAT) ,which uses three strap-on solid rockets to raise
   thrust from 170,000 Ibs, to 330,000 lbs. and provide 200 Ibs. in-
   crease in payload in a 300-mi. orbit. M n NASA programs had
                                               a
                                                I
   been pushing the payload limit of the De ta Those benefiting
    from the new booster were reported to be Syncom, the Bios satel-
   lites, Om, Tiros, and the Interplanetary Monitoring P o e       rb
    (Imp). (M&R,      10/21/63,15)
 NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the New York sec-
    tion of the AA in New York, pointed out that, the U S . manned
                 A
                 I
   space program involves technical requirements “about 20 timer;
   the complexity of the Minuteman program.” For this reason,
    among others, he said leaden of the space program had re-
   cognized from the beginning that leadership could be achieved
   “only throu h a sustained, steadily accelerating effort.” H e
   quoted Dr. Ifugh L. Dryden, spedung on Apr. 26,1958, when he
   said that without this big, long-term national commitment “I’d
   just a soon we didn’t start”; Dr. Wernher von Braun in 1958 bll-
          s
   irg the House Select Committee studying the Space Act that the
            problem was “how we can eliminate this lethal and waste-
    “;Y  ot-and-cold blowing that has plagued all our missile projects
   in the past. I think this lack of steady determination and un-
   wavering support over the years has hurt us more t h m anything”;
   and Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA’s Administrator, speaking
                                         first
   at the first NASA budget hearings before the House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics: “If our spaee programs are to be run
   on an off-again, on-again basis, zigging and zagging with the turn
   of every new year, then we’d better spend our monev buying tele-
   scopes to watch the R s i n pioneers in spaca” (Text)
                          usa
 FRC completed first phase of a program to determine how much visi-
   bility a pilot needs to fly an aircraft through all phases of flight.
   The problem is that the present standards of large glassed areas
   for ilot visibility would be virtually unaczeptable in vehicles
        g
   capa le of orbital flight and re-entry. FRC’S approach to the pro-
   blem was to configure a US. Army L 1 9 light aircraft with two
   wide-angle monocular telescopes mounted with their axis conver-
   gent to an angle of 55 toward the pilot. Exposing only four
                            O
   inches of glass, the two telescopes afforded the pilot 140” visual
   field horizontally, 90” vertically, with a 40” horizontal overlap.
   Forty flights were made with the system, testing all phases of
396           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

   flight. The second phase of the program would employ a high-
   speed jet ahxraft with a similar optical system. (FRC Release 25-
    63)
Octobm 22: NASA awarded a $236,520 grant to the Lowell Observa-
    tory, Flag;ta.ff, Ariz., to provide a building for processing,
    storage, and research of lunar and planetary photography.
    This would assist Lowell Observatory in fulfilling the request
    of the International Astronomical Union in August 1961 that
    Lowell establish a Western Hemisphere repository of lunar and
    planetary research materials correspondin to the Eastsrn Hemis-
    phere center at Meudon, France. (NASA fi0lease 63-235)
 Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) refuted charges of waste and
    inefficiency in the space program, reminded members of a time
                                                          a
    three ears before when similar statements were bein made about
    the d r c u r y program. As evidence, he read into t e record an
     article by James Baar in Missiles and Rockets of Au 15, 1960,
                                                              8;
    entitled “Is Mercury Program Headed for Disaster. : “NASA’s
    Mercury manned satellite program appears to be plummeting the
    United States toward a new humiliating disaster in the East-
    West space ram.
       “This is the stark conclusion that looms in the minds of a grow-
    ing number of eminent rocket scientists and engineers as the
    Mercury program continues to slip backward.” (CR, 10/21/63,
    A654748)
October 22; President John F. Kennedy addressed the centennial
    meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington:
     “. . . it took the First World War to bring science into central
     contact with government policy, and it took the Second World
     War to make scientific counsel an indispensable function of
     government . . . .
       “Every time you scientists make a major invention, we politi-
     cians have to invent a new institution to cope with it-and almost
     invariably, these days, it must be an international institution.
     I am not just thinkin of the fact that when you people figure
                            7
     out how to build a gobal satellite communication system, we
     have to figure out a global organization to manage it. I am
     thinking, as well, that scientific advance provided the rationale
     for the World Health Organization and the Food and Agricul-
     ture Organization-that splitting the atom leads not only to a
     nuclear arms race but to the establishment of the International
     Atomic Energy A ency-that the need for scientific exploration
                       3
     of Antarctica lea s to an international treaty providing free
     access to the area without regard to territorial claims-that the
     scientific possibility of a World Weather Watch requires the
     attention of the World Meteorological Organization-that           the
     exploration of internationd oceans leads to the establishment of
     an Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission . . . . The
     ocean, the atmosphere and outer space belong not to one nation
     or to one ideology but to all mankind.
        “. . . ours is a century of scientific conquest and scientific tri-
     umph. I f scientific discovery has not been an unalloyed bless-
     ing, if it has conferred on mankind the power not only to create
                                                                397
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,       1963

   but also to annihilate, it has at the same time provided humanity
    with a supreme challenge and a supreme testing. I f the chal-
   lenge and the testing are too much for humanity, then we are
   all doomed. But my own faith is plain and clear. I believe
   that the power of science and the responsibility of science have
    offered mankind a new op ortunity not only for intellectual
    growth but for moral discipfine-not only for the acquisition of
   knowledge but for the strengthening of nerve and will.” (CR,
    lO/28/63,1927!M30)
October 3 : After a technical lecture on the chemical structure
           2
    of matter, Dr. Linus Pauling, 1963 Nobel Peace Prize winner,
    attacked the U.S. lunar pro am before the National Academy
    of Sciences meeting in the Iepartment of -State auditorium: ‘‘I
                                  ! ?
    believe that it [the lunar program] is a pitiful demonstration,
                                                             Pto
    Something is wron with our system of values when we
                       f
    s end billions of do lars for national prestige.” Pauling G imed
     R
    t a t for the same investment it would be possible “to answer
    1000 interesting and important questions about the human body
    for every one question answered about the moon.” (Simons.
    WWh. Post, 10/23/63,1)
 Boilerplata Apollo capsule underwent eighth d m test of the
    3-parachute landing system. A t El Centro, Cali[ US. Naval-
    Air Force Parachute Facility dropped the capsule from a C-133
    transport aircraft from 13,000 f. in a test of the parachute
                                       t
    combmation under low-altitude abort conditions. (MSC Release
    63-178)
 GFSO announced negotiations with Republic Aviation Corp. for
    Phase I contract for Advanced Orbiting Solar 0bserva;tory
     ( A m ) . A m would be launched into a 300-mi. near-polar orbit
     for observations of x-rays, gamma rays, and ultranolet emis-
    sions of the sun. Phase I calls for oneyear development of sys-
                                                             (GSG X +
                                                                    i
     ieuls eIigi1iwx-hg w d Getailed deiga of ilie sat&i’t.
    le,- G-22-43)
 NASA awarded $2 million contract to Lockheed Missiles and Space
     Co. for a vehicle systems test complex to be used for full check-
     out of A na tar et vehicles to be used in Project Gemini ren-
     dezvous G t . T S p e Bus. D d y , 10/23/63,133)
                  hs
 Lewis Research Center tested a newly developed seal for liquid flu-
     orine pumps. This seal eliminates the explosion inherent in pre-
    vious seals for liquid fluorine transfer systems. (Lewis Chron-
     ology, 10)
 U.K.’s newest commercial jet aircraft, the BAC 111, crashed in a
     field in southern England during a test flight, killing all seven
     crewmen. The British Aircraft Grp.’s twin-jet, 74-passenger
     1 1 was planned a a replacement for the prop-jet Viscount,
       1                 s
     bringing jet service on short-haul routes. Prior to fhe crash,
     the aircraft had had some 80 hours of flight test. ( N Y T ,
     10/23/63, 66)
 Aviation executives criticized Government plans for the supersonic
     transport in testimony before the Senate Commerce Committee
     Subcommittee on Aviation. C. R. Smith, resident of American
                                             $
     Airlines, objected to the provision that in ustry pay one quarter
398                                                    19 6 3
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   of the development costs, wanted Government to ay all the costs
                                                          P
    and defer decision on how to recapture some o the costs until
    after the rototype had flown. John Stack, vice president and
               €
    director o engineering of Republic Aviation COT. and former
    NASA Director of Aeronautical Research, com lained that compe-
                                                      F
    tition with the British-French Concorde wou d force U.S. indus-
    try to set up management and assembly lines prematurely. Stack
    urged that a manufacturer be chosen to begin work on a proto-
    type next spring and that the one-year-long second design phase
    be eliminated. He also supported the steel-and-titanium mach 3
    concept a more efficient than an aluminum mach 2+ aircraft
               s
    presently favored by FAA. (Cl’ark,NYT, 10/23/63,9)
October 22-25: WD’S Exercise Big Lift successfully airlifted an entire
    14,500-man armored division from bases in the U.S. to Germany
    in less than 72 hours. This was the first large-scale transatlantic
     test of the C-135 jet transport fleet recently acquired by the
    Military Air Transport Service (MATS). (DOD Release 1339-63 ;
     Olsen, N Y T , 10/23/63, 1 )
October 23: Dr. Walter C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission
    Requirements and Flight Operations, MSC, was named NASA’s
    Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Oper-
    ations. He would supervise manned space fli ht operations at
     MSC, MSFC, and LOC. During manned space &ght missions he
     would have full authority and responsibilit for conduct of the
                                                    B
     flights. His appointment would become e ective Nov. 1, 1963.
      (NASA Release 63-237)
 NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking before the Michigan
     Industry-University Research Conference in Detroit, urged a
    steadily supported space program based on public understanding
     of the total purpose of the space effort : “If this debate is to serve
     the best interests of the country, it is essential that every citizen
     of influence, whether editor, businessman, scientist, professor, gov-
     ernment official, or military man, study and analyze all the prin-
    cipal reasons for a well-balanced, fast-paced space effort. The
     scientist who thinks only of scientific results or the businessman
     who looks only for economic results or the writer who seeks only
     for the spectacular or controversial will not be making his most
     constructive contribution to the process of national decision mak-
     ing . . . .” (Text)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Iowa Bankers
     Association 77th Annual Convention in Des Moines, said:
     “Let me list the principal reasons why our investment in manned
     space flight is sound :
        “1. The current level of effort is vital if we are ‘not to settle for
     second position in space . . . .
        “2. Almost all our advances in space technology will add di-
     rectly or indirectly to our ability to deter aggression . . . .
        “3. The scientific capital we shall acquire in the lunar program
     willlongservethenation . . . .
        “4. The facilities we are building and the technology we are
     acquiring are tangible assets that will extend benefits to our chil-
     dren andgrandchildren . . . .
                                                                       399
                                                      1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

       L‘5. The dollars that are putting us into space are being spent
   righthereonearth . . . .
       “6. We are clearly demonstrating to the world the ability and
    determination of our democratic society to organize whatever
    large-scale scientific and industrial effort is required to meet criti-
    cal national and international needs in time of peace as well a      s
   war. . . .
       “7. To meet the stringent demands of the space environment
    . . . engineers are developin new materials . . . certain t pa
                                   a                                o
                                                                        E
    off dividends, many of whic we cannot foresee, some of whic
    may beof revolutionarynatum . . . .
       “8. We are rapidly building up a large pool of highly trained
    and creative scientists, engineers, and technicians . . . .
       “9. We are currently devoting about one per cent of the coun-
    try’s income to the civilian space effort. If the inducammt to
    hard work and inspiration of participating directly or indirectly
    in spate exploration spurs our people to increase production of
    goods and services by only one per cent, the space program will
    pay for itself.
       “10. Our swift progress has now brought us to the point where
    our space .power can be employed in peace-making as well as
          e-keeping.” (Text)
    $“
Octo er 23: Ranger 6 launch reschduled by NABA from last ua&r
                                                                  P
    of 1963 to filst quarter of 1964. JPL had discovered de e t in  cs
    some of the diodes in the same shipment as 242 diodes used in the
    assembled lunar s aceeraft. Gold used in the bondin p
                       H                                        %”””
    was found to be aking inside the diode capsules; un er space
    conditions these minute flakes could cause malfunction. The
    launch was postponed so that the diodes could be replaced.
     (NASA Release 63-238)
 Dr. Albert C. Hall, DOD’S new chief of space development, cited the
                                                       of !ais-G-z.~G
    Saint arid ~ v ~FiGgTams           iepres&kive
                         i&s
    efforts that only proved “the state-of-the-art was not equal to the
    task,” according to space Business DaiZy. Midas, he said, was a
    system “that could not corn ete with contemporary systems on a
    cost effectiveness basis” ( i p a c e Bus. Daily, 10/24/63, 137)
 New camera tracking theodolite telescope developed by the U.S.
    A h m ywas undergoing h a 1 test evaluation at White Sands Mis-
    sile Range, N.M. Called QORID (Ground Optical Recorder for
     Intercept Determination), the telescope would track and film
    hypersonic, hi h-altitude missiles while simultaneously recording
                   3
    missile flight ata on magnetic tape in computer format. (DOD
    Release 1396-63)
 Army Pershing missile exploded shortly after launch a t Ft. Win-
    gate, N.M. ( AP, Wash. Post, 10/24/63)
 Second wing of 150 Minuteman ICBM’s activated and turned
                                                was
    over to Strategic Air Command. This wing was at Ellsworth
    AFB, S.D. First Minuteman wing was activated at Malstrom AFB,
     Mont., in July 1963. (DOD Release 1413-63)
October $4: NASA press conference in Washington on results of
     EXPLORER XVI meteoroid hazard experiments. Principal conclu-
     sion expressed by Dr. Fred L. m p p l e , Director of the Smith-
400                                                1 9 63
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    sonian Astrophysical Observatory, w a that in its 7% months of
                                           Ts
    useful lifetime EXPLORER XVI demonstrated that most of the me-
    teoroids in space were bits of “fluff” in existence since the forma-
    tion of the solar system some 4.6 billion pears ago and not, as
    feared, small rocks that would cause major impact damage to
    satellites. While the rock type meteoroids do exist, they are so
    rare as to make collision chances very remote. (NASA Release ;
    Myler, Wash.Post, 10/25/63)
October 24: Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Director of White House Office of
    Science and Technology, testified before the House Subcommittee
                                                                    y-
    on Science, Research and Development on the NASA-DOD a
    ment on joint study and recommendations on National Or ita1
    Space Station (NOM) : “We have finally made a good start.
    NOR, \re are going in the right direction.” He also said that
    much of NASA’s was work that DOD would have to do for itself
                      R&D
    if not done by NASA, that DOD’S R&D budget was leveling off and
    would continue to do so because the U.S. was no longer behind
    U.S.S.R. in weapon systems such as the ICBM. (Space Bus. Daily,
    10/25/63, 145)
 NASA announced it would negotiate with Linde Co. and Air Products
    and Chemicals, Inc., for final selection of the contractor to supply
    liquid hydrogen to the NASA test sites at Mississippi Test Opera-
    tions and MSJW for the Saturn launch vehicle test program. Sup-
     plier would have to have the capability of producing as much as
     115 million pounds of liquid hydrogen from April 1965-Dec. 1970.
     (NASA Release 63-239)

                                                            s
 Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson defended the space rogram as a
     major bulwark of U.S. posture. I n a speech to the assachusetts
    Associated Industries in Boston, the Vice President said: “If we
     want to maintain the credibility of our claim to the superiority
    of a free political system-and a free private enterprise system-
     we cannot seriously entertain the thou ht of precipitating now
                                             Y
     so massive a disillusionment as would fo low a olitical default on
    our commitments in space exploration.” &P, wash. post,
     10/25/63)
 DOD confirmed that Australia would buy 24 TFX aircraft from the
     U.S., with delivery beginning in 1967. I n the meantime, the
     U.S. would make available two squadrons of B 4 7 aircraft to
     replace Australia’s obsolete Canberra bombers. (DOD Release
     1415-63)
  DOD officials see very few applications of laser for military purposes
     in the near future, according to Space Business Daily. Use of
     laser within the earth’s atmosphere would be hampered by ab-
     sorption and diffusion of many frequencies even though the light
     is coherent. Greatest use seems to be in space, althou h size of
                                                                %
     power source may be a problem here. NASA was said to e taking
     more interest in laser for space applications, erhaps raisin ~ 6      t   ~
     investment to $7 or 8 million per yaw. ?space BW. Baay,
     10/25/63,147)
October 95.- DOD launched two unidentified satellites on one Atlas-
     Agena D launch vehicle (Pre8. Rpt. 012 S p m e , 1963,1/27/64)
                                                                  401
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

October 25: The Air Force accepted the first Gemini Launch Vehicle
    from the Martin Company. The booster, a specially modified
    Titan 1 ,would be used in the NASA Gemini program. (A-N-AF
             1
    Jozlmzal and Register, Jan. 1964; m c Release 31S114, Atch. 2,
    1/1/%2)
 Weather Bureau and US. Navy announced first tentative d t s
    from Project Stormfury, the cloud-seeding exefiments performed
    on hurricanes to determine whether the energy patterns of the
    storm can be changed. Hurricane Beulah was seeded with silver
    iodide particles on Aug. 23 and 24,1963. The Aug. 23 seeding
    apparently missed the eye of the storm; winds continued to in-
    crease. The Au .24 seeding did enter the eye of the storm; the
    eye appeared to $  egenerate and reform in a wider and less violent
    circle. Scientists cautioned that such an effect might have oc-
    c u d even without seeding and that several more hurricanes
    would have to be seeded before any firm conclusions could be
    drawn. (mB Release 63-13)
 Lewis announced final details of contract to General Dynamics
    Astronautics for construction of second Centaur launeh pad at
    Cape Canaveral. P d would give Centaur a capabilit of m e
                          a
                                                            9
    launch a month after completion in late 1964. (mc Re ease 63-
    88, Lewis Chronology, 10)
 Albert J. Evans was a p inted Acting Director of Aeronautical
    Research, NASA Hq., g l o w i n g the resignation of Charles H.
    Zirnmerman, who left NASA to become Chief E g n e ,
                                                    n i e r Army Ma-
    teriel Command. (NUA Announcement 63-232)
 Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara ordered the Navy to
    proceed with the construction of the conventional-powered air-
    craft carrier (CVA 67) authorized by Congress in F Y 1963. Navy
    had delayed construction to plead for nuclear propulsion in the
    -
    carrier; this would have cost an additional $180 million. (DOD
    neiease i42443j
 House P s Ofc and Civil Service Committee reported 1,248 cum-
           o t fie
    m t e r svstems were in use in the Federal government. The Com-
    hittee *attributed the computers with hol%ing down Federal pay-
    rolls. (UPI, NPT, 10/26/63,7)
October 26: Premier Nikita Khrushchev. in an interview with Corn-
    munist newsmen published in Izvestia, said : “At the present time
    we do not plan flrghts of cosmonauts to the moon.
       “I have read a report that the Americans wish to land a man
    on the moon by 1970. Well, let’s wish them success.
       “And we will see how they will fly there, and how they will land
    there or to be more correct ‘moon’ there.
       “And most important-how they will get up and come back.
       “We will take their experience into account.
       “We do not wish to compete in sending people to the moon
    without thorough preparation.
       “It is obvious there would be no benefit from such competition.
       “On the contrary it would do harm since it would lead to the
     destruction of people.
402           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

        “It is a joke in our country t say ‘Who is impatient on earth,
                                     o
    let him go to the moon.’
        “For us it is good enough on earth. But if we are to talk
    seriously we will have to work a lot and prepare well in order
    to complete a successful flight of man to the moon.” (UPI, NYT,
    10/27/63,1)
October 26: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, asked for his
    reaction to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that U.S.S.R. was
    not competing to land a man on the moon, said it was “useful
    to have an authoritative statement” on Soviet plans but that “we
    will have to think a long time before modifying our program.
        “We will not want to change the status of our program until
     we determine precisely what the statement means and what is in
    our national interest.” ( N Y T ,10/27/63,12)
 Administration reactions to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that
    Russia would not attempt to land a man on the moon indicated
    strong reservations on Russian motivations. Dr. Edward C.
    Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and
     Space Council, said the Russian withdrawal announcement was
    ‘La  very wise pronouncement. Whether they planned to go to the
     moon or not, they have sensed some slackening of support for the
     moon program here and have made a strategic move to capitalize
     on this situation.” Another official said: “All during the mora-
     torium on nuclear testing the Soviets secretly prepared for an
     intensive series of tests. How can we be certain that they won’t
     do the same thing in space?” (Wash. Post, 10/27/63)
  The Rosman, N.C., tracking and data acquisition facility was dedi-
     cated by NASA. A key station in NASA’s     Satellite Tracking and
     Data Acquisition Network (STADAN), the 85-ft.-diameter para-
     bolic antenna at Rosman would be used to track and receive the
     l~rge   flow of telemetered data from the large orbiting observa-
     tmies and would relay the data by telephone and radio to GSFC
     for processing and analysis. (NABA Release 63-240)
  AEC announced an underground nuclear test of 12 k t had taken place
     at Fallon, Nevada, some 1,200 ft. underground. Part of Project
      Shoal, the test mas made in conjunction with ARPA in the effort
     to improve instrumentation for distinguishing between under-
     ground nuclear tests and natural earthquakes. (AEC-DOD Release
     F-221)
  Polaris A-3 missile was launched from a submerged submarine for
     the first time. The submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson was cruis-
     ing submerged about 30 miles off Cape Canaveral; the Polaris
     flew successfully down the AMR. (DOD Release 1428-63)
October $7: A roundup of Congressional opinion on Premier Khrush-
      chev‘s statement of Oct. 26 that the Soviets did not plan to land
     a man on the moon and its possible effect on the U.S. manned
     lunar landing program indicated that most Congressmen thought
      it would result in some reduction in funds for the U.S. program.
      (Wash. Post, 10/28/63)
  Editorial in New Yorh Times commenting on rising importance of
      National Academy of Sciences: “The President [of the U.S.]
      hinted at but did not elaborate on the need for eater teamwork
     between the natural and social sciences. The %coveries of the
                                                                  403
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

    physical scientists create needs for new institutions, as the Presi-
    dent noted, but the &cacy of these new institutions depends in
    large part u n utilizing the insights and knowledge of the social
    scientists.        the natural scientists themselves participate now
    more often in the shaping of public policy, they must feel in-
    creasingly the need for guidance from the economist, the Sociol-
    ogist, the political scientist, the hiistorian.
        “Sir Charles Snow has IPecBntly stressed the importance o       f
    social scientists in meeting the human problems caused by the
    scientific revolution. But that importance is still too little recog-
    nized. As it beg~nsits m n d century the National Academy
    of Sciences could help upgrade the social sciences by opening its
    membership to social scientists, thus helpin to diminish the
                                                   t
    present invidious distinction between talente workers in t e e   hs
    two vital areas.” (NPT,10/27/63)
October 28: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking tu the
    Chamber of Commerce, Billings, &font., noted that President
    Jefferson’s Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which brought much o        f
    the state of Montana within the boundaries of the U.S., was
    criticized at the time as a ‘‘prodigal waste of ‘the public monies.’ ”
    Similarly the space program had been criticized. But Mi-. Webb
    predicted that “the decisions for a dynamic national space
         m made by the Congress, by President Eisenhower, an$;
    r e s i d e n t Kennedy during the past five years will earn a place
    in history that, in significance will go far beyond Jefferson’s
    Louisiana Purchase and many of the other major decisions which
    have characterized turning points in our national history.”
     (Text)
 NASA’S Langle Research Center asked 36 companies for ~roposa.1~
    on Project 6canner, a spacecraft that would e&ablish t e radia-
    tion characteristics of - Earth’s horizon and develop horizon-
                               the
    scanning techniques. program would involve two flight models
    complete with re-entry heat shield, plus one backup. (Space Bus.
    DaiZy, 10/29/63,165)
 Final approval for contracting the military Medium Altitude Com-
    munications Satellite (MACS) was being delayed by Secreta
                                                                 E
    Defense Robert s.McNamara pending a reply from ComSat orp          Of
    as to whether a civilian comsat could handle milihry tra5c under
    wartime conditions, according to Aviation. Week. It was antici-
    pated that the answer would be that several of the military re-
    quirements-jam-resistant        channels, protection    ainst attack,
                                                       T
    transportable receiving stations-would not be met y the civilian
    system. (Av.        Wk.,lo/%/@, 25)
 Development of the Apollo spacesuit and backpack was entering the
    manned test phase of the prototypes. Under a 3-phase program,
     Hamilton-Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and I n t e r n -
     tional Latex Corp. were now well into the second phase. The first
                                                                  f%z
     phase had been design; the second called for development of
     totypes of three suit designs, each building on test data
     its predecessors. Prototypes of first suit were finished in August;
    prototypes of the second suit were nearing completion. The
     third phase, to be concurrent with the second phase, would include
    environmental and physiological tests. ( A v . Wk.,     10/28/63,49)
404           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

October 2%: Rep. James Weaver (R.-Pa.) spoke on the space race
    following Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia was not
                                                 a
    sending a man to the moon : “This ‘moondo gle’ has been a wrong
    objective in a race with the Soviet Union t at never existed and
    has resulted in a space gap which threatens our national security.
       “Therefore, it becomes imperative that we immediately realine
     [sic] our space objectives to national security and eliminate this
    gap. I call upon James E.Webb, Administrator of the National
    Aeronautics and Space Administration, to carry out this objective.
    I f he cannot immediately reevaluate and report frankly and hon-
    estly to this Con rets that this has been accomplished, then I feel
                     %
    it is our responsi ility to demand his resignation. The Congress
    and the public can no longer tolerate public relations gimmicks
    and double-talk concerning the space program and our space gap
    when our national security is threatened.” (OR,      10/28/63,19365)
October 281.29: Ames Research Center held regional contest of high-
    school scientists, with the three winners to compete in the National
    Science Youth Congress finals in Washington, D.C. National Sci-
     ence Youth Congress is sponsored by NASA and National Science
    Teachers Association. (Ames Release 6 3 4 2 )
October 28-30: Symposium on the Physics of Solar Flares was held
     at GSFC, sponsored by NASA and the American Astronomical So-
    ciety. (GSFO Hist.)
                                               Milton 0. Thompson for
October 29: X-15 No. 1 was flown by NASA’s
    the first time. Flight reached maximum spe+ of 2,712 mph
     (mach 4.10) and 74,400-ft. altitude. Thompson was the ninth
    pilot to fly the X-15 and the only civilian among the potential
    pilots of the X-20 (Dyna-Soar). (FRC Release 26-63 ; WI, Chic.
    Trib., 10/30/63; Martin, NASA Hq.)
  X-15 No. 2, damaged in a landing accident in Nov. 1962, would ’be
     returned to flight status early in 1964 with a number of improve-
     ments, NASA announced. Under a USAF contract with North
     American Aviation, Inc., the damaged X-15 was being modified to
     take another 13,500 lbs. of propellants. This would increase the
     rocket engine burning time from 86 sec. to 145 sec., which theo-
     retically would add some 1,300 mph to maximum speed capability.
     There were no plans for extending altitude capability because it
     would increase re-entry stresses. Other modifications included
     strengthened nose wheel and landing skids, dropable wing tanks,
     provision for installation of two 50-gal. liquid-hydrogen tanks in
     the fuselage midsection, to be used for advanced propulsion ex-
     periments, and windshield changes and ablative material additions
     to cope with the higher heat accompanying higher speed. (FRC
     Release 27-63)
  Speaking at the dedication of the Douglas Space Center in Hunting-
     ton Beach, Calif., Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson emphasized
     the peaceful purpose of the U.S. in space research and compared
     our licy of cooperation in space to the secretive Soviet program :
        “ & k e who say-as some are inclined to do--that     our purposes
     and the purposes of communism in space exploration are the
     same misread and misunderstand the history and meaning of our
     times. I n 1957 when the Soviets placed the first sputnik in orbit,
                                                                  405
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    the Communist rulers of Russia refused to consider sharing the
    fruits of space research with other nations-refused to consider
    committing themselves to developing s ace for peaceful urposes
    alone. I n that same year, we of the 8nited States clear& stated
    our own national policy and purpose. We committed and ded-
    icated ourselves to sharing the fruits of space research with all
    mankind-and to the sole objective of developing the uses of space
    fo’firs%hat                while the Communist efforts am con-
    ducted behrnd a curtain of secrecy, we of the United States enjoy
    the cooperation, support and alliance o more than 60 nations
                                               f
    for our space program. It is significant that while we of the
    United States can and do propose joint endeavors for peaceful
    purposes, the Soviet both rejects our proposals and devotes itself
    to attempts to dissuade us from contrnumg on the programs we
    have established.
        “dmerica’s commitment to the exploration of space for peace-
    ful purposes-and for the good of all mankind-is a f r com-im
    mitment. We will not retreat from our national purpose. We
    will not be turned aside in our national effort by the transparent
    maneuvers of those who mould attempt to divert us.
        “Our national purpose in space is peace-not prestige.
        “Our foremost objective is not to send a man to the moon but to
                  ter measure of sunlight into the lives of men on
                    11/19/63, A7163)
October 99: Rep. J. Edward b u s h (D.-Ind.) spoke on the
    space race: “Mr. Speaker, the announcement that the Soviet
    Union is withdrawing from the mce to the moon has produced
    some disturbing reactions here in the United States. Here we
    have a breakdown in the Communist system. Here we have an
    opportunity to exert real leadership and show That a free econ-
               dz. An2 TTZ EaTe thm &io z- D O T ad:-9&kig th&t
    ”“7
    we abandon our efforts to explore the universe. I am perturbed.
    Why must we do something just because the Soviet Union does
    i t ? Wh should we refuse to do something just because the
    Soviet &ion refuses t o do it P” (CR, 10/29/63,19384)
 Addressin the Joint Meting of Senice Clubs, Bozeman, M o n a ,
           d
    NASA A ministrator James E. Webb said :
        “To take a clear lead in rocket power, or even to match the
    larger rockets the Russians may be building now, we must carry
     on with the development of the Saturn V. This giant rocket 1      s
    needed to do extensive maneuvering in space near the earth and
    has the power to send the Apollo spacecraft on its journey to the
    moon and on prolonged fli hts in earth orbit.
                              t
        “The United States wi 1 inevitably need space power of this
                                                                w6   do
    order even if we had no plans for going to the moon.
    not know now what future military requirements for rocket power
    may arise.” (Text)
 Project Gemini was running into serious problems in its onboard
    power systems, according to John Finney of theNew Pork T2he8.
     The new fuel cell sourca for electric power was to have provided
     power for up to two weeks at only 1/6 to 1/10 the weight af
406           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   batteries required to produce equal wattage. But fuel cell develop-
    ment has run into proiblems of leaka e, inadeqwte lifetime, and
                                           %
    poor thermal control. While such prd lems could robably be en-
                                                         P
    gineered out by the time fuel cells were needed or Apollo, the
    Gemini timetable might require batteries to be substituted for the
    fuel cells. This in turn might cut Gemini missions down to two
                     new Associate Administrator for M a n n d Space
    days. NASA's
    Flight Dr. George E. Mueller was said to favor beginning de-
    velopment of backup systems in some of the areas of new tech-
    nology such as fuel cells but to be hampered in this approach by
    lack of money. (Finney, NYT, 10/30/63,26)
October .99: FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby and his Deputy
    Administrator Gordon Rain testified on plans for supersonic trans-
    port before Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Avia-
    tion. They said the U.S. would cancel its development of the
    supemnic transport if events proved the U.S. could not produce
    an aircraft competitive in price wibh the British-French version.
    Rut they argued that estimates previously presented to the Sub-
    committee on costs of the aircraft were too high. Aviation spakes-
    man had estimated cost of the U.S. aircraft at from $30 million
     to $44 million er aircmft, compared with the $10 to $12 million
                    R
    estimated for t e heavily subsidized European aircraft,. FAA said
    U.S. aircraft should not cost more than $20 million. (AP, N Y T ,
     10/30/63, 26)
 USAF launched two unidentified satellitm from Vanden'berg AFE~,
     Calif., on a Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster. (UPI,
     Wash. Post, 10/30/63; Pres. R t. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
                                     F
  Atlm missile was launched from ape Canaveral in test of new slim-
     silhouette warhead intended to present less image on enemy radar
     screens. Atlas went out of control 2v2 min. after launch and fell
     into the Atlantic far short of its intended goal. This was the
     sixth successive failure of Atlas missiles, the previous five at Van-
     denberg AFB, Calif. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/63)
  USAF awarded contract to Goodyear Aerospace to study and develop
     a post-Eoho passive communications satellite. Ten ft. in diam-
     eter, the satellites would be a wire grid covered with a plastic film.
     Once inflation in orbit had occurred, the plastic film would dissi-
     pate under ultraviolet radiation from the sun, and the circular
     wire grid would be left. I t was thought that greater reflectivity
     could be achieved with the wire rid than with solid-skin spheres
                                       f
      such a Echo and that they wou d have a more stable orbit since
            s
     they would not be as subject to the solar wind. (Space Bus. Daily,
      10/30/63, 172)
October 30: NASA announced it was dropping four manned Apollo or-
     bital flights employin the Saturn I booster and accelerating the
      all-systems manned i p o l l o flights employing the Saturn I-B
     'booster. Saturn I would have been able to orbit only the com-
     mand and service modules o A 0110. Saturn I-B can launch the
                                   f
      entire system, including the f u n a r Excursion Module (LEM) .
      Studies have concluded that running all-systems checks from the
      beginning is a quicker and more certain method of checkout than
      to add additional systems flight by flight. Also the deletion of the
                                                                   407
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 63

    four flights would save $50 million in F Y 1964. The chan
    would delay the fir& manned Apollo flights b some nine m o n t c
    (NASA Release 63-246 ;NPT,10/31/63,18 ; dmh. Post, 10/31/63,
    5)
October 30: Thrust-Augmented Thor space booster developed by the
    USAF would be added to the Nationa.1 Launch Vehicle program as
    booster for Agena and Delta vehicles, MID and NASA a.nnounced.
    TAT would have three XM-33 solid-propellant rockets, each 31-in.
    in diameter and producing 54,OOO lbs. thrust, strapped to the sides
    of the basic Thor vahicle. This is the same rocket developed by
    Thiokol Chemical &rp. as the second stage of NASA’s u t           b
    booster. The three solid rockets would be fired at the same time
    as the Thor engine, would burn for about 40 sec., and than drop
    o f as the Thor engine continued powered flight. Raising Thor s
     f
    total thrust to 330,000 lbs., TAT would represent a 5%to 30% in-
    crease in capability over the Delta, putting 1,000 lbs. into earth
    orbit compared with $00 lbs. for ’Delta. (mRelease 1434-63)
 D .Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aero-
   r
    nautics and Space Council, speaking before the Air Transport
    Association Engineering and Maintenance Conference in Wash-
    ington, said : “While much has been said about the Congressional
    cuts in the XASA budget request, it is noteworthy that the debate
    was not on cutting back the program. Rather, it was on how much
                           ‘be. This is, I believe, the key to the public
    s’hould the incre~se
    outlook on spaca” ( e t Tx)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Montana Ststs
    University, Mimula, Mont., listed six reasons for making Project
    A 110 the major manned space flight effort of the 1960’s:
      ?)      The goal of lunar explorrttion is feasible from a engineer-
                                                               n
    in standpoint . . . .
       ‘2) By planning ahead, and. adopting a realistic schedule, we
                                       .
    ai7&Ld ~ & & & indKisiGz a-
             the              of i ~        i&               &iZEG:%-.

                                           a
       “3) We have set ourselves a clear oal which the entire world
    can understand, and one in which we ave a good chance o being  f
    first. . . .
        “4) We have set a goal which will focus o u r efforts, and at
    the m e time enable us to build up a broad base of space
    F e r . . ..
       “ 5 ) I n Project Apollo we rotect ourselves against-the great
                                   8
    psychological advantage the oviet Union would have if it done
    could m u p y and use the mmn . . .
        “6) Project Apollo gives us our fimt &chancs of overcorn%
    the lead in manned space exploration which the Sovietsnow hold.
     ‘TdJ
  Sen. A. . Monrone (D.-Okla.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on
                     B
    Aviation of the enate Commerce Committee, speaking at the Air
    Tmnsport h i a t i o n Engineering and Maintenance Confempce
    in Washington, said that the Government’s plan of cost sharing
    for the development of the su rsonic transport aircraft ($1 M-
    lion, the U.S. putting up 3/a, X e aviation industry the other 1/4)
    was ‘(a f r figure bhat must be considered final . . . .
               im
408           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

      “I am afraid that many of our finest businessmen still hope
    to consider this project in the nature of a defense contract. This
    effort must stand alone as a civil aviation need . . . .” The
    Senator did concede that if the market turned out to be for 100
    aircraft instead of 200, the Government “might be able to give
    the companies some bail-out on this.” ( N Y T , 10/31/63, 58)
October 30: I n column strongly supporting the U.S. space program,
    Roscoe Drummond stated that the United States “should not make
   the mistake of allowing Nikita Khrushchev to determine the size
    of the U.S. spaca program. This is a pitfall to be avoided at all
    costs . . . .
        “Naturally we must leave it to the concensus of the scientists
    and the technicians to decide whether the manned flight to the
    moon is the ‘best way and the urgent next step to insure pre-
    eminence in outer space. The controlling and compelling objec-
     tive is not a manned lunar landing on the moon for its own sake,
    but the achievement of mastery of the element of outer space for
     all that it will mean to the kind of earth we will inhabit for a
    long time to come.” (Wash.Post, 10/30/63)
 Editorial in The Houston Post:
        “Why Khrushchev’s word should be accepted on this [corn-
     menting that Russia does not have a definite program for puttin
                                                                      3
     SL man on the moon] any more than on anything else is har
     to understand . . . . It . . . must be kept in mind that Soviet
     policy in any area is a zig-zag affair and subject to quick change.
     Moreover, under the Soviet system, Khrushchev does not have
     to worry about congressional attitudes or reaction if he should
     decideuponachange . . . .
        “. . . why should Khrushchev be permitted to set the policy
     on this country’s space program? That is something for the
     Legislative and Executive branches of the TJnited States govern-
     ment to do on the basis of careful study and evaluation.
        “The fact is that the United States government made its deci-
     sion several years ago. It stands committed to a program of
     trying to put a man on the moon in this decade. What the
     Russians do or don’t do should be a matter of secondary im-
     portance at this point in the program. Much more is involved
     than merely a contest with Russians as to time.” (Text)
  A new program was being established to encourage the develop-
     ment of skilled writers who would explain science to the layman.
     The Richard Prentice Ettinger Program for Creative Writing
     would have three participating institutions-The Rockefeller
     Institute, New York Univ., and Univ. of Pa., and would be headed
     by Dr. Loren C. Eiseley, on leave from his post as Chairman of
     the Department of the History and Philosophy of Science at
     the Univ. of Pa. Beginning in 1964, it would award fellowships
     for the purpose of enabling the fellows to produce high-quality
     books and articles on science free from the pressure of earning
     a living. It also awards a Richard Prentice Ettinger Medal,
     with $l,oOO, to writers or others who have fostered understanding
     of science. ( N Y T , 10/30/63,40)
                                                                 409
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,   19 6 3

October 31: I n Presidential news conference, the question was asked
    whether the President construed Premier Khrushchev’s state-
    ment of Oct. 26 as takin Soviet Union out of the moon race.
                               ‘8
    The President replied:       didn’t read that into his statement.
                                                            .. . .
    I thou h t his statement was rather cautious1 worded
                                                   9
           %
       “I t ink i t is remarkable that some peope who were so un-
    willing to accept our test ban treaty, where there was a very ade-
    quata area of verification of whatever the Soviet Union was
    doing, were perfectly ready to accept Mr. Khrushchev’s very
    guarded and cautious remark that he was taking himself aut of
    the space race, and use that as an excuse for u s to abandon our
    efforts.
       “The fact of the matter is that the Soviets have made an in-
    tensive effort in s ace, and there is every indication that they
                          B
    are umtinuinu an that they have the potential to continue. I
    would read &. Khrushchev’s remarks very carefully. I think
    that he said before anyone went to the moon there should be
    ad uate preparation. We agree with that.
                                        c       we have is essential to
       ?n my opinion, the space pro
                                              use, as I haw said many
    the security of the United States,
    times before, it is not a question of going to the moon. It is
    a question of having the competence to m a s h - this envimn-
    ment. I would not make any bets on Soviet intentions.” (Trans-
    script? Wmh. Post, 11/1/63)
 Addressmg the Southwest Conference on Arms Control at the Uni-
    versity of Oklahoma, William C. Foster, Director, U.S. Arms
    Control and Disarmament Agency, discussed the complex rela-
    tionship between national strategy, military security, and arms
    control in a thermonuclear world.
         ..
       ‘‘ . certain t pes of weapons which could be developed in
    the future might      extreme1 difficult to make comparably safe.
                                    9
    1 am thinking in particiilar o weapons of mass destruction which
    might be stationed in outer space. Present analysis indicates
    that such weapons would be both more expensive and less effec-
    tive than conventional I ~ delivery systems. Moreover, once
                                    M
    placed in space such weapons would constitub a permanent risk.
    There would always be a possibility that normal mechanical
    failure, collision with a meteorite, or interaction with unforeseen
    solar radiations might trigger it by accident.
       “In our agency we have long believed that it would be desir-
    able if we could reach an understanding that such weapons would
    not be placed in s ace. Without such an understanding we be-
                          & a greater risk that an arms race in spam
    lieve there would
    might develop simply for prestige reasons rather than because of
    any real military utility.” (This Changing World, 1/1/64)
 A second Aerobee-Hi research rocket in the NASA-French joint pro-
    gram investigating propagation of very low frequency waves in
    the ionosphere was launched from Wallops Station. The 193-lb.
    payload went t o an altitude of 115 mi. and yielded seven min-
    utes of telemetry data before impact. The first experiment in
    this series was conducted on Oct. 17, 1963. (Wallops Release
    63-98)
     741-623 -27
410          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

October 31 :NASA launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wal-
    lops Station. Payload was a 77-lb. package sent to %-mi. altitude
    to measure mechanical and thermal stresses on a scientific paylwd
    during launch. (Wallops Release 63-99)
 NASA Director of Plans and Program Evaluation Abraham Hyatt
    resigned, effective this date. His office would be absorbed on
    Nov. 1 into the office of the Assistant Administrator for Tech-
    nology Utilization and Policy Planning a s part of the Head-
    quarters reorganization. (Space Bus. DaZy, 10/17/63, 100)
 Development testing of the supersonic 500-mile-range Hound Dog
    at low altitudes was successfully concluded with a launch over
    the Eglin Test Range, Fla. (AFSC Release 313-R-114, 1/1/64,
      4)
 Three ruby-colored spots appeared on the surface of the moon on
    the night of Oct. 29, 1963, and might have been volcanic erup-
   tions, Dr. John Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff,
    Ariz., announced. Hall said that James Greenacre found the
    spots while studying the moon through a 24-in. refracting tele-
    scope. The spots stood out against the yellow-white surface of
    the moon. Greenacre said that in three years of studying the
    moon’s surface he had never seen spots similar to these, although
    a Russian astronomer had reported sighting a similar phenome-
    non in Nov. 1958 or 1959. ( m ~ San Diego Union, 11/1/63;
                                         ?
    Christian Science Monitor, 11/2/63)
 Gordon Bain, FAA Deputy Administrator for S u ersonic Trans-
    port Development, issued statement rejecting 8 c t . 1 proposal
    by Continental Airlines President Robert F. Six that U.S.
    join with U.K. and France in supersonic transport development.
    Regarding U.S. participation in U.K.-French Concorde develop-
    ment, Bain said that “at the present stage in the development
      rogram of the Concorde, there is little, if anything? that United
    Etates manufacturers could contribute, except possibly money,”
    and monetary contribution would aggravate U.S. balance-of-pay-
    ments problem. Regarding U.K.-French-U.S. joint development
    of mach 3 airliner, Bain said: “At no time have the British-
    French indicated any interest in such a project. (Wash. Post.
    10/4/63)
During October: Centaur AC-2 vehicle completed its last two major
    tests prior to launch. At Lewis Research Center the new stage
    separation system underwent successful test. At General Dy-
    namics/Astronautics Sycamore Canyon test site in Calif., -two
    R L l O engines underwent full duration, full power test (380 sec.
    at 30,000 lbs. thrust). (Au. Wk.,    10/14/63 32)
 Tests continued at Pacific Missile Range to seiect and qualify one
    of five sounding rockets for us8 in more than 200 solar experi-
    ments planned for the forthcoming IQSY. Rockets being tested
    were Canadian Bristol Aerojet, Ltd., Black Brant 111; Douglas
    Aircraft Co. D A C - ~ O C British Aircraft Corp. Thunderbird ;
                             ;
    the Seagull; and Atlantic Research Corp. Archer. (M&R,
                d
    10/28/63, 16
 NASA had deci ed not to begin development of the Multi-Mission
    Module (MMM) at this time. The module would use two R L l O
                                                                    411
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    engines with tanks confi         for different missions. Serving as
    the third stage of the aturn I-B or the fourth stage of the
    Saturn V, it would give the big boosters the flexibilit needed for
                                                           B
    planetary and other missions. Present decision was ased on the
    fact that the stage is not neOeSSary for the A p l l o program.
     (Au. W k . , 10/14/63, 23)
During October: Project Stabilization Agreement was ratified for
    N A ~ AMississippi Test Operations facilities by representatives of
    business, labor, and Government. Worked out by the President’s
    Missile Sites Labor Commission, the unusual agmement estab-
    lished a standard for working conditions, hours, hirin practices,
                                                             f
    grievance procedures, etc., in return for the promise o no strikes
    or work stoppages. Agreement would run to July 1, 1966.
    (.!pace B w . Daily, 10/11/63,65)
 NASA was about to enter the prolonged-flight phase of its bioscience
    program, according to Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Director of
    Space Sciences. He cited negotiations now underway with GE
   to provide six 1,000-lb. recoverable biosatellites. These would be
    used for such flights as three-to-five day flights to study effects of
    weightlessness and radiation on plants and animals; 21-day
   orbital flights to stud effects of weightlessness and absence of
                           9
    earth’s rotation on bio ogiml rhythms in plants and animals; and
    1440-30 day flights by small monkeys to study effects of prolonged
    weightlessness on the cardiovascular system, central nervous sys-
    tem, and general physiology and behavior. All studies would
    have importance for prolonged manned space flight. (Macomber,
    Sun Diego Union, 10/12/63)
 USAF was reported by Aviation Week and ,!pace Technology to he
    planning an expansion of its ballistic missile early warnin sys-
   tem ( B M E W ~ ) to cover the southern approaches t o the U.ff and
    possibly also to detect launches from submarines. Named Project
    Red Mill, d i g prepesed system h+-g develnpd-hg Raythem Cn.
   under USAF contract would use high-f requency ionospheric radar
                  a
    bounce techni lies to detect changes in the ionospheric critical fre-
    quency made y rocket exhaust. (Av.Wk..           10/14/63, 23)
 Harcard Busine~s      Review conducted poll of corporation executives
   on the space program, found that seven out of ten believe U.S.S.R.
    is ahead in race to send a man to the moon, six out of ten that the
    U.S.S.R. will beat the U.S. to the moon by a year and a half;
    only four out of ten would s eed up the space program. (Ear-
    vard Business Recietv, Sept.&t. 1963)
 Dr. Henry J. E. Reid, who was Director of NACA’S Langley Research
    Center for 34 years prior to his retirement, was named “Elder
    Statesman of Aviation” by the National Aeronautic Association.
    (Langley Release)
 AFOAR proposed a five-year plan for its support of basic research, in-
    cluding a 40% increase in support of geophysics and a 30% in-
   crease for the other physical sciences. (M&R. 10/21/63,21)
 U.S.S.R. MARS I probe lost contact with tracking stations when 65
   million miles out because of malfunction in the spacecraft attitude
   control system, according to Alexandre A. Mironov, Soviet Em-
   bassy scientific adviser in Washin,aton.     (As. k . , 10/21/63,28)
                                                     W
412                                               1963
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

During October: H. H. Koelle, Director of Future Projects Office,
   MSFC, in “Trends in Earth-to-Orbit Transportation Systems,” in
   Aeronautics and Aerospace Engineering,noted that the next year
    would be interesting in that both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were
    expected to come up with big increase in payload in orbit. The
   U.S. Saturn I was expected to put 10 tons in orbit. “Also,I
    would not be a bit surprised if the U.S.S.R. launched a payload
    in the 40- to 50-ton class before this [next] year is over. The
    next step increase will be provided by the Saturn V in about 1967,
    when a 100-ton oapabi’lity will be reached b the U.S. Many
    people hope that at least by that time the U.6.S.R. single-flight
    ca abilities will have been equalled or exceeded.”
       gpace transportation w s developing fast, Koelle concluded :
                                a
    “While air transportation needed two generations to improve the
    efficiency of passenger transport by thrm orders of magnitude,
    we expect to improve the economy of Earth-to-orbit cargo trans-
    portation by four orders of magnitude in one generation.”
     ( A d A E :NOV.63,25-30)
                         NOVEMBER 1963
November 1 : U.S.S.R. announced launchin of POLET I (Fli h t I ) , a
                                              P
   new type of maneuverable spacecraft or use in m a n n 3 orbital
   rendezvous flight. Initial orbital data were: apogee, 592 km.
    (368 mi.) ;perigee, 339 km. (211 mi.). After what were described
   a “repeated” changes in altitude and inclination, the spamcraft
     s
   on Nov. 2 attained “find orbit”: apogee, 1,437 Inn. (893 mi.) ;
   perigee, 343 km. (213 mi.) ;period, 102.5 min.; inclination, 58’55’.
    (Pravda, 11/2/63, AFss-Trans. ; Shabad, NYT, 11/2/63, 1 ;
   11/3/63,33)
 Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced the launching of POLET I at a
   Moscow reception in honor of Laotian Prince Souvanna Phouma:
   LL. . . the present spaceship is really new.    While the previous
   ships placed into orbit made flights mainly in the direction im-
   parted to them when they were launched from Earth, the space-
   craft that was lofted today is makin wide maneuvers in space,
                                         di
   varying the orbital plane and altitu e.
       “The fact that we have launched such a ship bears testimony
   that human ingenuity has reached a higher stage. Now man i         n
   space is no longer a prisoner of his ship. He controls it and guides
   its flight. The spacecraft has h m e ever more mpomve to
   man% will.”
       Stating that the U.S.S.R. had been given serious attention to
   President Kennedy’s pro osal for a joint lunar landing program,
   Premier Khrushchev adled: “What could be better than to send
   a Russian and an American to the moon together, or better yet,
   a Russian man and an American w o r n ?
       “If we could agree on further easing of tsnsion, not just-in
   moral but in concrete terms such as disarmament, this would gme
   greater means, namely international means, to the development of
   science.” (Pravda,11/2/63, AFSS-TIX.IH.    ; Shabad, NPT, 11/2/63,
   1, 9)
 U.S. reaction to U.S.S.R.’s launching of POLET I and Premier Khru-
   shchev’s subsequent expression of interest in U.S.-U.S.S.R. coop-
   eration of manned space flight was summed up by NASA
   Administrator James E. Webb, who inted out ‘%hewisdom of
   President Kennedy’s remarks on Wegesday that there is every
   indication that the Soviet Union is proceeding with a vigorous
   space program.
                  ints out how important it is for us to pursue our
              cf“
      “It
   broad-base program as assurance against su
      U.S. space experts likened POLXT I to the 8g?&mini space
   craft, scheduled to make its first unmanned flight in late 1963
   or early 1964. (Simons, Wash. Post, 11/2/63)         ’

                                                             413
414            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

November 1 : GSFC awarded contract to Yale Univ. to design and de-
     velop a worldwide radio monitoring network for study of planet
     Jupiter. Four stations would comprise the global network, lo-
     cated at approximately ever 90” longitude around the earth-
     one at GSFC in Greenbelt, MbI, and the other three at U.S. satel-
     lite tracking stations in Hartesbeesthoek, South Africa; Cama-
     rvon, Australia; and South Point, Hawaii. Primary duky of the
     stations would be to maintain a 24-hr. radio monitor of the myste-
     rious low-frequency radio noises sporadically emitted from the
     planet. The data should provide infomation on Jupiter’s mag-
     netosphere, the interplanetary medium, and the earth’s ionosphere.
      ( WFC Release G-25-6’3)
 Major reorganization of NASA Hq. became effective (see Oct. 9 for
     details), consolidatin the four major pro ram offices into three
                           T                      9
     and delineating and e evating certain staff unctions. (NASA Re-
     leases 63-225, 242)
  MSC announced a contract amendment to General Dynamics/Convair
     in the amount of $2,247,174 for two additional Little Joe I1 solid
     boosters for use in the Apollo test program. The two new boost-
     ers would be used in high-altitude abort test-around 60,000 ft.-
     testing the capability of the launch escape system tu separate the
     command module from the booster. This amendment would
     brin total Little Joe I1 procurement costs to $8,928,637, including
         f
     the our vehicles originally ordered and nearly $500,000 for de-
     sign, development, and installation of two launchers at the White
     Sands Missile Range, NM. (MSC Rele<ase63-223)
  Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aero-
     nautics and Space Council, spoke before the Society of Experi-
     mental Test Pilots in Wlashington: “. . . it occurs to me that
     perhaps some of our best known astronauts took greater risks,
     with less thoroughly tested equipment, when they were flying air-
     craft in the atmosphere than when they went into space . . . . I
                                                      A
     simply want to mention that, our astronauts, ust as all test pilots,
     had don0 many courageous things before the pace Age descended
     upon us and too few were recognized as heroes for those feats.”
      (Text)
  I n a d d m at a space exploration symposium at New York Uni-
     versity, Dr. Eugdne M. Emme, ~ A s . 4 Historian, reviewed the birth
     of the space age and its first half decade. Referring to the
     impact of space exploration upon society, he said :
         “Space exploration-with     all of its novelty and drama and
      future potential for society-continues to jar the intellect, stir the
                                                                      ..
     emotions, and stimulate actions among peoples everywhere . .
      Our children, of course, have no doubt whatever that man will
      soon set foot on the surface of the moon, and then the nearby
      planets; it is only a question of exactly how soon. The rest of
      us old folks, conditioned as we are to the scientific and tech-
      nological realities of the recent past, have a little difficulty com-
      prehendin either the reality or the significance concerning the
               f                                            .
     mobility o mankind in space today and tomorrow . . .
         “To the historian, the closing of the present kindergarten era
     of astronautics, with its tender philosophy, offers the g e m for a
                                                                415
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   new renaissance in the mind and spirit of mankind. It could well
   be a renaissance for mankind as was sparked with the new
                                    ar
   geo raphy of Columbus and M llan and the new astronomy
       8
   of opernicus and Galileo which elped
                                    A
   Dark Ages; or when the new bioiogy of
   organism, the challenges of M a n and the
   Bergson and Freud for the conscious man
   tellectual stimulus of the late nineteenth
   humanitarianism and the techno10 ‘cal boom of the twentieth
   century . . . .” (Text; Abpmoer Ebtorimn, 1/64,6-10)
November 1 ;Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory was dedicated by ARPA
   and USAF in Arecibo, Puerto Rico. Largest radar-radio telescope
   of its kind in the world, AIO is a l,OW-ft.-diameter bowl con-
   structed in a natural bowl formed by several mountain peaks.
   As a radiotelesco e, it should detect radiation from galactic
                       3
   sources considerab y more distant than any yet detected. As a
   radar, it would be the most sensitive instrument yet built for
   ionospheric research. Dr. Thomas Gold, head of the astronomy
   department of Cornell Univ., which built and would operate the
   new facility, predicted that it would he1 make clear “the grand
                                            Y
   architecture of the Universe.” (DOD Re ease 1358-63 ; Schmeck,
   NYT, 11/2/63,9)
 Titan I1 was launched 5,700 mi. down AMR in test of vibration levels
      rior to its em loyment as a booster for Gemini manned s ace
                   Y
   iights. Also a ong on the flight was a pickaback capsule o f in-
   struments to study the exhaust plume of the missile. (UPI, NPT,
    11/2/63,9)
 DOD announced that the Army would begin in November a series of
    “graduation firin      of the Pershin ground-to-ground solid-
                       T”
      ropellant missile y tactical units. Ifinngs would be from Fort
    gill, Okla. (DOD Release 1442-63)
 A m y Nikt+&ilc g~fjmi&!o_ ~ ~ i s i l c s.~cc-f.d!- Gi&
   White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Continuation oi*tests were to
   aid in development of the more advanced Nike X system. (DOD
   Release 1444-63)
 Chinese Communists claimed they had shot down an American-
    built, Nationalist-Chinese-operated U-2 reconnaissance aircraft
    near Shanghai in East China. This was the second U-2 the
    Chinese Communists claimed to have shot down over their terri-
   tory. (NYT, 11/2/63,6)
 Defense Documentation Center (DDC) for Scientific and Technical
    Information was transferred from operational control of USAF to
    Defense Supply Agency (DSA) ,effective this date. Physical loca-
    tion remained a t Cameron Station, Alexandria, Va. DDC was
    previous1 known as Armed Services Technical Information
             LSTXA)  . (DOD Release 1371-63)
    Agency
 Columnist William S. White, writing in the Washington Evenzng
    Star, charged that Premier Nikita Khrushchev was being sup-
    ported in his efforts to slow down the U.S. space propam by
    “one of the stran t coalitions we have ever h ~ w n ” Con-in
    gress, made up oEonservatives who want to save money and
    liberals who want to spend the money on welfare. “The con-
416           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

   servatives . . . ought to ponder what they are about here. For
   apart from the almost indescribable strategic and scientific sig-
   nificance of this program, there is the bottom fact that it is al-
   ready nearly indispensible to the American economy and may
   later become indis ensible in the absolute sense.
                       P
      “Automation, wien fully launched, will create huge pools of
   unemployables. Politically, these must and will be cared for,
   under any forsemble regime, Republican or Democratic. Is it
   not better to spend the money for space than to speed the day
   when all this money and more will have to be thrown about for
   the most gigantic-and also permanent-leaf-raking schemes in
   the world’s history ?
       “The space program is the precise opposite of economic crack-
    potism. It is sensible conservatism’s greatest future weapon
   against just such crackpotism.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/1/63)
November 2 :The international communications conference convened
   in Geneva by the International Telecommunications Union had
   been in session a month. Representatives from 170 countries and
   territories had been working out positions on a number of technical
    problems in committees and working groups. During the fifth and
    last week, these findings would be submitted to the plenary sessions
    for approval. (Reuters, N Y T , 11/3/63,12F)
 European interest in a cooperative communications satellite effort
    was continuing. The U.K. and 12 other European countries met
    on the subject in Paris in May 1963 and in London in July. Vari-
    ous committees were formed to study the technical, economic, and
    political problems involved and these committees were to report to
    a meetin to be held in Rome on Nov. 27. The general direction
    of the &cussions has been toward some sort of partnership
    between the European countries and the U.S. ComSatCorp.
     (Farnsworth, N Y T , 11/3/63,12F)
 Humorous columnist Arthur Hop e commented on Premier Khru-
                                     R
    shchev’s statement of Oct. 26 t at Russia was not competing to
    land a man on the moon, said this marked the beginning of a new
    Rea on in Soviet diplomacy-“Competitive unresistance.”
       d h , it strikes at the one weakness in the American character.
    For while we are imbued with the will to win, we can’t stand lick-
    ing somebody who isn’t trying. Competitive unresistance, let me
    warn you, will sap our will to resist.
       ‘L. . Of course we could do some things for other reasons. Like
          .
    maybe feeding peo le because they’re hungry. Or reachin for the
                       L                                       f
    moon because we lieve the future of our race lies in t e stars.
    But would Congress buy that? Nonsense. It’s unrealistic.
                                                                           .
       “So I say we must meet this new Soviet threat head-on. We
    must abolish our moon program, knock off foreign aid and do our
    utmost, fellow Americans, to make our Nation a second-rate ower.
    But cheer up. I’m certain we can count on Congress.” (&oppe,
    Wash. Ewe. Star, 11/2/63,5)
 USAF launched Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. the
    20th of the solid-fueled missiles launched from the West doast
    base. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star. 11/3/63)
                                                                   417
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 6 3

November b: Soviet reported POLET I had gone into fixed elliptical
    earth orbit after flying through several orbits and orbital planes
    and had increased its maximum distance from 368 to 892 mi. from
    earth while keeping a minimum distance of about 210 mi. ( A d d ,
    Jan.1964, - 5 )
           3 8osmonauts Capt. Valentha V. Tereshkova and Maj.
Nove&r      :
    Andrian G. Nikolayev were married in a civil ceremony in Mos-
    cow, followed by an emotional four-hour reception for 300 guests.
    Premier Nikita Khrushchev acted as toastmaster a t the reception,
    and relativs and friends were crowded into the background b
    Soviet dignitaries. A crowd of 1,OOO stood outside the state w d
    ding palace prior to the marriage and watched guests arrive.
    Moscow Radio announced the ceremony 90 min. after it had taken
    place and interrupted its pro am frequently for recorded bul-
                                   ff
    letins from the reception. Fel ow cosmonauts were in attendance
    and signed the marriage register as witnesses. (Shabad, NPT,
    11/4/63,1)
 U.S.S.R. was designing a supersonic transport aircraft from the start,
    not modifying a bomber design as they had done with the TU-
    104 and were rumored to be doing again, according to FAA Deputy
    Administrator Gordon Bain. (NYT 11/4/63,1)
  ComSatGrp was planning its initial odering of stock in the spring
    of 1964, probably on the order of $200 million. Half of this stock
    would by law have to be made available to the general public at no
    more than $100 per share, the remaining half being taken by the
    communications industry. Wall Street predicted that the stock
                                                             r
    mould meet with unprecedented enthusiasm for a lar
                                                                     by a
    new and speculative corporation. Meanwhile the omSatCorp
    technical staff was still studying the technical and economic fac-
    tors involved in establishing a lobal communications net “at the
    earliest practicable date” that Eongress directed. The goal was
    for an operating satellite system h,v 19664?, empkyiq either
    medium-altitude or synchronous-orbit satellites. (NYT, 11/3/63,
    IF)
  A roundup of world press opinion on the manned lunar landing race,
    following Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia
    was not presently planning manned lunar flight, indicated that the
    majority of the newspapers thought Khrushchev had made a sen-
    sible decision which the U.S. ought to follow. (NYT, 11/3/63,
    9E)
  U.S.S.R.’s maneuverable spacecraft p o r n I launched Nov. 1, 1963,
                                               ,
    was put through its maneuvers by radio commands from the
    ground, according to K. Gilzin, writmg in the Soviet a r m e d forces
    newspaper Krmnaya Zvezda:“Our new maneuverable spaceship,
    heeding radio commands from earth, obediently turned first to one
    side, then to the other, soared up and dived, changing its position
    in space.” (NPT, 11/4/63)
  Editorial in the Washin on Sumday Stur commented on U.S.S.R.’s
                           T
    latest space feat the aunching of the maneuverable spacecraft
    POLET I : “Russia’)snewest venture in s ace has come at exactly the

                                              congressmen
    right time. Although not so intendeif it ulls the rug from under
    those among us-such as economizing                      and BXW-
418           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   sively zealous scientists like Linus Pauling-who           have been
   clamoring for an end to our country’s program to place Americans
   on the moon by 1970.
      “These people, with much naivete (to use a polite word) have
   attached a n extravagant degree of importance to Premier k h r u -
   shchev’s recent remarks vaguely s u g g d i n g that he may be with-
   drawing the Soviets from the lunar race . . . . their latest space
   shot plainly, and disturbin ly, indicates that they are well ahead
                                 5
   of us with the kind of ren ezvous capability that is essential to
   efforts to place men on the moon and bring them back safely . . . .
      “Clearly, we must run this race as swiftly as we possibly can.”
   (CR,11/4/63, A6869)
Nouember 3: Reviewing the U.S. manned lunar landing program,
   John Finney of the New York Times concluded that the race to
   the moon had always been a one-sided one, that there was no evi-
   dence that the Russians were building the large rocket that
                                                           x
   would be necessary for such a venture, that the were rather
   proceeding on a building-block program in space t at eventually
   would lead to a lunar landing, but not as a special, high-priority
   project. This, Finney said, was also the approach of the U.S.
   until May 1961. “Then, in the wake of the Bay of Pigs fiasco
   and the first Soviet manned space flight, the Kennedy ,Qdmin-
    istration ordered an abrupt change in course.’’ The original
   justification was that U.S. restige was a t stake. As time went
    on and budget resistance feveloped in Congress, the Adminis-
   tration argument shifted to one of attaininq “a position of pre-
    eminence” in space. Also the potential military benefits were
    emphasized more and more. Finally, the President’s proposal
    for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program seemed to
    undercut all preceding positions. To Mr. Finney, all this added
    up to the certainty that the U.S. would continue its program for
    a manned lunar landing “but it will be pursued with less competi-
    tive zeal and at a more leisurely pace.” (Finney, N Y T , 11/3/63,
    5E)
 Former President Dwi ht D. Eisenhower, interviewed on NBC-TV,
    said he was surprisefin May 1960 when the U.S.S.R. publicized
    the downing of the U.S. U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Russia.
    Secretary of State John Foster Dulles also “believed just as I
    did that it was necessary to use it but he also believed that it
    would cause no real publicity if one of them should fall.” Both
    of them felt that the Soviets would not be willing to concede
      ublicly that for “three or four years we’ve been doiiig this . . . .’7
    8 n the question of admitting U.S. responsibilit? [or the flights,
    Mr. Eisenhower said: “ . . . I just thought as L g as the thin
                                                                          3
    had come out, the b& thing to do-and I don’t believe I aske
                          e
    anyone’s advice on this-I just said ‘I am responsible and that’s
   that.’ ” (Wmh. Post 11/4/63
November 4: USAF launched an dbres (advanced ballistic re-entry
    system) vehicle on an Atlas booster from Vandenberg AFB,
    Calif. Like the two previous launches in the series from AMR,
    Abres carried scientific experiments designed to advance the state
    of the art in re-entry systems. No attempt was made to recover
    the payload. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/5/63,202)
                                                                       419
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

Novem6er 4: U.S.S.R. and U.S. were reportad by t.he Washington
  Post to have reached agreement on frequency allocation for com-
  munications satellites a t the International Telecommunications
  Union-sponsored conference in Geneva. I n revious years the
                                                          t
  Soviet Union had opposed any space activity y nongovernmen-
  tal organizations, but in recent months had drop d its opposi-
                                                              (?
  tion to private firms, such as the US. ComSat orp, operating
  in space. Original positions a t the conference had seen the US.
  ask for reservation of 2,725 megacycles in a hi hly sou ht-after
     ortion of the microwave s ectrum, while t f e U.S.8.R. had
                                        f
  Favored only 1,600 mc. Detai s of the compromise osition would
                                                              f
  emerge when both nations went before the f u l convention.
   (Wash.Post, 11/5/63)
PCH-1, patral craft hydrofoil built by Boeing, flight-testen by
  US. Navy at speeds of more than 45 knots. (A&A, January
  1964, p. 5 )
Partial results announced b Univ. of Stockholm scientists from
                                   9
  the U.S.-Swedish series o sounding rocket experiments made in
  July and Aug. 1963 showed extremely low temperatures t o be
  associated with the presence of noctilucent clouds. Sounding
  rock& data from the Kmnogtird firings indicated that u p to
  35 mi. tem ratures closely ‘followed the profile found over the
              I&“
  US. and ot er countries. The temperature increased from about
   -50°C (-58°F) at 10 mi. t o slightly above 0°C 32°F) a t
                                                                   6
   32 mi., where absorption of the sun’s ultraviolet ra iation by
   ozone molecules causes a warming. Above this level, tempera-
  tures decreased again to a normal minimum at 50 mi. of -120°C
    (-184°F). When noctilucent clouds were present a t this alti-
   tude, however, the temperature dropped to what appears to be the
                                                      - 143°C ( -225’ F) .
  lowest tem rature ever recorded in natu-
             x”
   This woul confirm earlier findings in 1962 that noctilucent clouds
                     o1nl-d -1.e;r.lna r m t . 4 G t h ;pa ( = & a * Rdaa-
                                                       _VV. \-’-”- ---”
   o mrnmnnmd
        ‘y’yr’”’”        .* u.
                          ,v ,   =-““*v“ Y Y Y -
                    YA
  U”                                               .AA
                                                    .”*


  63-248)
Laser beam bounced off the moon by Soviets was detected by Cri-
  mean Astrophysical Observatory. (A&A, January 1964, 5 )
Editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology by Editor Rob-
   ert Hotz criticized the national space policy as “badly shredded”
   by President Kennedy’s recent statements, called for a new state-
  ment of policy “based on solid elements of national interest”
  before the F Y 1965 budget debate begins in Congress. (Au.
   Wk., 11/4/63)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of AFSC, s oke to the A=/
   ASD Vehicle Design and Propulsion Meeting in flayton, Ohio, on
  the future of amnautical systems. He predicted a continued
  need for aircraft in the weapons inventory, cited particular
   improvement potential in cargo aircraft and V/Stol. Another
   potential was that “future space operations may require the us8
   of recoverable boosters, for reasons of both efficienc and won-
                                                                  i
   omy. The first stage of such a booster system wou d probably
   be a recoverable air-breathing vehicle.”
      Two technical areas of particular promise were identified as
   materials and propulsion. “We have identified new materials
420           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

   that are stronger, lighter, stiffer, and able to withstand higher
   temperatures. For example, new types of metallic fibers may be
   feasible in forming extremely strong, lightweight composite struc-
   tures. I f such projected applications prove to be practical, then
   we may !bein for a revolution in aircraft design and fabrication.
      “There also appear to be high payoffs in the propulsion area.
   New technology should enable us to achieve better thrust-to-
   weight ratios and to move away from single point design.
      “. . . Engineers are almost always overly optimistic about the
   next two or three yeam and unduly conservative in their estimates
   of a 15-year period or more. There were study groups in the
   1950’s that denied the practicality and feasibility of ICBM’s,     the
   turbofan, and hypersonic flight. Ten years ago, so-called ‘sound
   engineering judgment’ would not have forecast the present gen-
   eration of systems. The point is that ‘engineering judgment’
   does not always give the best evaluation of long-range redictions.
                                                            1
    The crucial question to ask is, ‘Does a new concept efy known
    scientific principles?’ I f it does not, then the technical erablems
    will eventually be overcome.’’ ( AFSC Release 310-R-9 l )
November 4: NASA was examining the nuclear-pulse propulsion con-
    cept (Orion) which had been studied under TTSAF contracts for
    some five years. Nuclear-pulse-a series of controlled nuclear ex-
    plosionewas considered a possible means of propulsion for fast
    manned trips to Venus, Mars, and J u iter in the 1975-1995 time
                                            E
    period. The fast trip would be desira le because component life-
    times would run around l , O hrs., somewhat over one ear. It
                               0O
                                O
                                                                t
    would therefore be highly desirable that the round-trip e possi-
    ble in one year’s time. I f Orion were chosen as the propulsion
    system, some amendment to the nuclear test-ban treaty might be
    necessary to legalize its use. NASA was studying the Orion poten-
    tial through a contract issued in June 1963 to the General Atomics
    Div. of General Dynamics. (M&R, 11/4/63, 34)
November 5: MSC announced a reorganization designed to strengthen
    Apollo and Gemini management structure and to assimilate Proj-
    ect Mercury personnel into these programs. Under Dr. Robert
    R. Gilruth as Director and James C. Elms as Deputy Director
    would be four assistant directors, managers of major programs,
    and manager of MSC Florida Operations. The four assistant
    directors : Assistant Director for Engineering and Development
    (Maxime A. Faget), Assistant Director for Flight Operations
     (Christopher C. Kraft, Jr.) Assistant Director for Flight Crew
                                  )

    Operations (Donald K. Slayton), and Assistant Director for
    Administration (Wesley L. Hjornevik) . Major program mana-
   gers: Apollo Spacecraft Program Office (Dr. Joseph F. Shea)
    and Gemini Program Manager (Charles W. Mathews). (MSC
    Release)
 Various Russian sources had listed a variety of possible uses for
    the Polet type of maneuverable siztellite, according to Space
    Bwiness Daily. Space expert Vladimir Dobronravov had said
    that the spacecraft would be used for rendezvous and docking
    experiments. Tass mentioned the potential for reconnaissance,
    weather, or communications satellite. M. Litvin-Sedoi said it
                                                                        421
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,           19 63

    was a test of a system for construction of an orbiting space plat-
    form. ( S ace Bus. Daily, 11/5/63,201)
                6r.
November 5 :         Wernher von Braun, Director, Marshall Space
    Flight Center, addressing Chamber of Commerce, Charleston,
    West Virginia, said :
       “In sup ort of Project Atpollo major manufacturing, testing,
               R
    and launc ing facilities are now under construction. Y a s of  er
    construction, mnnel buildu and training for activation will
                   E                  6     put to use. I f Project A p l l o
    be necessary fore the can
    should be short-changed: these unfinished buildings would stand
    as monuments to America's folly. You simply cannot turn a
    complex project like Apollo off and on like a faucet.” (Test)
 Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, the President’s Scientific Advisor, would
    resign from government this winter and return to MIT, the White
    House announced. .( Wash.Post, 11/5/63)
                                       R
 Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis. said on the Senate floor that
    “we can and should dedicate merica’s great resources to the
    magnificent challenge of space” but charged NASA with waste
    and inefficiency. He inserted in the Congressiod Record an
    article of his in which he recommended (1) NASA build into its
    organization more effective safeguards a inst w s e duplication,
                                                         at,
    and other “leakage” of funds; (2) 8 n g n - s ~         acquire skilled
    investigators to analyze the space program in depth; and (3)
    “Private individuals and groups should apply their concern about
    excessive and U M ~ C ~ S S ~ VGovernment spending to the space
    program.” (CR,     11/5/63,19990-91)
 Rep. Melvm Prim (D.-Ill.), speaking before AIM-AFGC               meeting
    in Dayton, Ohio, warned that “the honeymoon in research and
    development is over” on Capitol Hill. “The day of ill-defined
    objectives for research and development programs, of gross over-
    runs in costs, of blurred and overlapping management responsi-
                      --- :--
           :----:21-
                                                As proof of the hardeziing
    LlllL-
    UlIlLy la l&pluly wlI1ll1g ti3 8ii eiiIid.”
    attitude in Congress, he cited the cuts in the NASA budget, in the
    National Science Foundation budget, and the appointment of the
    Select Committee to examine the Government s research ro-
                                                                       8
    grams. Improvements must be made, he said, “before the on-
    gress and the people lose faith in those who are responsible for
    carrying out our vital research and development programs and
    implementing their results.” Otherwise he warned, corrective
    action would fall i t “hands which are iess considerate and less
                        no
    understanding.” Rep. Price has for 10 years been chairman of
    the Subcommittee on Research and Development of the Joint
    Committee on Atomic Energy. He was recently named chairman
    of the new Research Subcommittee of the House Armed Services
    Committee and a member of the Select Committee on Government
    Research. (Finne NYT, 11/6/63,15)
  1963 Nobel Prize in %7hpsicswas announced in Stockholm to have
    been won joint1 by American Prof. Maria Goep rt Mayer, of
    the Univ. of Cagf. at La Jolla, and American ProrEugene Paul
    Wigner,. of Princeton Univ., the former sharing her half of the
      rize with German Prof. J. Hans D. Jensen, of the Univ. of
    Eeidelberg. Mrs. Mayer and Prof. Jensen, working independ-
422           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    ently, devised nuclear models portraying the particles as arranged
    in levels or shelves which increase abruptly in number of parti-
    cles a t each level further out from the nucleus. Prof. Wigner
    was cited for devising symmetry principles explaining the inter-
    action of the proton and neutron in accordance with the direction
    of their s inning motion. The prize in Chemistry was also an-
              E
    nounced, eing awarded jointly to Italian Prof. Guilo Natta, of
    the Institute of Technology at Milan, and German Prof. Carl
    Ziegler, of the Max Planck Institute for Carbon Research in Mul-
    heim. They were cited for devising a system of controlling the
    polymerizing of simple hydrocarbons into large molecule sub-
    stances. Their discovery had important commercial results, mak-
    ing possible the development of many kinds of plastics, synthetic
    detergents, antiknock mixtures for high-octane fuels, etc. (NYT,
    11/6/63,1)
Noz*em,ber 6 : Premier Nikita Khrushchev told a group of visiting
    U.S. businessmen that U.S.S.R. was continuin its manned lunar
    landing program. Clarifying his remarks of 8ct. 26, he said that
    “when me have the technical possibilities of doing this, and when
    we have complete confidence that whoever is sent to the moon can
    safely be sent back, then it is quite feasible, quite possible.” He
    said that POLET I had made s m rendezvous possible but that “no
                                  p
    definite date” had been set for such an experiment. On the super-
    sonic transport aircraft, he said : “I can say that we are designing
    and building a supersonic plane. I can’t give you the details be-
    cause I don’t remember the technical data on that plane.” ( N Y T ,
     11/7/63,1; AP, Wash. Post, 11/7/63)
 Utmost care would be taken in the assembly and checkout of the
    Mariner B spacecraft intended for a landing on Mars in 1966 so
    that the Mars lander would be completely free of earth microbes
    that might contaminate the Martian environment. Workers with
    even minor colds would be barred from the assembly area. The
     final assembly mould be subjected to a dry heat at 275°F for 24
    hours, then sealed into its special can and placed aboard the
    booster for launching. The special can would not open until the
    spacecraft was some 350 mi. from earth, considered to be the limit
    of earth microbes. (Wash.Post, 11/7/63)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.),Chairman of the Senate Com-
    mittee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told the Senate that
    it was unwarranted to assume from Premier Khrushchev’s Oct.
     26 remarks that the Soviets had pulled out of the space race.
    “The competition in space between the United Stabs and the
     Soviet Union is still intense. It would be foolish indeed if this
    country were to attempt to reorient its vast space
     time the Soviet Union made some pronouncement a
    We should take cognizance of Russian stataments
    not let ourselves be diverted from sound objectives on the ground
     that competition no longer exists.” (CR, 11/6/63, 20140)
  By the beginning of 1964 the US. would have 475 ICBM’s against
                                                               as
    U.S.S.R.’s 100, according to a stud released by the Institute of
     Strategic Studies in London. U.f? was also estimated to have
    1,300 strategic bombers and 10 Polaris submarines with 16 mis-
                                                                   423
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    siles each. U.S.S.R. was said to have 1,200 bombers-l,OOO of
    which were medium bombers of only 3,500 mi. r a n g e a n d no
    Polaris-type submarines but 90 400-mi. missiles capable of being
    fired from a surfaced submarine. (AP, N P T , 11/6/63,3)
Nosern6er 6: MSFC awarded Rocketdyne Div. of North American Avia.-
    tion a $8,441,956 conbact to extend the duration run of the 5-2
             a
    liquid-hydrogen rocket engine from 250 sec. to 500 sec. (Space
    Bw.D d y , 11/7/63,218)
 Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space
    Flight, speaking before the Washington chapter of AIAA, said that
    funds for the space program thus f a r in this decade had (1)
    created a team of trained people; (2) developed basic technology;
     (3) constructed facilities; and (4) been used up in consumption of
    consumable items. Consumables, he said, represented the cost
    of launches and costs of the recovery forces. This category
    amounted to less than eight per cent of the Mal. “The remain-
    in 92 per cent of the funds are used for creating permanent capi-
    t a f . . . .” (Text)
 Ford Foundation announced a grant of $3OO,ooO to take young
    engineering professors from the university campus i t industry
                                                            no
    for one year to give them experience in “manufacturing, market-
    ing, financing, and other considerations that influence engineering
    decisions in practice.” The program mould cover three years and
    would involve some 60 faculty members. Program would be
    directed by Clarence E. Watson, former vice president of Colum-
    bia Broadcasting System Laboratories. Another $200,000 grant
    was made to the Univ. of Tenn. to take outstanding scientists and
    engineers into parttime teaching. ( N Y T , 11/7/63,41)
Norember 7: MSC successfully conducted the first off-the-pad abort
    test of the Apollo launch escape system at White Sands Missile
    Range, N.M. A boilerplate version of the Apollo command
    iiiodtik ( B ~ i k p % iXO.Gj ipiis lift& OE the pad bji the 155,OW-
                            h
    1b.-thrust launch escape motor mounted on a launch escape tower
    attached to the Apollo module. Thrust continued to a height of
    4,100 ft. (T+8 sec.), escape tower jettisoned at 4,900 ft. (T+15.5
    sec.), and parachutes deployed for the recovery. Primary pur-
    pose of the test was to determine the stability and operational
    characteristics of the escape configuration during a pad abort.
     (MSC Release 63-24”; N Y T , 11/8/63,16)
 U.S.S.R. celebrated the 46th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolu-
    tion with a Moscow parade that featured the first public display
    of its antimissile missile. Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, Chief of
    the Soviet General Staff, hailed the weapon on a radio broadcast
    as capable of destroying “the enemy in the air.” At a reception
    Premier Khrushchev said : “Before the Revolution Russia was a
    beggar. Now she has become the Soviet Union and is a king in
    the land. From the lowest she has become the second country in
    the world, and in a maximum of seven years me will be first.”
     (Tanner, N Y T , 11/8/63,1)
 X-15 No. 3 was flown to 2,925 mph (mach 4.40) and 82,300-ft. alti-
    tude by Major Robert Rushworth (USAF). (X-15 Project Office)
424            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

N o v e d e r 7: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were said near agreement on a dec-
     laration of principles of space law. Agreement was said to have
     been reached in a series of talks at the U.N. Both n at’   ions were
     to present their positdons to the 28-member Committee on the
     Pexeful Uses of Outer Space in hopes that the entire committee
     would sponsor the declaration in the General Assembly. Earlier
      in the year the U.S. had found four Soviet demands with regard
      to space law to be unacceptable and talks on the declaration had
     seemed deadlocked. (Hamilton, N Y T , 11/8/63,1)
  Perfection in manufacture of engines for Project Gemini would be
      sought through a Verification Instruction Program (VIP) to train
      and qualify manufacturing and test personnel at Aerojet’s Liquid
      Rocket Plant. The program would include 30 days of classroom
      instruction followed by on-the-job training for top management
      and senior hourly personnel. Program would be operated by
              Astronaut Frank Borman and Aerojet plant manager Ray
      NAS~~
      C. Stiff, Jr. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/8/63,228)
  President, Kennedy announced that he had appointed Dr. Donald
      F. Hornig, Chairman of the Cheniistry Department at Princeton
      Univ., to succeed Dr. Jerome n. Wiesiier as the President’s science
      adviser and director of the White House Office of Science and
      Technology. Dr. Hornig has previously been a member of the
      President’s Science Advisory Committee. The President also
      announced that Robert H. Charles, R special assistant to the NASA
      Administrator, would succeed Joseph S. Imirie as Assistant Secre-
      tary of the Air Force for Materiel. (Wash. Post, 11/8/63)
   DOD announced US. Army had filed with F&dBration Aeroiiautique
      Internationale for certification of six ne.w world speed records
      for rotocraft. A Hiller OH-23G light observation helicopter,
      piloted by Capt. Bertram G. Leach ( U S A ) , flew record flights
      m two weight CIXWPS on three coiirsw for speed over a
       straight course and over a closed circuit. I n the E1B (1,102 to
       2,204 lbs.) class, the OH-23G was timed at 123.67 mph on a 3-kni.
       straight course, 123.58 mph on a 15-km. strai ht course, and 119.81
       mph on a 100-km. closed circuit. I n the E l 8 (2,204 to 3,858 lbs.)
       class, the OH-23G was clocked at 123.44 mph, 123.77 mph, and
       121.70 mph on the same three courses. (mn Release 1460-63)
   UBAF Minuteman missile was launched from AMR on an intanded
       1,700-mi. flight, but went out of control and exploded several
       hundred feet above the launch ad. Several fires were started on
                                     P
       Cape Canaveral by flaming ragments but without injury or
       property damage. (AP, NYT, 11/8/63,7)
   Rep. George P. bfiller (D.-Calif.) spoke on the House floor of the
       series of meetings with leading scientists that had been conducted
       by the Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of
       the House Subcommittee on Science and Astronautics. “I cannot
       overemphasize the work of the Daddario Subcommittee in the
       effect it will have on the future progress of the United States,
       progress not only in science but also in the proper relationship of
       science and technology to our entire society. The members of
       the subcommittee are assuming a very weighty responsibility be-
       cause, I believe, results of the subcommittee work will set the
                                                                       425
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     framework for science and technology in relation to the overall
     resources that we have to guide ourselves in the difficult years
     that lie ahead of us.” (CR,      11/7/63,20332)
Nozrember 7: Argentina was planning a series of science fairs for
     secondary school students on a national basis. The Argentine
     Department of Education mould operate the program, with as-
     sistance from the National Commission for Scientific and Tech-
     nical Investigation. (Science Service, NPT, 11/7/63, 67)
Norember 8: m conference on communications frequency allocation
     concluded in Geneva on a successful note. Joseph MccOnnell,
     president of the Reynolds Metal Co. and head of the U.S. dele-
     gation, talked from Geneva via SYNCOM II communications satel-
     lite about the results of the conference. Final a r m e n t had set
     aside some 2,800 megacycles of the spectrum or use of space
     communications. This was somewhat more than the U.S. had
     requested, althou h not all of it in the portions of the spectrum
     that the US. hafwanted. (NASA Press Conference Transcript;
     Wash. Post, 11/9/63)
  West Germany joined the list of nations participating in satellite
     communications with the opening of its narrowband station at
               . A wideband station to permit television transmission
     Raistinf
     was un er construction. Raisting became the seventh station in
     the satellite communications network. Other narrowband sta-
     tions were at Nutley, N.J.; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Fucino Italy.
     Wideband stations were at Andover, Me.; Goonhilly h w n s ,
     U.K. ; and Pleumeur-Bodou, F a c . (NABA Release 63-250)
                                        rne
  Army Corps of Engineers issued invitations to bid on construction
     of a Vibration Test Laboratory to be built at NASA Manned Space-
     craft Center for an approximate cost of $1.5 million. The labora-
     tory would contain some 13,700 sq. ft. and have a general vibration
     test area 42 ft. high, a spacecraft vibration test area 115 ft. high,
     iiiid pici-isioii foi ~ E c ~ s ,S , sild coiiiroi 1-00111s. n. would
                                   S~T                             DI&
     be opened on Jan. 9,1964. &sc Release 63-226)
  Sen. Philip A. Hart (D.-Mich.) introduced a bill (S.2298) to estab-
     lish a Commission on the Application of Technology to Commun-
     ity and ManpoFer Needs. The Commission would be composed
     of members from Government, science, industry, and labor. It
     would study the current technology and its growth potential,
     looking to selection of those areas of benefit to national and com-
     munity needs. It would also study and make recommendations
     on the impact of technological application. (OR,11/8/63,
     20376-79)
  I n lecture on “The Practical and I m ractical Uses of Space” at
                                            R
     Catholic University, Dr. Edward Te er supported the U.S. lunar
     program but parried questions on the reasons. “Ijust don’t know
     why . . . I wanted to o to the moon before S utnik.”
         Teller stated that he 73-2lieved that water couli be drawn from
                                                            5
     lunar rocks by underground nuclear explosions : “One hundred
     tons of water on the moon would be the equivalent of 100 tons of
       old here.” He said that contamination of the water would not
                                                      P
     f e a problem as the U.S. had already develo               “clean” bombs
     and that even cleaner bombs are possible. ( yres, Wash. Post,
     11/9/63, C14)
      741-623 -28
426           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1903

November 8: MSC officials stated that the reason the first Little Joe
    I1 did not terminate at the proper time and altitude was because
    the primer cord joining the initiator to the charge that would have
    exploded the casing of the Algol engine, thus terminating pro-
    pulsion, was not connected. (Maloney, H o w t m Post, 11/9/63)
 Large firaball streaked across San Francisco Bay area sky, landing
    in the Pacific Ocean several miles off-shore, and witnessed by
    thousands of residents. Fireball was presumed to be a meteor.
     (AP, Wash. Post, 11/8/63, A3)
  Cleveland Clinic kept a calf alive for 20 hours after its heart had
    been replaced by a mechanical h a r t system. The controls to
    drive the pump of this mechanical heart were designed for the
     Clinic by NASA Lewis Research Center pump specialists. (Lewis
     Chronology, 11)
November 9: USAF’S Rome Air Development Center (RADC), Griffiss
     AFB, N.Y., would take part in the tracking and experimentation
                    Echo I1 passive communications satellite scheduled
     with NASA’s
     for launching shortly. A 60-ft.-diameter steerable parabolic
    antenna had been erected at the Center’s Passive Satellite Research
     Terminal near Rome N.Y. The terminal would be able to trans-
     mit on S and X bands for 5,000-mi. tracking and communications
     range. USAF would investigate passive communications satellites
     for their possibilities as a relatively nonjammable military com-
     munications system. (A-N-AF Journ. & Reg., 11/9/63, 28)
  USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards AFB, Calif., was
     using F-104 and F-106 fighter aircraft to simulate portions of
     space vehicle re-entry and landing profiles, Capt. Edward J.
     Dwight (USAF) said at Howard Univ. in Washington. The
     F-104 is usually accelerated to mach 2 at 35,000 ft. and con-
     tinued in powered climb to 75,000, coasts to a top altitude of
     90,000 to 95,000 ft., and starts down. “We usually reli ht the
     engine at about 60,000 feet and recover from a spin.” Wfen the
     XF-104, modified to add a rocket engine, was available, this
     maneuver would be extended to 120,000 to 140,000 ft. The F-106
     is used to simulate the landing pattern of a Dyna Soar-type
     space vehicle, dropping from 20,000 ft. to a high-speed landing.
      ( N Y T , 11/10/63,88)
  USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.,
     on board a Thor-Agena booster. (Jf&R, 11/18/63,12)
  An Eastern Air Lines DC-8 jet trans ort aircraft flying over Texas
                                         cf
     in clear weather suddenly droppe more than two miles-from
     20,000 ft. to 6,000 ft.-in an unexplained dive so violent that it
     tore one of the four jet engines loose from its wing mounting
     and injured 17 of the 124 pzssengers. The aircraft made an
     emergency landing without incident. An investigation im-
     mediately began as to the effect of clear-air turbulence on jet
      aircraft. One theory was that the conventional means of dealing
     with turbulencethat is, slowing down to soften the impact of
      the turbulence-might in fact be dangerous in jet aircraft be-
      cause the slower air speed would lessen the pilot’s control of the
                                  v
      aircraft and make it too eas for the aircraft to go out of control.
      (Hudson, N Y T , 11/15/63,5 )
                                                                427
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,      19 6 3


                                                              rmd
Nosember 9: USAF launched a Titan I1 ICBM from an under
    silo at Vandenberg AFB, Calif. Test, sixth Titan I1 launc from
    Vandenberg, was to check operation of the total weapon system.
    (AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/63)
During earZy hTmember:USAF selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth,
    Boein ,and North American Aviation, Inc., to study feasibility of
    an A I fvanced Manned Penetrator (AMP), revision of prevlous
    Low Altitude Manned Penetrator (LAMP). All threa had ro-
    posed use of kerosene-type fuels in the engine. (Au. gk.,
    11/11/63,%)
November 10: X-15 No. 2, being remodeled under UBAF contract by
    North American Aviation, Inc., would have as one of its most
    important research objectives the testing of a ramjet engine modi-
    fied to burn liquid hydrogen. Using the basic configuration of
    the Navy’s Typhon missile engine, the ramjet would slow the
    supersonic airstream of the X-15 to subsonic speed for burnin
                                                                  !
                                                                  i
    in the engine. Theoretically the ramjet flying at 4,600 mph shoul
    be twice as scient as a jet engine. (Clark, NPT, 11/10/63,88)
  Sen. Albert Gore (D.-Tenn.) wrote in the New Y w k T h e 8 Maqa-
    sine about space law and the Dryden-Blagonravov agreements:
    “This agreement, though limited in nature, is significant if for no
    other reason than that it indicates there are some areas in which
    our two countries have found it p i b l e to cooperate in outer
    space development. I f successfully implemented it can, perhaps,
    lead to other and broader agreements. The Dryden-Blagonravov
    agreement relates to scientific and technical matters. It was
    achieved despite political differences. Similarly, agreement
    should be possible on some legal questions if we can isolate those
    questions from political considerations.
       “Perhaps if we can build on these small areas of agreement
    an escalation of the arms ram into outer space can be avolded.
    I t is conceivable that science and technology, so often i history
                                                              n
    energized b the threat or event of war, may, thmugh ~ c e - r e -
               iI
    search and erelopment, pave the way for removal of the arriem
    erected by hate, fear, and suspicion.’’ (NPT Magazine, 11/10/63,
    23 f f )
November 11: U.S.S.R. orbited COSMOS XXI, “intended for continued
    space research.” Orbital data : apogee, 229 km. (142 mi.) ; peri-
    gee, 195 km. (121 mi.) ;period, 88.5 min. ;and inclination, 64”50’.
     (Tass, Komsomolskaya Przrda, 11/13/63,1, AFSM Trans.)
  Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy
    of Sciences, was interviewed b Soviet newsmen on the Si@-
                                   t
    cance of POLJET the maneuvera le spacecraft orbited b U.S.S.R.
                    I,
                                                          9
    on November 1,1963. I n speaking of its implications or manned
    space flight, Keldysh said : “Maneuverable spacecraft.will ermit
     us to execute a landing from any orbit to a given ‘kosmo%om’;
    carry out a meeting in space of ships which are flying i different
                                                             n
    orbits; and also allow astronauts to select the most advantageous
    landing area.
       “The ability of a ship to maneuver will make it possible for
     us to create heav orbital scientific research stations in space so
                     E
     that we can exc ange crews, replace scientific equipment and
428           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   maintain a continuous supply of all that is necessary . . . .??
    (Pravda,11/11/63,1, AFSS-T Trans.)
November 11 :NASA postponed indefinitely the launch of the first inter-
   planetary monitoring probe (Imp) after ground tests of the third-
   stage launch vehicle indicated that a change would have to be
   made in the separation sequence to prevent contamination of the
    spacecraft. (AP, NYT, 11/12/63, 42; Wash. Daily News,
    11/11/63)
 U.S. tracking data on the Russian POLET I maneuverable spacecraft
   substantiated the Russian claim of change in apogee but indicated
   that any substantial change in plane had to be made before com-
   pletion of the first orbit. According to Aviation Week, NORAD'S
   initial orbital plane for the Russian satellite was 59.99", later
   revised t 58.89". Whether this 1.1" change was a result of a
              o
    satellite maneuver or was merely a refinement of earlier data is
    uncertain. (Av. Wk., 11/11/63,28)
 Rocketdyne had completed test firings of the X-8 experimental
    engine, one of a series of experimental rocket engines being de-
    signed and tested by Rocketdyne for USAF'S Ballistic Systems Div.
    in a 'search for advanced propulsion techniques. The X-8 engine
    had tested the feasibility of using liquid hydrogen as coolant for
    the thrust chamber. The tests showed liquid hydrogen to be a
    remarkably good coolant. An X-12 engine would now be built to
    test the possibility of achieving an increase of four to five times
    the pressure in the thrust chamber using coolant. This would
    not alter thrust a t sea level but would give considerably increased
    thrust at altitude. (Av.Wk..11/11/63,99)
 A number of unofficial reports from Moscow have identified two key
    figures in the Soviet space program, according to Theodore
    Shabad, the N e w York Times Moscow correspondent. On0 of
    the men was Valentin P. Glushko, known as a rocket propulsion
    expert who worked with Friedrich Zander in the first Soviet
    research in liquid fuel rockets in the early 1930's. The other was
        a
     Ser ei P. Korolov, a mechanical engineer long associated with
    mec anics and structural problems of flight. Both are full a d -
    emicians in the Soviet Academy of Scisnces. (Shabad, NYT,
    11/12/63,2)
 Aviation Week reported that USAF and USN were pressing NASA to
    improve the reliability of the Scout launch vehicle. The Navy
    was said to have had only 50% success with it in their Transit
    navigational satellite program. USAF was said to have had a
    little better performance but only because it had undertaken a
    complete and expensive checkout of components. Government-
    furnished equipment was said to be especially unreliable. (Av.
     Wk.,11/11/63,34)
  Chemist S. Stephen Papell, of NASA's      Lewis Research Center, had
     applied for a patent on magnetic rocket fuel. Mr. Papell had
    found a means of magnetizing J P 4 and other liquid hydro-
    carbons by mixing small quantities of magnetic iron oxide with
    the liquids. Under weightlessness, an electromagnet located near
    the propellant pumps could pull the fuel into the pumps. Papell
    said much work remained to be done on the process before it could
                                                                 429
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   be considered operationally feasible. ( A v . Wk.,    11/11/63, 30;
   Lewis Chronology, 11)
November 11: US. Army had contracted I m k h d California for
    further development of the Ping Pong short-range reconnaissance
    missile concept. Under this concept, a missile would be fired a
    short distance behind enemy lines, would take photos of enemy
      ositions, and then a motor on the other end of the missile would
    ire it back over U.S. lines for recovery. (Au. Wk.,   11/11/63,34)
 Editorial by Editor Robert Hotz in Aviation W e and 8 ace
                                                      ek
                                                                I
    Technology on US. supersonic transport aircraft: “One o the
    most significant points developed by the [Senate] hearings i that
                                                                 s
    the FAA has vastly underestimated the development costs of the
    supersonic transport, and that the aircraft manufacturing in-
    dustry cannot and will not assume even the fraction of these costs
    that the government has assigned to it.” (Hotz, Av. Wk.,
    11/11/63,21)
 The comet Burnham 1960 I1 “wagged” its tail during its trip past
    earth and to the point in its orbit nearest the sun. Photographs
    taken by Daniel Malaise in April and May 1960 from the Astro-
    physical Institute of the Univ. of Liege, Belgium, showed that the
    tail of the comet moved in a four-day cycle, swinging about eight
    degrees t o each side of the radius vector each four days. The
    most obvious explanation of the movement would be thak it was
    caused by rotation of the comet’s nucleus, but so f a r no explma-
    tion had been fully satisfactory. (Schmeck, NPT, 11/11/63,29;
    cf. article in The Astronomicd J o u m l , Od.1963)
 USN launched a Polaris A 3 missile under water from the nuclear
    submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson i a flight of more than 2,000
                                          n
    mi. down the AMR. (UPI, N Y T , 11/12/63,18)
Noz*ember If?: NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from
    Wallops Station, Va., sending a 156-lb. payload t o an altitude of
    IS mi. Pnyioad was a p’noiospwiroiiiebri u iumtiie i i k a i d e t
     -k




    light emissions from atomic oxygen at various altitudes in the
    u per atmosphere to learn more about the amounts and properties
     P
    o the oxygen atoms. (Wallops Release 63-101; NPT, 11/13/63,
  As2% mS&Corp Board Chairman Leo D. Welch and President I .       h
    Joseph V. Charyk left the U.S. for a meeting in Bonn, Germany,
    with the European Conference of Posts and Telecommunications,
    there was increasing evidence that European nations would de-
    mand a substantial role in the management of a global communi-
    cations satsllite operation in return for joining the US. ComSat-
    Corp effort rather than build a competing system of their own.
    (Finney, NPT, 11/13/63,17)
  Soviet Cosmonaut Major ,Qndrian Nikolayev, touring India with his
    bride, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolavev, said in New Delhi that
    U.S.S.R. was planning a spacecraft capable of sustaining the life
    of a crew for three years. This was the estimated time for a
    manned flight to Mars or Venus and return, with some 14 months
    of this actual roundtrip flight time and the other two years wait-
    ing on the planet for the proper orbital relationship for the re-
    turn flight. ( AP, Wash. Ece. Star, 11/12/63)
430           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

November 1.2: Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) read into the
    Congressional Record an editorial from Life Magazine on
    priorities in the U.S. space program: “The United States needs
    a reasoned and balanced space program that is more than a series
    of jumpy reflexes to things Khrushchev may or may not be doing.
    The first priority is not the moon. It is the conquest of inner
    space (up to 500 miles high), the true military high ground from
    which our world can be photographed, weather surveyed, perhaps
    atom policed. Beyond that lie vast challenges in the quest for
    knowledge of space, where the moon is only one way station. The
    challenges must be met, the United States must be a space-faring
    nation; but at a rate and in an order set by our own capacity and
    deliberation.” ( O R , 11/12/63, A7016)
November 13: Senate Appropriations Committee completed action on
                                                a
    NASA’sY 1964 approprintlion b spprovin a $5.19 billion NASA
            F
                                     i
    budget. This was only $90 mil ion more t an approved by the
    House of Representatives. It had been thought that the Senate
    would raise the House figure to about $5.3 billion. The Senate
    Committee also retained its version of the Pelly amendment, for-
    bidding R joint lunar program without consent of Congress.
     (Finney, .VYT, 11/14/63,21)
         Mississippi Test Operations ( MTO) had a work force of nearly
  NASA‘s
    900 as of this date, of which nearly 700 were contractor employees,
    81 were Arm Corps of Engineers personnel, and 34 were NASA
                 2
    employees.      d i r e contracts at MTO now stood at some $28 mil-
    lion, with another $10 million out on bids. (Marshall Star,
.   11/13/63,1)
  Dr. Jerome €3. Wiesner, retiring scientific adviser to the President,
    n-as named Dean of the School of Science, MIT, succeeding Dr.
    George R. Harrison. (AP, N Y T , 11/14/63,31)
  MSC announced new systeni of procurement actions, designed
    to give the Government a better product at lower prices
    and to save industry time and money in competing for contracts.
    Under the new Two-Step Formal A4dvertisingsystem, companies
    would submit only technical proposals in the first stage, instead
    of both technical and business management aspects as was for-
    merly done. MSC would evaluate the technical proposals, notify
    those companies whose proposals were acceptable, and invite them
    to submit a formal bid. This system was thought to provide all
    the advantages of competition while retaining the Government’s
     right to pick the company with the best solution to the problem.
     (MSC Release 63-236)
  DOD announced that Army solid-fuel Pershing niissiles would be
    sent to Europe early in 1964 to begin replacing the Redstone mis-
    siles now in the field. Advantages of the Pershing were cited
     as being greater mobility and reliability and an all-weather capa-
    bility. (DOD Release 1474-63; UPI, N Y T , 11/14/63, 6 )
  Dr. Vannevar Bush, honorary chairman of the corporation of MIT.
     long-time scientific adviser to the Government, and Director of
    the Ofc of Scientific Research and Development from 194146,
          fie
     wrote a letter to the New Yo& T i m s on the manned lunar pro-
     gram. Noting that Premier Khrushchev said recently that a
                                                                   431
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 6 3

   manned lunar landing would not be worth the cost in money or
   in lives, Dr. Bush stated : “This is an aspect of the space program
   which the American public has by no means faced.” That lives
   would be lost in the program was inevitable, he asserted, and
   would occur with the whole world watching.
       “What will happen when the tragedy occurs? The public is
   now in doubt on the program. They wdl be impatient as it pro-
   ceeds very slowly, with little of popular appeal to report. When
   a grim tragedy occurs they may throw the whole experiment out
   the window.
       “I have just as much enthusiasm as the next man for the parts
   of the program which make sense: the communications and
   weather satellites, for example. But the whole program has been
   blown u p to absurd dimensions. Instruments on the moon would
   gather scientific information, nearly as much as a man would,
   and the information would not be worth the cost.
       “To put a man on the moon is folly, en ndered by childish
   enthusiasm. It will backfire on those w f o drive it ahead.”
    (NPT, 11/17/63,8E)
November 13: Titan II launch from AMR on Nov. 1,1963, testing the
   effectiveness of new damping devices installed to reduce surges
   of propellant and oxidizer that c r a t e d vibration levels unaccept-
    able to Project Gemini manned space flight, was termed success-
   ful by S p e Bushwse Dudy. Vibration level had dropped to a
    level acceptable to NASA, although u s . wanted further tests to
    confirm reliability. (Space BW. Daily, 11/14/63,251)
 MSC officials said the Apollo P d Abort Ts No. 1, conducted at
                                      a         et
    WSMR on Nov. 7,1963, appeared from data to have been successful
    in all respects and showed the aerodynamics of the Apollo escape
    system “to be just what we expected.” Liftoff and subsequent
    flight sequencing were within one second of program. (M8C
    S.
     p
     .      weii;s R G m d G p , ::j:3/s3, 1)
 USAF launched a Minuteman missile from AMR in a successful
    5,000-mi. flight. Missile had an advanced second stage intended
    to extend the range of the solid-fuel IGBM. (NYT,       11/14/63,13)
 TJSAF launched an Atlas D IOBM from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.
     (M&E, 11/18/63, 11)
November 14: X-15 No. 1 was flown to 3,286 mph (mach 4.75) and
                                                        ,
    90,800-ft. altitude by Capt. Joseph Engle (UGAF) his second X-15
    flight. The X-15 was put through two sharp rolling turns to
    test aircraft stability at hi h s eeds and a part of the pilot’s
                                                    s
    familiarization training. fSt. k u i s Pwt-Dispatch, 11/15/63 ;
    X-15 Project Office)
 An MSC operations team finished a study at Ling-Temco-Vought,
    Inc., that indicated an astronaut could effect rendezvous in space
    using only his piloting skill and simple spacecraft radar. Al-
    though Apollo flight would have automatx guidance and navi-
    gation equipment and continuous assistance from ground tracking
    stations, developers of backup systems needed t know the mini-
                                                       o
    mum with which the astronaut could operate. (MSC Release
    63-238)
432                                                1D 0 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

November 14: MIT scientists reported the first observation of the ele-
    ments of water in space. Supported by a USAF 84-ft. parabolic
    radio telescope, a digital computer, and a radiation measuring
    device, the scientish detected hydroxyl radicals (OH) in space.
    Since the free hydrogen atom was detected in space in 1951, this
    means that the constituents of water have now been detected.
    MIT would now study the Milky Way on the frequencies absorbed
    by the hydroxyl radical and compare the resultin
                                                            f
                                                            map Of the
    dust and gas clouds with that already constructed ram observs-
    tion on the hydrogen absorption line. Information gained was
    expected to add greatly to knowledge of the structure and dy-
    namics of the cosmos. ( N Y T , 11/14/63,47)
 The Chemistry and Energy Conversion Divlsion at the Lewis Re-
    search Center began a major study of the feasibility of using
     thin-fYm solar cells for space power applications. (Lewis
    Chronology, 11)
  President Kennedy was asked in his weekly news conference about
    the significance of the Soviet antimissile missile shown in Moscow
     for the first time on Nov. 7. He replied: “I don’t think there is
     any doubt that they have an anti-missile, as do we. The prvblem,
    of coum, is what you do with saturation. I don’t think the
     Soviet Union or the United States have solved the problem of
     denling, as I said before, with a whole arsenal of missiles coming
     at us at maximum speed with decoys. That, up to now, has been
    the impossible task.” (Wash.Post, 11/15/63)
         Miami air route traffic control center began area positive con-
  FAA’s
     trol (APC) radar separation service to jet aircraft flying above
     24,000 ft., bringing 22 out of 25 FAA centers into the APC network
     and coverin 90% of continental U.S. Centers at Great Falls,
                 %
     Mant., and oston will join in 1964 and the St. Louis center
     would be phased out. The next step in the program would be
     to lower the APC floor from 24,000 ft. to 18,000 ft. (FAA Release
     63-97)
  Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA’s      Marshall Space Flight
     Center, said in Kansas City that there was no conflict between
     science and religion. “Science stands to better understand crea-
     tion. Religion stands to better understand the creator. Science
     seeks to harness the forces of nature around us; religion and
     ethics seek to harness the forces of nature within us.” (Kansas
     City Times, 11/15/63)
  U.K. announced it had established a space researck station for
     satellite abservation at the Sembawang naval air station in
     Singapore. (UPI, Wash. Dui2y News, 11/15/65)
  Dr. Fmred L. Whipple, Director of the Smithsonian Astrophysical
     Observatory, stated his conviction that a belt of comets never seen
     from earth lies near the path of the planet Pluto. It was this
     comet belt, he though, that accounted for the disturbances in
     the orbit of the planet Neptune. Pluto had sometimes been
     credited with this effect, but Dr. Whipple said that Pluto could
     scarcely weigh as much as the earth, while the objects producing
     such an effect would have to weigh ten times as much as the
     earth. (Science Service, NYT, 11/14/63,3)
                                                                 433
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

November 14: London D i y Eer& reported Rolls Royce, L d ,    t . had
                          al
    submitted proposals to the British government for sending space
      robes to the mom and Mars by 1970, by converting the Blue
    8 t m k booster to use of liquid hydrogen. (UPI, Wash. Post,
    11/15/63)
 SAO crew launched a Titan I ICBX f r o b Vandenberg AFB, Calif., in
    a routine training launch. (AP, Wash.Post, 11/15/63)
 Soviet scientists re rted that radio soundings had indicated that
                          moon was “hard and extreme1 poraus,” in
    the surface of
                                                        d
    contrast to other theories that the moon was covere with a thick
    layer of dust. (UPI, Wash. Daily News, 11/14/63; Zzvesth,
    11/15/63,6,AFSS-T Trans.
                              k
Novernber 15: NASA’S Flight esearch Centsr, FAA, and US. Navy
    nnnouncsd completion of a series of test flights simulating the
    supersonic tran rt aircraft (SST) flying in the air traffic con-
    trol network. Y N a v y A5A jet aircraft was used to simulate
    the sm because its thrust-to-weight ratio enabled it to simulate
    closely the performance of the SST up to 50,000 ft. Some 21
    flights were made into Los Angeles along Federal airways, start-
    ing from level flight at 50,000 ft. and mach 1.7,then decelerating
    to mach 1.4 and descending, dro ping below the speed of sound
                                     i
    before reaching 30,000 ft., and ying at 340 mph at 20,000 ft.,
    not much faster than resent-day jet trans orts. Flight con-
                                                  B
    trollers reported no probplems with descent an landing, although
    takeoff and climb did present more problems because of the high
     performance of the aircraft. (FRC Release 31-63)
Nouenzbm 16: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS XXII i t earth orbit. Ini-
                                                  no
    tial orbital data :apogee, 394 km. (245 mi.) ;perigee,205 km. (127
    mi.) ; period, 90.3 min. ; inclination, 64”56‘. (Pravda, 11/17/63,
     1, A m - T TI’aIIS.)
  President Kennedy visited C a p Canaveml, his third tour of the
    test site within two years. Nying in from Paim Beach, where
    he was spending the weekend, the President spent three hours
     watching the launching of a Polaris missile from the submerged
    nuclear submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson,riding in a helicopter
     over the Menitt Island Launch Area (MU) where NASA is con-
     structing facilities for Saturn V launches, visiting the Saturn I
     rocket on its launch site. S p k m g of the Saturn I flight sched-
     uled for earlv December, the President said that if successful it
     would givs the U.S. “the largest booster in the world and show
     significant progress in space.
        “Ithink that would be an important milestone for us.”
        The President was briefed on Poet Gemini and Apollo and
                                         rjcs
     the related booster pro ms by a group of NASA officials mcluding
     N A ~ A Administrator r m e s E. Webb, NASA Associate Admin-
     istrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and MSFG Director Dr. Wern-
     her von Braun. At one point in the illustrated lecture, the
     President lagged behind his party to examine models of the var-
     ious boosters in the space program. He picked up a model of
     the 72-ft. Atlas D which had ‘boosted Project Mercury a t     sm
                                             the
     nauts into orbit and compared it with a model of the 281-ft.
     Saturn V intended to propel Project Apollo astronauts to a
434           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    manned lunar landing. “This is fantastic,” the President said.
    ( N Y T , 11/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 11/17/63,2)
November 16: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have a draft of a
    resolution ,on legal aspects of space exploration and to be circulat-
    ing it for comment to other members of the 28-nation U.N. Com-
    mittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space prior to formal sub-
    mission. It was announced on Nov. 8 that the U.S. and U.S.S.R.
                  a
    had reached eneral agreement. (Brewer, N Y T , 11/17/63, 34)
  Soviet Marshal ikolai I. Krylov, writing in Izwestia, claimed that
    Soviet ICBM’s many respects exceed both quantitatively and
                      “in
    qualitatively” the strategic rocket potential of any other nation.
     The new-model tests in the Pacific in the spring of 1963 had
                            x
    produced “fabulous su er-sniper accuracy” over a range of 8,000
    mi., he said. Among c aracteristics of Soviet ICBM’s, Marshal
                                                             the
     listed “unlimited range,” relative ease of operation, combat readi-
     ness “within minutes,” and capability of launching from mobile
     field installations having no preliminary engineering work.
      ( N Y T , 11/17/63,39)
Noventbe?. 17: NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from
     NASA Wallops Station, Va., sending a 200-lb. payload 115 mi. into
     the upper atmos here to measure ultraviolet radiation. Experi-
                      P
     ment was part o a continuing program to develop techniques for
     measuring ultraviolet dayglow and from the measurements de-
     terminin the physical processes taking place in the upper atmos-
     phere. &ch techniques would also be useful as instrumentation
     on satellites studying the atmospheres of other planets. (Wal-
     lops Release 63-103)
  First international art program via communications satellite was
     presented over NBC-TV. Entitled ‘‘Museums Without Walls,” the
      half-hour program interchanged views of paintings from the
      Louvre in Paris and the National Gallery in Washington via
      Relay communications satellite. The program went off without
      any significant technical difficulties and reception was excellent.
       (Gould, N Y T , 11/18/63,59)
 Nowernher 18: Speaking in Tampa, Fla., a t a ceremony celebrating
      the 50th anniversary of the first scheduled air service in the U.S.,
      President Kennedy contrasted the first air service between Tampa
      and neighboring St. Petersburg with today’s jet travel. Looking
      ahead, he said that “within our sight, if not yet within our grasp,
      is the day when men will routinely fly through space at 25 times
      the speed of sound.” As soon as 1975, the President predicted,
      “metroplanes” would take off from the center of one city and
      land in the center of another, while supersonic jet transports
      would be crossing the oceans at 1.400 mDh. And bevond that
      would be “hyper&nic transports” flying at’ mach 6 to 8: (Wash.
      Ewe. Star, 11/18/63)
   The House Select Committee on Government Research opened its
      hearings with nine witnesses from Government and university sci-
      entific circles. Created by the House last September “to make a
      complete, full and !thorough investigation ,of the numerous re-
      search programs” conducted by or sponsored by the Federal Gov-
      vernment, the Committee would by November 1964 have listened
                                                                      435
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   to some 70 scientific leaders from Government, univmities, in-
   dustry, and labor. (Finney, NYT, 11/19/63 18)
November 18: NASA Administrator. James E. Webb, testifyi
                                                                3   before
   the Select Committee on Government Research of the ous8 of
   Representatives, said : “Something more than four billion dollars
   will be paid industry for work it will do under NASA contracts
   this year. About half of this will pay for the design of this ad-
   vmced equipment and for its fabrication, using the latest methods
    and newest technologies in its production. . . . Just t~ make
                                                                    Tp-
   sure that the design is right, the fabrication is ri ht, and the
                                                      f
   ment sufficiently reliable, the other half of this our billion do lam
   will be paid to industry to test these machines and advanced sys-
   tems of equipment once they have been fabricated. Thus Ameri-
   can industry is moving into an entirely new period whereathe
   importance of very advanced design, manufacture, fabrication,
   and testing for utmost reliability will replace some of the practices
   of the past.” (Text)
 Former NASA Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd
   Holmes, said in Hartford address that industry and government
   leaders must discover better wa s to manage the US. space pro-
           He discussed Project Ipollo plans and said the space
    %
    !E
     :    programs must be based on better mutual confidence be-
   tween Government and industry. (Hartford [Corn.] Couramt,
    11/19/63)
  Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academ of Sciences,
                                                            9
    testified at the initial hearing held by the House Se ect Commit-
    tee on Government Research. Dr. Seitz warned Congress against
    starving basic research and individual or small-team research “in
    order to divert funds for research which appears to be more
    spectaicular from a popular standpoint . . . .
                                                             "pep"
    signs of such dirersion in thejresent session There 0-
                                                     of the .
    As evidence of this trend, Dr. lseitz pointed out the reiauve size
    of the cuts in the NASA budget compared with the cuts of the
    Rational Science Foundation. Also, he pointed out, even the
    NASA cuts were heavier in space sciences than in manned space
    flight or applications. NASA. he thought, should play a role like
    that of the Office of Naval Research ten years ago, offering broad
    support to basic research in chemistry, physics, astronomy, and
    other sciences. (Loo ,N.Y. Eerdd Tribune, 11/19/63)
  Secretary of Defense RQ ert S. McNamara, in address before Eco-
                             K
    nomic Club of New York, summarized current status of “the
    balance of strategic nuolear forces” :
       “The U.S. force now contains more than 500 operational long-
            ballistic missiles-Atlas, Titan, Minuteman, P o l a r i o a n d
    r”T
    is p anned to increase to over 1,700 by 1966. There is no doubt
    in our minds and none in t i e minds of the Soviets that these
    missiles can penetrate to their targets. In addition, the U.S.
    has Strategic Air Command bombers on air alert and over 500
    bombers on quick reaction ground alert. By comparison, the
    consensus is that today the Soviets could place about half as m n y
    bombers over North America on a first strike. The Soviets are
    estimated to have today only a fraction as many intercontinental
436           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    missiles as vie do. Furthermore, their submarine-launched bal-
    list,ic missiles are short range, and generally are not comparable
    to our Polaris force. The Soviets pose a very large threat against
    Europe, including hundreds of intermediate and medium-range
    ballistic missiles. This threat is today and will continue to be
    covered by the clear superiority of our strategic forces . . . .77
     (Text)
November 18: Willis B. Foster became Director of new Manned
                                     Office of Space Science and A pli-
    Space Science Div. of NASA’s
    cations. Formerly Deputy Assistant Director for Researcl in
    DOD’S Directorate of Defense Research and Engineering, Mr.
    Foster would direct liaison and scientific support of the manned
     space flight program, including the criteria and selection of
    scientist-astronauts and scientific RCD in support of manned space
    flight. (NASA Release 63-242)
 N.WA had launched only six of a projected 40 major satellites and
    probes so far in 1963, according to Awiution Week. Though all
     six had been succssful, it was a big drop from the 18 launches in
     1962. N.\SA Associate Adniinistrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,
     attributed some of the drop in the launch rate to ”squaring away
     difficulties which existed before N . w . ~was created or which devel-
     oped in the early days of the agency.” He included Centaur and
     Nimbus in this category.
        “As for some of the other delays and postponements, I think
     they are due to our involvement in projects where we are doin
                                                                        f
     thin s for the first time. In building spacecraft such as EGO, an
         8
     the rbiting A4stronomicalObservatory, we are leaning how to
     design, assemble and test advanced spacecraft-a new generation
     of spacecraft that are much more complex than the ones we have
     been flying so successfully.” (A m Wk., 11/18/63, 30, 31)
 NASA Administrator James E. Webb was showing interest in acquir-
     ing USAF Titan I 1 boosters to launch €uture heavy payloads such
                       1
     as observatory satellites, according to Aviation Week. Webb was
     said to have discussed wieh DOD’S Dr. Harold Brown the possibility
     of adding Titan I 1 to the list of standard launch vehicles in the
                         1
     national space program. (Av.Wk., 11/18/63, 25)
  Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced a five-year space
     program that included development of Japanese boosters and
     launchin of three satellites. It would be funded a t $59,138,888
              f
     and emp oy some 300 Japanese engineers. Programs included a
     60-km. weather observation rocket ; a 150-km. two-stage weather
     observation rocket ; 400-km. three-stage rockets ; 1,200-km. two-
     stage rockets; navigation satellites, to be ready for launching by
     NASA in 1967. (MdR,11/18/63,13)
  The ratio of NASA scientists and engineers to NASA-contractor scien-
      tists and engineers should be 1 to 4 by early 1964. It was 1 9 in
     Jan. 1960,1:3 in Jan. 1963. ( S ace BW. DaiZy, 11/18/63,265)
                                      6
  Astronomers at McMath Hulbert bservatory of the Univ. of Michi-
     gan and at the U.S. Naval Observatory reported the first s i p s of
     a new 1 1 - y ~solar cycle. Indications of a new cycle were the ap-
                     .
     pearance of sun mots well above the sun’s eauator and the reversed
     magnetic polarit; of the disturbance. (Qcience Service, N Y T ,
     11/18/63, 15)
                                                                  437
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

             .-
N o v d e r 18 Two USAF U-2 aircraft have Ibeen used a t AXR for more
    than three years in a program gathering data on infrared charac-
    teristics of the exhaust plumes of ballistic missiles, according to
    Aviation Week. The program had been sponsored by Aeronauti-
    cal Systems Div. of m.       Known a Smokes Joe, it was ooordi-
                                          s
    nated with ARPA’S Project Tabsbne, which includes aircraft-user
                                             d
    programs Lookout (using RCAF CF-100’s and RAMP (Radiation
    Air Borne Measurement Progmm).               ne of the U-2’s was
    equipped with 400-lb. radiometar, the other with spectrometer.
    One o both covered 80% of AIKR launchings, flying at 60 OOO ft.
           r
    to observe the plume of the rocket as it passed on its upward flight.
    Data was forwaded to agencies concerned with ballistic missile
    defense. (Av.Wk., 11/18/63,53)
  ma-sponsored solar hydrogen rocket engine (SOHR) was s u c c ~ f u l
    in Series of ground tests,produc o.up to one pound thrust in runs
                                    ”s
    of several hours. Scale-up to 10- b . thrust now appeared feasi-
                                         s
    ble. Built by Eledro-Optical Systems, Inc., ~ O H R uses large, light-
    weight solar concentrators to focus solar energy into a cavity ab-
    sorber containing a heat exchanger using hydro n. The h             d
                                                     f?
    hydrogen providea thrust as it is accelerated t rough a nozzle.
    One GOHR generating one to two lbs. thrust could move a 6,OOO-lb.
    payload from a 300-mi. orbit t a 22,400-mi. synchronous orbit in
                                   o
    20 days, compared with half a day for a chemical powerplant and
    45 days for an electrical one. Specific impulse of SOHR is 800 w.,
    compared with 400 9~c. chemicals, 1,200 for arc jets, and 5,000
                             for
         x
    sec. u for ion rockets. (M&R,11/18/63,35)
  U.S. ha produced a total of 53 U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, accord-
    ing to AwiatiOn Week. The f r t model, of which 48 were pro-
                                    is
    duced, was a single sea.ter; most of them were powered by the
    Pratt & Whitney J57-P-37A (JT3)jet engine, a few-including
    the one flown by Francis Gary Powers-+ PBEWJ75’6. The SBC-
    und Iii(j&J tScq-jlq p & & by 8 m&$Ld                            twbz-
                                  7-                      y&F
                 FG
    s p l engine.. Five were produced. (Au. Wk., 11/18/63, 57)
  Editorial in Mwsiles mnd Rockets took issue with widespread asser-




    industry.
      “With such a demand for new jobs ahead and with a concur-
    rent need for skilled workers, the answer seems obviousyet has
    received little attention. Training of surplus manpower to fit
    the requirements for skilled workers is the only sensible r o u b
    not a cutback in what will soon be the nation’s largest industry.
438           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

    But we have yet to see any large-scale government program for
    training of unemployable.
        “Nor is it solely a government problem. It must be shared by
    the nation’s industrial management and labor unions.” ( M & R ,
    11/18/63, 46)
November 18: French government report recognized the direct and in-
    dire& economic benefits to the French economy from space and
    nuclear work. Of 13,000 persons employed in rocket development,
    5,000 were in electronics, 5,000 in chemical-metallurgy. Of 14,000
    working at the Pierrelatte nuclear center, 92% are emplpyees
    of private indust . (M&R, 11/18/63,9)
  USAF was reported ?Aviation Week to have canceled its specific
                          y
                          I
    operational requirement ( SOR) for the CX-4 cargo aircraft
     (100,000-lb. payload, 4,000-mi. range) in favor of an upgraded
     requirement for a cx-x concept that would provide 180,000-lb.
     payload and 10,000 to 12,000-mi. range by taking advantage of
     new state of the art improvements expected to be available within
     the next two years, including the high-bypass-ratio turbofan en-
     gine for lower fuel consumption, boundary-layer control for in-
     creased lift and range, and 11 hter structural materials, including
                                  t
     plastic and metal honeycom s, ceramic-metal combinations for
     use in high-temperature portions of the engines, and other plastic
     parts. cx-x would be able to deliver troops and equipment over-
                                                              a
     seas, airdrop them, and return to U.S. without landin or re-
     fueling. Cost per ton mile was expected to be less than t e long-
     sought five cents per ton mile; indeed, it was thought to be
     cheaper than sea lift when antisubmarine forces are included.
      (Av.  Wk., 11/18/63,26)
November 18-90: I n a paper presented to the national symposium
     of the Society of Aerospace Material and Process E n ineers in
     Seattle, Wash., D. J. Levy, a Lockheed Missiles and 8pace Co.
      scientist, discussed a revolutionary new gold-plating technique.
     His own invention, the technique makes it possible to goldplate
     by the simple method of spraying a gold solution from an ordi-
     nary spray gun, or from an aerosol bomb. Gold is the ideal sub-
      stance for thermal control because of its optical properties and
      resistance to tarnish. This new method, “Lockspray-Gold,” has
      the advantage of great flexibility since there is no limit to the
      size of the object that can be coated. Levy also described how his
      gold-spray process was successfully used in the design of special
      lightweight furlable antennas developed by Lockheed for space
      vehicles. (Space News Roundup, 12/11/63,2)
 November 19: A NASA Hq press conference confirmed that the com-
      bustion instability that had plagued the 1.5 million-1b.-thrust
      F-1 rocket engine had been corrected. NASA had assembled a
      team of the best propulzion experts in the country to work on
      the problem. The nature of the corrective action was redesign
      of a part of the engine behind the injector, so that fuel and
      oxydizer were no longer subject to surging as they entered the
      thrust chamber. Further redesign was underway to simplify
      the rather complicated series of baffles in the new part. (Wash.
      Eve. Star, 11/19/63)
                                                                      439
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 3

NovembeT 19: NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans,
    Jr., Speaung before the Chamber of (=omme.rce, Albuquerque,
    N.M., said :“All of you saw the headlines saying, ‘Khrushchev An-
    nounces Withdrawal from Moon Race’ or words to that effect; but
    I wonder how many read the subsequent stories i which Khru-
                                                        n
    shchev said his remarks had been misinterpreted, and that the
    Soviet Union intended to explore the moon as soon as this could be
    done with confidence of success
       “ ‘Even our opponents realize that we have the leading role in
    space,’ Khrushchev said recently. ‘They haven’t overtaken us yet,
    and we are not going to let them. Our people are covering them-
    selves with glory. We shall give the capitalist world no peace,
    since it has to go.’
       ‘‘We have a balanced, fast paced space program geared to our
    national needs and resources. I can assure you that the Soviets
    are also working hard on a well conceived program, even though
    they throw a veil of secrecy over their failures and try to confuse
    us about their objectives.” (Text)
 FAA announced a plan for allocation of the U.S. supersonic airliners
    as they came off the production line. U.S. airlines would re-
    ceive # of the first 70 aircraft, with preference going to airlines
    ffying the Atlantic. Foreign airlines would receive the remain-
    ing 26 of the first 70, again with preference going to a i r l i n s on
    the Atlantic Ocean run. ( N Y T , 11/20/63, 70)
 I n the Senate debate on the Independent 0 5 c e s Appro riations bill,
                                                            ga
    Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) made a mohon t t the N ~                   A
    appropriation be cut an additional $519 million-a flat 10% cut
    in each of the three NASA budget cat ries :research and develop-
                                          T
    ment, construction of facilities, an administrative operations.



                                                     1
    thoughtful basis.” (CR, 11/19/63, 21270-299
  Dr. Jose h F. Shea, Program Mana r, Apol o Spacecraft, MBC,
                                          F
    spoke Lfore the National Rocket lub i Washington. He ex-
                                                  n
    plained the philosoph behind the recent changes in the A 0110
                                                                     P
                             h9
    flight-test prowam, w en Saturn I launch vehicles were rep aced
    by Saturn IB’s and the first manned flight thereby delayed for
    some nine months. Dr. Shea pointed out that the space age had
    advanced to the point that the space environment is understood
    well enou h so that components can be designed, built, and ground-
              %
   tasted wit confidence that they c m perform well in spacs. The
    flight test program has become “the relatively small portion of the
    development iceberg which is clearly visible to the public.” This
    had led to a desire to flight-test the entire spacecraft configuration
    from the outset, rather than the previous method of adding addi-
   tiona.1 systems flight by flight, when “every spacecraft is a some-
    what different desi containin the potential of new problems.
                         P
       “The discipline o a single con guration-configuration control,
                                              x
    if you will-not on1 increases the car over from test to test so
    necessary for estabishing design con dence, but also provides
    repeated opportunities for early spacecraft tests of substantial
   scope.” (Text)
440            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

N o u m b e r 19: Dr. Phili Abelson, Director of the Carnegie Institu-
     tion’s Geophysical Zaboratory and editor of the AAAS magazine
     Science, criticized the mechanism for providing the President with
     scientific advice. I n a speech in Houston, he said: “Too much
     power is concentrated in a few overworked people, most of whom
     are of limited competence. The secrecy of the operations and the
     power invoked must inevitabl lead to corruption, either of the
                                    3
     intellect or of the purse. . .       As to the President’s Scientific
      Adviser, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Abelson charged he c6hasac-
      cumulated more visible and invisible power than any scientist
      in the peacetime history of this country . . .” and was a man who
      had failed “to engage in forward planning” of science policy.
      (Simons, Wash. Post, 11/20/63)
November 20: Senate passed (72-1) the appropriations bill for Inde-
      pendent Offices (H.R. 8747), which included the NASA FY 1964
      appropriations, and sent the bill to a conference committee to rec-
      oncile Senate and House versions. Senate amendments included
      one by Sen. Proxmire cutting N A s h appropriations by $90 million
      ($80 million from R&D, $10 million from construction of facilities),
      bringing the total NASA appropriation approved by the Senate
      down to the $5.1 billion approved by the House; and one by Sen.
      Anderson requiring NASA to notify Congress 30 days in advance
      of any transfer of R ~ funds in excess of $250,000 to construction
                               D
      of facilities. Amendments defeated included the one by Sen.
      Fulbright to cut the NASA ap ro riation by 10% ($519 million).
                                  i”8
       (CR,                                11/21/63; Wash. Post, 11/21/
              11/20/63, 21339-382;
      63)
  President Kenned congratulated the U.S. delegation to the recent
                       IY
      International elecommunications Union conference in Geneva,
      said the conference “has been one of the most successful of its
      kind held in recent times.” The U.S. and the ComSatCorp “can
      now take practical steps, in cooperation with other governments
      and foreign business entities to develop a single global communi-
      cations system.” Reassuring small countries on their role in the
      communications satellite system, the President said : “It continues
      to be the policy of the United States that all countries which wish
      to partici ate in the ownership, management and use of this
               P
      system n-i 1 have the opportunity to do so.” (MacKenzie, Wash.
      Post, 11/21/63)
  President’s report to Congress on U.S. participation in the U.N.
      during 1962 stated:
        “In two otlier fields the United Nations has continued to be a
      vital instrument to effect a disengagement in important sectors
      of the great ower confrontation. The Organization has served
                   f
      as a forum or encouraging an agreement for the cessation of
      nuclear weapon testing and for promotin progress toward gen-
                                                 F
      eral disarmament. It has served, as we 1, as a mechanism for
     negotiatin legal principles and technical cooperation in outer
             d
      space.        must be no less concerned with these persistent efforts
      to shape the future within the framework of the United N a t’    ions
      Charter than we are with United Nations operations designed to
      respond to the alarm bells of the present.” ( C R ,11/20/63,21321)
                                                                   441
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,       1 963

November 24: Lewis scientists reported on studies of radiation
     henomenon they believe caused VANWARD 1’s voice to change.
    br. Jim Blue, Lewis scientist, attributed the ‘‘voice change” to a
   structural chan e inside Van ard’s quartz crystal. VANQUARD I,
                    f             &
   launched Marc 17, 1958,              noted the earth’s pear shape,
         Release 63-93, Lewis Chronology, 11)
    (LW:
 Tass reported that a                            scientist, Prof. Gleb
   Chebotarev,
   the moon Mars,
               04
    regions     outer space around the moon, Venus, Mars and Mer-
    cury where stable movement of artificial satellites is possible have
   been determined by means of electric machines at the Theoretical
   Astronomy Institute.” (UPI, NPT, 11/21/63)
 DOD announad the transfer of the Naval Missile Facility a t Point
    Arguello, Calif., and Navy trackin stations in the Pacific to the
                                        %
    USAF and the establishment within t e USAF of a central authority
    to act as single manager for ICBM and space tracking activities,
    including AMR, ICBM and s m activities ak Point Arguello and
                                 p
    Vandenberg AFB, Calif., and the Air Force Satellite Control
    Facility, Sunnyvale, Calif. USAF also acquired on-orbit control of
   DOD satellites except Navy navi tional satellites and military
    communicationS satellites. (DOD%~- 149443)
 Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aero-
    nautics and Space Council, speaking before the Atomic Industrial
    Forum Conference in New York, said that nuclear energy was
    essential to the space program and offered larger potential in space
    applications than in terrestrial ones. “One of the major defects
    in s ace think’ today is that it is too ‘short-run’. There is a
                    Y
    tengncy to thin only from budget to budget rather than from
    decade to decade. It has taken great effort-not altogether suc-
    cessful-to get people to think as long-run as a manned flight to
    the mean In terms nf whslt s p r p tmw1 and spsm exploration
    mean to this country, the lunar objective is really a short-run
    target. Yet, some people think of it as the final space goal which
    is so far in the future that it can be further delayed without
    serious effects. If we are to think clearly about space, it is im-
                             i e the lunar program for what it is, Le.,
    portant that we re        z
                        “g;”
    only one of the initia steps in a very young rogram. I believe
                                                   P
    that those who understand and support nuc ear energy in space
    have a responsibility to educate others in the lon -run,      broad-
                                                            $
    based view of space. . . . I am suggesting that, i we can get
    people to realize now that space travel and space exploration are
    permanent features of the economy, the idea of nuclear energy
    will automatically be considered a major element in the program.”
     (Text)
  An American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft believed to be returning
    from a mission over Cuba had crashed into the Gulf of Mexico
    40 mi. north of Key West. An air-sea rescue search failed to
    recover the pilot. (UPI, Wash. Post, 11/21/63)
  Sen. Glinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.) ,Chairman of the Senate Com-
    mittee 011 Aeronautical and Space Sciences, spoke to the 1963
    Annual Conferenoe of the Atomic Industrial Fonun in New York
    on the relationship between Congress and science. Sen. Ander-
     741-623
442           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

   son offered four main reasons for the new level of Congressional
   concern over the Federal investment in science and technology:
     1) cost consciousness ; (2) “the belief among some Members that
      bngress has lost the ability to overseeeffectively the vast diffusion
   of R&D activities for which it appropriates funds”; (3) “concern
   that the procedures of Congress, in some respects, may not measure
   up to the demands of ‘big science’”; and (4) “criticism of the
   space program as ‘moon madness’ and ‘lunacy’ gets lumped in
   with the criticism of heavy spending for research and develop-
   ment.” Sen. Anderson agreed with the aims of those who were
   cost conscious, although he noted that many MD programs that
   had been canceled as “failures” had in fact left a valuable
   technological legacy to subsequent programs. He agreed that
   Congress needed more advice on technical matters, but doubted
   that the need would be solved by Congress hiring its own tech-
   nical staff; rather it needed more help from specially convened
      anels; more engineering advicesince the bulk of the Nation’s
      i
      15 billion annual investment in science and technology is in the
   engineering of hardware rather than in science; improved presen-
   tations b the Executive De artment, including more briefing
   by the O&ce of Science and $echology ; expansion of channels
   of information such as Library of Congress, NAS, NSF; reports
   by the scientific and engineering communities to Congress on,the
    state of science and of engineering; and more long-term planning.
     (CR,12/3/63,2199’7-22000
November 20: First award of                    established Burroughs In-
    ternational Ts Pilot
                  et                           to Joseph T. Tymczyszym,
    Chief of FAA’S West Coast Supersonic Transport Office. The
    award presented by FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby at the
   Wings Club in New York was established by United Aircraft
    Corp. in honor of Richard H. Burroughs, Chance Vought test
    pilot who was killed when he stayed with his disabled experi-
    mental aircraft to guide it away from an inhabited area. Award
    would be administered by Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., of New
    York. (FAA Release 63-96)
 Army fired a Pershing solid-fuel missile from Fort Wingate N.M.,
    260 mi. to White Sands Missile Range, N.M., in a public demon-
   stration of the battlefield missile prior to its deployment to Eu-
    rope early in 1964. This was the 15th firing of the Pershing to
                                             (Langguth, N Y T , 11/21/63,
    WSMR from various distances away.
    25 )
 USAF accepted the first two F 4 C tactical fighter aircraft into the
    Air Force inventory in ceremonies at MacDill AFB, Fla. The
    F 4 C is the Air Force version of the Navy’s F 4 B , combines into
    one aircraft the capabilit for close air support, interdiction, and
    air superiority. (DOD Rereease 1496-63)
November , ’ :President Kennedy visited San Antonio and Houston.
            %I
    I n San Antonio, he participated in the dedimtion of the new $6-
    million Aerospace Medical Health Center at Brooks AFB. “Too
    many Americans make the mistake of assuming that space re-
    search has no value here on earth. Nothing could be further from
    the truth,” the President said, and then went on to enumerate
                                                                   443
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    some of the advances in medical science and technique that had
    come from space research.
       Referring to the reduced NASA budget passed by the Senate the
    previous day, the President said : “There will be pressures for our
    country to do less and temptations to do something else. But
    this research must and will go ahead. That much we know.
    That much we can say with confidence and conviction . . . .
       “Our effort in space is not, as some have suggested, a competi-
    tor for the national resources needed to improve our living stand-
    ards. It is instead a working partner and coproducer of those
    resources.” (Wicker, NPT, 11/22/63 ; Kiker, N.Y. Be&
    Tribuoze, 11/22/63)
November 91: USAF Outstanding Unit Award was presented to the
    Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine for having “formulated
    new scientific concepts and performed original research of great
    national and international significance.” Award was made dur-
    ing ceremonies in which President Kennedy dedicated the school’s
    new facilities at Brooks AFB, Tex. (Air Force Magazine, 1/63,
    84)
  First rocket to be launched from India was achieved as the result
    of the coordinated effo- of Franm, India, and the US. The
    Nike-Apache, launched from Thumba., the site near the southern
    tip of India that would become an international rocket launchin
                                                                      5
     facility for IQSY experiments, reached a altitude of 106 mi., an
                                              n
    was the first of four sodium-vapor expriments to determine speed
     and direction of upper rctmosphere wmds. (NASA Release 63-105 ;
    NASA Rpt. of S. Rkt.Launching,12/12/63)
  GSFC announced that under a $2 million contract now under final ne-
    gotiation, Sperry Rand Corp.’s Univac Div. would deliver eleven
                                                                      s
    Model 1218 computer s stems to manned space flight trackin
                             g
     stations for operation y July 1964. These computers woul
     aut~maticn!!y surr,mirize telemetry frnm the spaceem ft, Frovide
     summaries for display in the mission control center so that the con-
    trollers can select and examine certain data on a real-time basis,
     and prepare the telemetry data for final processing in the more
     elaborate computers at GSFC and MSC. During the Mercury pro-
     gram, controllers at the tracking stations had to select data manu-
     ally. (GSFC Release G-26-63)
  Text of US.-U.S.S.R. agreement on legal principles of space explo-
     ration was released at the U.N. in New York. The document
     would be brought before the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful
     Uses of Outer Space on Nov. 22. Even if approved, the state-
     ment of principles would not be legally binding on U.N. members.
     The plan was for two treaties based on the principles to be sub-
     mitted to member nations early in 1964. The treaties would cover
      (1) rescue and return of astronauts and space vehicles, and (2)
     liability for death, injury, or damage caused on earth by space
     vehicles. (Wash. Post, 11/22/63; Text, NYT, 11/22/63, 18)
  British scientisl Dr. John F. Kerridge of Univ. of London reported
     at the cosmic dust conference in New York sponsored by the New
     York Academy of Sciences that he had found material in meteor-
444                                                19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   ites that closely resembled the kinds of clays formed by water
   action on earth. This would argue that the meteorites were once
   part of a body large enough to have its own atmosphere and
   hence its own weather. This supported previous findings by Dr.
   Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham Univ., who also claims to have
   found fossil-like objects in meteorites. (Sullivan, N Y T ,
   11/22/63,32)
November 21 : Dr. Jerome B. Wiemer, Scientific Adviser to the Presi-
    dent, defended himself and his staff against charges by Dr. Philip
   Abelson the previous day. Testifying before the Senate Commit-
    tee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in favor of continuing
             graduate training program, Dr. Wiesner said of Abelson :
    NASA’s
    “His statement is so inconsistent that it’s hard to answer. He
    m u s e d me of being a czar . . . but also said I haven’t done
    much.” Wiesner defended his staff against Abelson’s charge that
    they were not outstanding scientists: “A Nobel Prize winner is
    not necessarily the best man to advise the President.” (Wash.
    Post, 11/22/63)
 Testifyin before the House Select Committee on Government Re-
           gbr
    search, . Vannevar Bush said :
       “The spectacular success of applied research during the war
    led to a fallac entertained by many. I t is that any problem
                    $
    can be solved y gathering enough scientists and giving them
    enough money . . . . It is folly to thus proceed. The great scien-
    tific steps forward originate in the minds of gifted scientists,
    not in the minds of promoters. The best way to proceed is to
    be sure that really ins ired scientists have what they need to work
                          7
    with, and leave them a one.
        “If the country pours enough money into research, it will inevi-
    tably support the trivial and the mediocre. The supply of scien-
    tific manpower is not unlimited.
        “In any broad pro ram of research the keyword in regard to
                          %
     any one aspect of t e program is ‘relevance.’ It is a ood
     word to have in mind in examining any research program. 8om-
     petent directors of research know what it means. Probably
     ‘conducive to progress toward the main object of a [Tgram’
     is as good a definition as any. Just finding out somet ing new
     is not by itself sufficient justification for research. It needs to
     mean something when we find it.
        “When scientific programs are judged by popular acclaim we
     inevitably have over-emphasis on the spectacular. That is just
     what we have today. The deeply important scientific advances
    moving today are not easy to understand. I f they were they
     would have been accomplished long ago. Outstanding scientific
     progress, which will most affect the lives and health of our chil-
     dren, is not grasped by many.”
        Objecting to the practice of the government and the armed
     forces of utilizing universities in the management of secret pro-
     grams, Bush said :
        “It should never be forgotten that the main task of the univer-
     sities is to educate men. The country will need skilled profes-
     sional men in the future as much as it will need new knowledge.
                                                            4-45
             ASTRONAUTICS AND mRONAUTICS, 19 63

   As we now go we are not meeting this challenge sufficiently.
   Every research program placed in a university should be so
   ordered that its product is not only new lmowledge but skilled
   educated men.” (Text)
November 21 :The House Republican task force on space and aeronau-
   tics issued a 15-page report on the Administration’s space pro-
                 Main criticism was that the military space program was
                             ‘ o little progress has been made toward the de-
                              To
   =neglected.
    velopment of a strategic space capability. I n fact, the tendency
    of the present Administration is in the opposite direction-away
    from any military capability in space whatsoever other than aon-
    ventional unmanned missiles.” Meanwhile, the report charged,
   the civilian space program “has grown so big so fast that waste
    and inefficitmcy have been all too inevita!ble.” Althou h NASA
   was taking some steps to tighten controls, i t “could a n f should
   do more.” I n international space agreements, the report charged
   that the U.S. had given more than it received in the agreements
   reached with the Soviet Union. Furthermore it contended that
   the Administration was usurping the powers of C o n r s s by
   entering into a series of space agreements without su mitting
    them to the Senate for its advice and consent. Finally, the report
    expressed concern over rising costs of Federal U D and its com-
    petition with industry. ‘‘Com etition between Government and
                                P
    industry in research and deve opment appears to be increasing
    rather than decreasing, with industry operating at a natural and
    unnecessary disadvantage. This apparent imbalance should be
    corrected.” ( N P T , 11/22/63,21)
  The old question of whether sun spots affect human behavior
    received new empirical evidence. Drs. Howard Friedman, Robert
    0. Becker, and Charles H. Bachman of the State Univ. of New
    York .and Syracuse Univ., reported on a study they had made
    *
                                                            PO& ~ ~ ~ h k t ~
    111 W I I K I ~ ilie daily tldiiiisioii iaie in wveii
         1     1
                                                                 p
    hospitals was compared with the daily variation in the earth’s
    magnetic field over a period of four years. The comparison
    revealed that “the greater the intensity of the earth’s magnetic
    field due to ‘sun spots’ and other natural interference wmin out
    of the cosmos, the higher the rate of psychiatric hospital a&s-
    sions.” The effect was explained by the fact that all creatures
   with central nervous systems operate on self-generated, direct-
    current electricity. The same is true of radio transmitters and
    receivers. I n both cases the electric impulses must travel thro
                                                             ?ih
   the earth’s magnetic field. This magnetic field is norma y
    smooth flowing. On1 when it is disturbed does radio trans-
                       2
    mission suffer. The octors reasoned that the same thing might
    occur in the human nervous system. ‘phe dolctors concluded:
    “Speculatively, the results are in keeping with the conception
    of the behavior of an organism being significantly influenced,
    through the direct-current control system, by external force fields
    Attention is thus invited to a hitherto neglected dimension i the   n
    complexity of psychopathology specifically, and perhaps generally
    in all human behavior.” (UPI, Wmh.Post, 11/22/63)
446            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

November 91: Donald K. Slayton was sworn into his Civil Service ap-
     pointment as Assistant Director for Flight Crew operations, MSC.
     His resignation from the USAF had become effective the previous
     day. (MSC Release 63-242)
November 2’ President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas,
              %:
     Tex. Within two hours of the President’s death, Vice President
     Lyndon B. Johnson had taken the oath as the 36th President of
     the U.S., aboard Air Force No. 1, the Presidential jet aircraft.
     ( N Y T , 11/24/63, E l )
 President Kennedy, speaking at a breakfast in Ft. Worth a few
     hours before his assassination, mentioned as part of the growing
     strength of the U.S. the development of the TFX aircraft :
         “There’s been a good deal of discussion about the long and
     hard-fought competition to win the TFX contract ; but very little
     discussion about what this plane will do.
         “It will be the first operational aircraft ever produced that
     can literally spread its wings through the air. It will thus give
     us a single plane capable of carrying out missions of speed as well
     as distance; able to fly very far in one form, or very fast in
     another.
         “It can take off from rug ed, short airstrips, enormously in-
     creasing the Air Force’s abzity to participate in limited wars.
     The same basic plane will serve the Navy’s carriers, saving the
     taxpayers at least one billion dollars in costs if they built separate
                               and the Air Force.” ( N Y T , 11/24/63, 2)
     planes for the Na
  I n the speech whichyresident Kennedy was on his way through
     Dallas to deliver when he was assassinated, the President had
     prepared a statement on US. preparedness. After reviewing the
     improvements in military readiness, the President would have
     said :
         “I have spoken of strength largely in terms of the deterrence
      and resistance of aggression and attack. But, in today’s world,
      freedom can be lost without a shot being fired, by ballots as well
     as bullets. The success of our leadership is dependent upon re-
      s ect for our mission in the world as well as our missiles-on a
      f
     c ear recognition of the virtues of freedom a well as the evils of
                                                     s
     tyranny . . . .
         “And that is also why we have regained the initiative in the
     exploration of outer space-making an annual effort greater than
     the combined total of all space activities undertaken during the
      fifties-launching more than 130 vehicles into earth orbit-puttihg
      into actual operation valuable weather and communications satel-
     lites-and making it clear to all that the United States of Amer-
     ica has no intention of finishing second in space.
         “This effort is expensive-but it pays its own way, for freedom
     and for America. For there is no longer any fear in the free
      world that a Communist lead in s ace will become a permanent
     assertion of supremacy and the fasis of military superiority.
      There is no longer any doubt about the strength and skill of Amer-
     ican science, American industry, American education and the
     American free enterprise system. I n short, our national space
      effort represents a great ain in, and a great resource of, our na-
     tional strength . . . .” f N Y T , 11/24/63,2)
                                                                                                          447
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

November 22: The first live transmission of TV signals across the
   Pacific Ocean was accomplished via RELAYI communications satel-
   lite. The U.S. ground station in the Mohave desert transmitted
   the pictures, which were relayed by the satellite to J a an’s new
   Space Communications Laboratory north of Tokyo. &ewers in
   Japan saw and heard taped messages from Japanese Ambassador
    Ryuji ‘hkeuchi and NASA Admmistrator James E. Webb, as
                                                                                            rwting
   well as scenic and cultural sequences. A message of
                                                                   that
   President Kennedy had taped for the occasion was eleted when
   word came in of his assassination a few hours before the broadcast
    was to take place. BBD and NBC-TV shared in producing the pro-
   gram. ( NASA Release 63-256 ;NPT, ll/24/63,14)
November 23: Communicationssatellites have been used for some time
   by AT^ to transmit a
   that normally would have gone
                                                      user and ask him
   call the telephone
    about the quality                                    vere told that
    they had talked via satellite, since part of the experiment was t o
    test the user’s psycholo ical reactions and these might have been
    affected by such knowle&e. Although the communications satel-
    lites are not licensed for commercial use, ATH would pay the U.S.
    government a fee for the time used for the experiments. On1 the
    medium-altitude Telstar and Relay satellites were used. ?Fin-
    ney, NYT, 11/24/63, 16)
November 24: The s ace pro am would not chan e greatly under the
                                                                                 %
    new President, %ndon         Johnson, William ines of the Wash-
    ington Sunday tar predicted: “The reasons are twofold and
    sim le.
       “hrst, Mr. Johnson is fully as enthusiastic about the space
    program as was Mr. Kennedy, if not more s . Second, the new
                                                   o
    President has been in on the space program from its start, and
    th-n.qmh +h,. v A mA-th,. F             D-,.,.: ,t
                                         .
                                         ,                      Um---d-’-                                 6XK-.
                   Q                                                                   t.
                                                                                        ,
                                                        .
                                                        -                                        -nm
                     x l U W l l L l l J VI L L W l d C L l l i 1 L G l l l l C U J                       UIL
                                                                                      3 lidUlG   VVpllu
    UIILVUglL bLXG

    Space.’ ”
      Mr. Johnson was head of the Senate Preparedness subcommittee
    at the time the U.S.S.R. launched SPUTNIK I, Hines pointed out.
    As Senate Majority Leader he caused the inquiry into US. space
    posture and s arked the special Senate committee that later be-
                          B
    came the stan ing Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences.
      “More than any other one man, President Johnson is personally
          nsible for the National Aeronautics and S a e Act o 1958
                                                     pc        f
    an the sprawling agency which it created . . . .
      “With the advent of the Kennedy administration, the space
    program immediately grew in importance, largely through Mr.
    Johnson’s urging. The Space A t was amended to make the Vice
                                   c
    President head of the [Space] council . . . .
      “Under then Vice President Johnson, the council took on real
    meaning. . . .
      “The Johnson-organized council staff prepared the studies
    which the Vice President used to persuade President Kennedy
    i the sprin of 1961 that a manned lunar landin should be
     n
                                                  (Hines, fvash. Sum
    undertaken k f o r e the decade is out.”’
    Star, 11/24/63)
448           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         196 3

November 2’4: A roup of scientists met in Seattle to discuss polic for
                                                                    8
                  #
    the Pacific cience Center. Formerly the U.S. exhibit at eat-
    tle’s Century 21 Exposition, the Center is located in the six-
    building complex covering more than six acres, it havin been
    leased by the Government to the nonprofit Pacific Science &enter
    Foundation. A 12-man science advisory committee headed by
    Paul A. Scherer, former associate director of the National Science
    Foundation, would advise on policy and exhibit content as part
     of the effort to convert the area into a permanent institution.
     It would become part of the 74-acre Smttle Center. (Davies,
    NYT, 11/24/63, 18)
November 25: President John F. Kennedy was buried in Arlington
     National Cemetery in a s t a b funeral attended by the largest
       athering of foreign dignitaries ever to visit Washington.
     4hroughout the four days of stark events, the Nation and the
     world participated to a degree never before possible by means
     of round-the-clock T V coverage that raised that young medium
     to a new dimension for thoroughness, maturity, and sensitivity.
     RELAY I communications satellite enabled all of Europe, includ-
     ing the U.S.S.R., to view the funeral ceremonies. The satellite
     also provided transmission across the Pacific to Japan, where an
     estimated 95 million persons viewed the ceremonies. ( N Y T ,
     11/26/63)
  Stratoscope I1 balloon was launched from Palestine, Tex., landed
     near Kosciusko, Miss., some 18 hrs. later, having lifted a 31/2-ton
     36-in. telescope some 80,000 ft. where the telescope, viewing space
     from a point above 95% of the earth’s interfering atmwphere,
     photographed the infrared light coming from Jupiter, the moon,
     and two giant red stars. D .Marvin Schwarzchild, of Prince-
                                    r
     ton Univ. and head of the scientific team, said they were hopeful
     that the photographs would provide another piece of evidence on
      the life cycle of stars. NSF, which has sponsored the series of
      Stratoscope balloon flights along with ONR and NASA, termed the
      flight “very successful.” (Wash. Post, 11/28/63, L5 ; N Y T ,
      12/3/63, 46)
  I n an article in Missile and Rockets, NASA Administrator James
      E. Webb emphasized the importance of the engineer in the
      space program :
         “Durin this period of intensive research and develo ment, it
                                                                8
              f
      becomes oubly important for industry, the press, an NASA to
      tell the workshop and test site story as well as the launch site
      story. The role of the space engineer must be brought out as
      clearly as the achievements of space scientists and the astro-
      nauts . . . . ” ( M d R , 11/25/63)
  Missiles and Rockets article on NASA’s         advanced research pro-
      gram said: “The mtest single obstacle to development of
      new and improve8 rocket en hes-large             or small-lies   in
                                       f
      certain peculiar sounds emitted y powerplants in o eration.
                                                            E
         L C Commonly called screech, screaming, squealing or uzzing, the
      sounds are all manifestations of combustion instability-one of
      least understood characteristics of a rocket engine.
                                                                    449
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

         “The key to the lack of knowledge and understanding of the
     phenomenon is in the very complexity of the combustion process
     within the engine.” (M&R, 11/25/63,63)
N o v e d e r 26‘: NASA successfully launched EXPLORER XMIE, the Inter-
        laneterg Monitoring Probe (Imp), from AMR on a Thm-Delta
     L e r . Intended to have an apogee of 173,000 mi. and a perigee
     of 125 mi., EXPLURER xvm mas tracked as havin an apogee of
                                                        %
      122,800 mi. and a perigee of 120 mi., with an or ita1 penodof
     about four days, and an inclination of 33.3”. Essentia ly a con-
     tinuation of the series of energetic particle spacecraft and similar
     in design and in some experiments to the earlier EXPLOBEBB xn,
     xrv, and xv, its 35 lbs. of instruments would measure the major
     magnetic field phenomena in space, including the interplanetary
     magnetic field, interactions of the streaming solar plasma and
                               a
      the geomagnetic field, alactic and solar radiation. (NASA
     Releases 63-249,261; W m .Post, 11/27/63)
  Two sounding rockets were launched from Wallops Station, Va., a        s
      NASA provided launching, tracking, and data acquisition for two
      related Univ. of Michigan experiments investigating characteris-
      tics of the upper atmosphere. A Nike-Apache was launched to
      103 mi., with a 70-lb. payload chiefly comprised of an ion mass
      spectrometer to measure air density and composition as a function
      of altitude. Shortly thereafter, a Nike-Cajun was launched to
      81 mi. with a 56-lb. payload chiefly composed o three 26-in. mylar
                                                        f
      balls which were ejected a t intervals and their descent and drift
      tracked as a measure of wind direction and velocity and atmos-
      pheric densit . (NASA Release 63-106)
                    I
  First complete ight system test of the Sed (space electric rocket
     test) payload under simulated space conditions a t Lewis Research
      Center. Two engines in the S r package mould be the first elec-
                                       et
      tric engines to operate in space. (Lewis Chronology, 11)
              cc.    a..r?cncced thRt it apnnld join with Ca_l?n_da_’S
                                                                    FedPm1
  ZCA TTictcr
      Transport Department in building a $5-million experimental sta-
      tion in eastern Canada to serve as a space relay station for voice
      transmissions from overseas. The station would be operated un-
      der an agreement between Canada and NASA. (m, NYT,
      11/27/63, 21)
  TELSTAR II communications satellite brought live American televi-
      sion to the Soviet Union for the first time in the weekend of re-
      porting on the assassination of President Kennedy and the mourn-
      ing and funeral that followed. Zmestia devoted one whole page
      of its four pages to an analysis of the ironic events. Entitled
      “Texas and Telstar,” the article pointed out that Telstar, “the
      technical wonder of the 20th century, came into our lives with
      America’s mourning and brought us the c r y of battle, a battle
      between light and darkness raging this week on the other side of
      the earth.
          “Only the darkest Spanish Inquisition could have produced the
      Scenes that were flashed by the American satellite . . . .
450                                                 19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     “We have seen the grief of the American nation and rofoundly
                                                             R
   sympathize with it. We have seen a mad detective t riller and
   we reject it with contempt and anger.” (Shabad, NYT, 11/27/63,
   17)
November 2 : USN launched a Polaris A-3 missile off U.S.S. Ob-
           6
   servation Island missile support ship, had to destroy the missile
   52 sec. after launch when it went off course. (M&R, 12/9/63,
      3
Nove er 27: NASA launched the first successful Atlas-Centaur s ace
   booster from A=.      The booster performed perfectly and the Een-
   taur second stage ignited its liquid-hydrogen engines in s ace and
   went into orbit as the heaviest object (10,500 lbs.) yet or ited by
   the U.S. Orbital data were later announced to be : apogee, 1,050
   mi.; perigee, 340 mi.; period, 108 min.; and inclination, 30”.
   Although another six flights remained before the Centaur could
   be considered operational, this first successful flight of the high-
    energy liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen booster was a major land-
   mark in a development program dogged with delays and dis-
      x
    ap ointmeiits. The previous launch attempt, on May 8, 1962,
    en ed 55 sec. after launch in fiery explosion when the weather
    shield ripped off the Centaur second stage. I n a press conference
    after the launch, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space
    Sciences and Applications Edgar M. Cortright spoke of the
    launching as “the world’s first successful flight of a hydrogen-
    oxygen rocket.” Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis
    Research Center and the man who personall oversaw the re-
                                                     B
   working of Centaur during the past year, ad ed that the flight
    was “the first test of our ability to successfully ignite hydrogen
    on time in space.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/28/63 ; Benedict,
    Wmh. Post, 11/28/63; Witkin, N Y T , 11/28/63 ; NASA Releases
    63-254-26 1)
  X-15 NQ. 3 was flown to 89,800 ft. and :?+&lo m h (mach 4.94), by
    NASA pilot Milton 0. Thompson. “his was Qhompson’s second
    flight m the X-15 and was intended to familiarize him with the
    extreme altitude control of the rocket research aircraft. (M&R,
    12/9/63,10; X-15Project Office)
  President Lyndon B. Johnson addressed a joint session of Congress,
    his first major speech since assuming the Presidency on Nov. 22
    following the assassination of President Kennedy : “The greatest
    leader of our time has been struck down by the foulest deed of our
             ..
    time..
       “The dream of conquering the vastness of space-the dream of
    partnership across the Atlantic and across the Pacific as well-
    the dream of a Peace Corps in less developed n a t i o n e t h e dream
    of education for all of our children-the dream of jobs for all who
    seek them and need them-the dream of care for our elderly-the
    dream of an all-out attack on mental illness-and above all, the
    dream of equal rights for all Americans, whatever their race or
    color-these and other American dreams have been vitalized by
                                         . .”
    his drive and by his dedication . .        (CR,  11/27/63, 21734)
                                                                    451
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

November B: NASA signed Memorandum of A eement with Military
              ‘
     Sea Transportation Service ( MSTS) rovigng ocean transporta-
                                           P
     tion services between US. ports for wge Saturn launch vehicle
     stages and supporting equipment in connection with the manned
     lunar landin pro            ( N m 739,2/10/64)
                 % Em’
   mc-engineers m r i d base-heating studies being performed on
     Saturn V Apollo rockets Base-heating can be a Severe problem
     with rocket vehicles pouring out exhaust gases a t temperatures as
     high as 6000°F. Similar studies were performed on Saturn I.
      (LRC Release 63-95, LewisChronology, 12)
   NASA’s liquid-hydrogen engin designed to provide 200,000 lbs.
           5-2
                                     3
     of thrust for upper stages of the aturn I B and Saturn V boosters,
     successfully underwent its first extended duration ground test
     fuulg, a static firing of 510 s8c. The 5-2 had been desi e for a
                                                                   d
     duration of 250 sec. and had been undergoing ground g i n g s for
     that duration since Oct. 1962. Recently the requirements were
     changed to provide the longer burning time. (Marshaa Star,
     12/4/63,3)
   Feasibility of operating large numbers of ion engines together was
     established when Lewis Research Center successfuly operated an
      array of nine ion engines under simulated space conditions. (LIE
      Chronology)
   USAF launched a Thor-Agena D booster carrying an unidentified
      satellite, from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. Also launched that day
     was a Minuteman ICBM in what was termed a routine training
      launch. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/28/63)
   The Air Force accepted the first Titan I 1 engines from Aerojet-
                                               1
      General Corporation in Sacramento. The engines were the first-
      and second-stage liquid-fuel engines for the Titan I I I A (core)
      of the Titan IIIC. To ether they produce a combined thrust of
      530,000 lbs. (A-N-A#aoUTnal and Register, Jan., 1964)
it’overn6er an;    Pr-eGCleui $ohson &hxd prsid TEdcsgg~kg
                                                B
      Day message to the American people via T V and radio, less than
      one week after he assumed the duties of the Presidenc upon the
                                                             i
      assassination of President Kennedy. “All of us ave lived
      through seven days that none of us will ever forget . . . .
        “A great leader is dead ; a great nation must move on. Yester-
      day is not ours to recover, but tomorrow is ours to w n or lose . ...
                                                           i
         “And to honor his memory and the future of the works he
      started, I have today determined that Station No. 1of the Atlantic
      Missile Range and a NASA launch operations center in Florida
      shall hereafter be known as the John F. Kennedy Space Center.
         “Ihave also acted today with the understandin and the su port
      of my friend, the Governor of Florida, Farris Ifrysnt, to J a n g e
      the name of Cape Canaveral. It shall be known hereafter as
      Cape Kennedy.” (0,         Wmh. Post, 11/29/63)
   SYNCOM II successfully performed a velocity correction maneuver,
      usin the lateral H,O, jet to correct a westward drift of -104”
         %
      per ay. The jet performed as expected; drift after correction
      was - . W 5 ” per day. (GBFC Historian)
452           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

November $9: President Johnson signed the Executive Order estab-
    lishing the John F. Kennedy S ace Center :
       “WHEREAS President John F Kennedy lighted the imagination
                                  !
    of our people when he set the moon as our target and man as
    the means to reach it; and
       “WHEREAS the installations now to be renamed are a center
    and a symbol of our country’s peaceful assault on space; and
       “WHEREAS it is in the nature of this assault that it should test
    the limits of our youth and grace, our strength and wit, our vigor
    and perseveranm-qualities fitting to the memory of John F.
    Kennedy :
       “NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the authority vested in me as
    President of the United States, I hereby designate the facilities
    of the Launch Operations Center of the National Aeronautics and
     Space ,Qdministration and the facilities of Station No. 1 of the
    Atlantic Missile Range, in the State of Florida, as the John F.
    Kennedy Space Center; and such facilities shall be hereafter
     known and referred to by that name.” (Marshli Star, 12/11/63,
     2)
  Soviet news agency Tass announced that U.S.S.R. would launch a
     test series of “new, improved types of rocket boosters for space-
     craft” and designated two areas in the Pacific Ocean (Area I in
     the vicinit of 10” N latitude and 170” W longitude, Area I1
              d    latitude and 170” E longitude) as impact areas to
     near 35”
     be avoided by ships and aircraft from Dec. 2, 1963, through
     Jan. 25,1964. (Pravda, 11/29/63,1, AFSS-T Trans.)
  President Johnson signed H. J. Res. 809, joint resolution making
     continuing appropriations for FY 1964 and for other purposes
     through Jan. 31, 1964. (P.L. 88-188) (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt.
    I1/l9?
  ComSat orp announced that John A. Johnson, NASA General
    Counsel since NASA was formed in 1958, Tcould become its Direc-
    tor of International Arrangements. NASA in turn announced
    that Mr. Johnson would be succeeded as General Counsel by
    Walter D. Sohier, Deputy Generd Counsel. (Wash. Eve. Star,
    11/29/63 ; ComSatCorp Release ; NASA Release 63-259)
  DOD announced that the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile had scored an-
    other successful interception against an ICBM. This 10th SUC-
    m s f u l Nike-Zeus interception was from Iiwajalein Atoll in the
    Pacific, the target a Titan I ICBM launched from Vandenberg
    AFB, Calif. DOD refused to state the date on which the intercep-
    tion took place. (DOD Release 1519-63; Wash. Post, 11/30/63)
  Re . Robert E. Jones (D.-Ala.) inserted in the C o n g r e s s M
    gecord an article by Eugene Patterson, editor of the At-
    lanta Constitution, in which Mr. Patterson noted with approval
    remarks by Dr. Wernher von Braun on the lunar program viewed
    as a “ ‘capital investment into the next few decades of space ex-
    ploration, both military and civilian.’ ” Patterson concluded : “It
    will be an incredible American performance if the United States
    shrinks back now from the space age into which von Braun
    dmgged us, kicking and protesting, and in which he is now having
    to struggle to keep us.” (GR,    11/29/63, A7320)
                                                                  453
                                                  19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

November % : USAF launched a Minutmnan ICBM from a undergmund
            9                                          n
   silo at Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (Wash. Post, 11/30/63)
November 30: QSFC announced negotiations with the Marine Engineer-
   ing Dept. of Northrop-Nortronics on a contract for design and
    construction of a huge 230-ton test chamber to simulate the launch
    phase of space flight for test of unmanned spacecraft and their
    components. The chamber would duplicate as near1 as possible
                                                           .t:
    the environmental conditions and the separate o r corn ined condi-
    tions of acceleration, noise, vibration, and vacuum. The Launch
    Phase Simulator was expected to cost approximately $1.9 million.
    (QSFC Release 6-27-63)
 Japan sent a note of protest to the U.S.S.R. in reaction to the Soviet
    announcement of Nov. 29 designating two areas in the Pacific as
    test areas for a new series of Russian rocket launchinp from Dec.
    2,1963, through Jan. 25,1964. Japan reserved the nght to claim
    dama es if any were incurred by Japanese as a result of the tests.
     ( AP,%ash. Eve. Star, 11/30/63)
 Two Soviet Ilyushin-18 transport a k m f t completed 15,OOO-de
    flight from Moamv to the R s i n Antarctic base of M i r n ~
                                     usa
    Director of the Leningrad Polar Institute, A. Treshnokov, said
    in New Zealand that such flights mi ht well inaugurate regular
                                         rf
    supply flights between Moscow an the Antarctic. (Reuters,
    wash,Post, 12/1/63, A29)
  Soviet Arm newspaper Red Star reported an account of a rocket
    failure t e first public mention of B rocket launching failure in
    the U.B.S.R. No date or program w s named, only a
                                            a
                                                                 T*
    heroism of a Lt. Col. Serebreynnikov. He reportedly pul ed ouk   Of
    a starting lug by hand after mechanism had failed, and only six
                 P
    seconds be ore the racket exploded. (AP, Wmh. Post, 12/1/63,
    A35kz o & c+&7kv”p Lyndon B. Johnson, writing in ithe
During member: Vice President
                                              ce., d
      is                      &przl                a
    yzll                   mzTwz>L?c &e                               :
                                   =f               E!&r;rC
       “Space is not a gambit. It is not a gimmick.
       “Our national activities in space research and exploration are
    no longer in the category of a gamble. We are able to talk seri-
    ously about explorations and journeys, 26 million miles away to
    the lanet Venus--or 47 million miles away to the planet Mars.
                                       I n the new A
       &e have come a long wa
                                                  f-  Of Space which
    brings us together, we are &stined to go a ong way further.
    Where the moon is a major goal toda ,it will be tomorrow a mere
    whistle stop for the space traveler. {confidently believe that the
    developments of the Space Age will bring the beginning of the
    longest and greatest boom of abundance and prosperity in the
    history of man.” ( C w e ,Fall 1963,244)
  The Marquardt Corp. of Van Nuys, Calif., has delivered 30 produc-
    tion units of its Roksonde 200-1 to West Germany. The sound-
    ing rockets would be used for meteorological testing at the Salto
    di Quirra Test Range in Sardinia. The meteorological data
    gatherin is part of the overall European effort i support of the
                                                     n
             7
    IQSY wor dwide programs As part of the program, the Mar-
      uardt Corp. will assist the West German government in two
    Taunching series. The first series was currently i progress,
                                                          n
454           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    scheduled for completion by mid-December ; the second would
   be completed in early 1964. (Marquardt Release, 11/21/63, SIN,
   Jan., 1964)
During November: JPL scientists Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and Ru-
    land L. Carpenter reported in Xcience magazine on recent radar
    experiments using an 85-ft. parabolic antenna at a tracking sta-
    tion in the Mohave Desert. The planet Mercury was found t o be
    quite rugged, more so than Mars and twice a rugged as Venus.
                                                     s
    The experiments also corroborated Mercury’s rotation period as
    88 days. (Science Service, N Y T , 11/6/63, 33)
 Reported in Aviation World (FZugwZt) that West Germany has a
    $25 million-budget to develop a series of 5 satellites to be built
    under NASA’s   established quality control standards. The satellite
    would consist of three parts: the satellite capsule with a recovery
    unit, the sun mirror, the energy converter. The first satellite
    recovery capsule would descend with the aid of a parachute;
    later models would include a winged glider version. Telemetric
    transmissions and subsequent evaluation would commence as soon
     as the satellite enters an Earth orbit. The second satellite and
     the remainder of the series would be equipped with engines that
     will permit changes in the orbital parameters. On the second
     satellite small solid fuel rockets would be used, but the following
     models could be equipped with ion engines.
        The satellite’s mission would include research in the guidance
     and direction stabilization systems during the launching investi-
    gation of the orbital rendezvous problems, as well as a study of the
     radiation belts. I n the case of the fifth satellite, the ion engines
     could be replaced with nuclear-powered engines to permit con-
     tinuous orbital changes and accelerate to an escape velocity.
     (Plugwelt (Aviation World),Nov., 1963; SIN, Jan., 1964)
  William B. Bergen, president of the Martin Co., writing in the
     November issue of Aerospace Management, expressed his approval
     of DOD’S new cost-plus-incentive-fee (CPIF) contracting as op-
     posed to the more conventional cost-plus-fixed-fee (CPFF) con-
     tracting that had existed in R B ~ Dwork for m e years. CPFF was
     necessary in the early days of missile work and of space tech-
     nology when “We had a critical time element and our technology
     was shaky.” Now, he said, “there aren’t enough projects . . . to
     fill the aerospace plants. CPIF is going to be a great catalyst in
     separating t8hemen from the boys in this business. Americans
     recognize talent by financial reward. I f you have it, you get; if
     you don’t have, you don’t get. CPIF will be a great f a h r in
     providing the measure and thp reward of the industry’s talents.”
      (CR,  11/19/63, A7150-51)
  Navy Bureau of Weapons’ astronautics group approved a study by
     the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and recom-
     mended that the Thor-Able-Star be substituted for the Scout as
     the launch vehicle for the Navy Transit navigational satellites.
     Navy had been dissatisfied with the reliability record of the NASA
     Scout boosters in the Transit program. (Au. Wk., 11/25/63,23)
  USAF w s studying a novel method of protectin           spacecraft from
           a
                                                     6
     meteoroid hits, according to Maj. Gen. Marvin . Demler (USBF) ,
                                                                                             455
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    Commander of the A F Research aBd Technology Div. USAF’S
    Fli h t Dynamics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson m,Ohio, was
       fi
    stu ying the concept of surrounding the spacecraft with a 40-in.-
    thick layer of metallic dust held in place by an electrostatic field.
    A meteoroid hitting the vibrating dust layer would be shattered
    or va rd (iK&R,11/25/63,29)
              i.
        Is“
D u & q ouember: Military role in the U.S. space program is u en-
    erally misrepresented and largely misunderstood,” Maj. Gen.%en
    I. Funk, Commander of A F Space Systems Div., told the World
    Affairs Council meeting in Los Angela. The national policy of
    using space for peaceful purposes “serves to put the military into
    space, not restrict space to purely non-military activities. What-
    every shape and direction our ventures into space ultimately take,
    military considerations cannot be separated from the political,
    economic, psychological, technological and sociological implica-
    tions of space development.” (M&R, 11/25/63,30)
  NASA and the Air Force began a t s of a 5-psi 100% oxygen environ-
                                    et
    ment in a &-day experiment with four airmen at Brooks AFB, Tex.
    It would include 7 days in the chamber in a normal atmosphere to
      ather base-line data, 30 days in the test atmosphere, one half day
    for detailed lung and eye examinations outside the chamber, and
    then 5 more days in the test atmosphere for “follow-up” observa-
    tions. Conducted jointly with NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
    the experiment should lay to rest fears about the debilitatin ef-
    fects of pure oxygen on lungs, blood, and other organs. AdfAE,
    December 1963,91)
  A solar array characteristics test was run on the orbiting BYNCOIKII
    synchronous-orbit communciations satellite. The test (on Nov.
    22) found a power loss of 20% from the effects of solar radiation
    on the solar cells during four months in orbit. The text confirmed
    the desirability of changing the next Syncurn satellite-Syncom
                                                                                      .
                                                                                      .
    e--frGrl                                                   _.-..1
                                                                ,. .-.
          rf                               nnc-:..                             : ~ ~ ll/1- L.
                                                                                       ~ p I.
                                                                                            .CIGLLU
                                                                                             ,
                         -..1in     .L+L .VUU 111.                               c..
              -1..                                   ,..,le,
                                                                       GL        liU
                     IL b G L l J   W le11           yUaLUA    W   V        UllUW

    with .012-1n. quartz cover slides. The newer n/p cells had shown
    in ground evaluation to last up to 20 times longer than conven-
    tional p/n cells. (GSFC Historian; Goddard News, 12/2/63,2)
  Reported in A ~ t ~ o n u u t and Aerospace Engineering that a “hitch-
                                ks
    hiker” satellite called Satar ( Satellite-Aerospace Research)
    would be built and tested by General Dynamics. A bullet-shaped
    spacecraft 12 ft. long and 30 in. in diameter, Satar would be in-
    corporated in Atlas missiles u e for training missions. It would
                                     sd
    consist of a payload section capable of accommodating “several
    hundred pounds of experiments” and a propulsion section in-
    cluding a solid-propellant motor, guidance, attitude control, and
    related equipment. Satar would be released after Atlas burnout
    and & about 15 min. before its own engine ignited to send it
    into orbit. First flight was scheduled for next spring. (A&AE,
    Nov. 1963,158)
                         DECEMBER 1963
Decembtw 1: Air Defense Command and FAA began combined opera-
    tions in Great Falls Sage (Semi-automatic Ground Environment)
    Direction Center at Malmstrom AFB, Mont., the event marking a
    milestone in military and civil air traffic control. FAA’S new Great
    Falls Air Route Traffic Control Center makes use of ADC’S opera-
    tional facilities, computers, long-range radars, and related equip-
    ment to provide air traffic control services to civil and military
    aircraft operating in about 135,000 sq. mi. of air space over Mon-
    tana and North Dakota. (FAA Release 63-102)
 RCA Board Chairman David Sarnoff, addressin American Friends
                                                   8
    of the Hebrew University in New York, pre icted vast scientific
    and technological developments in the years ahead that “are so
    fundamental that they will alter the very structure of society and
    compel each of us to readjust some of our traditional
                  ..
    concepts. .
        “Modern man-especially the would-be leader in society-has
    to be a culturally integrated individual, familiar with the sciences
    as well a the humanities. There cannot be two isolated cultures
              s
     for the simple reason that there is only one society in which to
           . ..
    live .
        “I would propose that scientific and cultural education begin
     with the earliest school years and extend without interruptlon
    through college and into the professional schools. Specifically,
     courses in the social sciences and humanities should be related to
    the physical sciences. It, seems to me highly desirable that science
     itself should be studied as a social phenomenon because of the
                                      . ..
     great impact it has upon society .
           .
        ‘‘. . scientific realities of tomorrow will surpass our vision of
     today. The great challenge before all of us is to make sure that
     the new knowledge and new instrumentalities shall be used con-
     structively and not destructively. The powers of science and
     technology are neither good nor evil in themselves. Their capac-
                                                         ..
     ity for ood or evil lies in the use we make of them . .” (Text,
     CR, 127/63,22087-89)
     456
                                                                     457
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

D e c e d e r S: Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the
     Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, an-
     nounced that revised testimony refuted the earlier contention that
     25 per cent of U.S. scientific manpower would be working on space
     programs by 1970: “I challenged the accuracy of that forecast.
     The next day the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Com-
     mittee began hearings on NABA’S relations with universities . . . .
         “The best estimatw are that 6 or 7 per cent-at most 10 per
                     be involved. That is a long way from bein
      cent-might
     excessive drain on scientific brainpower.” (UPI, NPT, 12/ 3g an  /63,
     47)
  Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee
     on Scienm and Astronautics, reviewed Centaur development in
     speech on the House floor :“. . . Centaur began as a low-priority,
     financially austere feasibility study, in Competition with high-
     priority defense programs. As its importance to the national
     spam effort became mpre apparent, its terms of reference were
     changed; and, a time a d , its inherent technical difliculties
                        s
                              Kn
     came to the surface; tec ical dficulkies, I might add, that we
     have learned to expect in most new rograms.
                                          R
        ‘‘Certainly, the original flight sc edule of Centaur was overly
     optimistic. Hindsight a s tells us 6hak the complexity of the
                                lo
     programwasgmitlyundemsthted . . . . ,         9

        Referring to press articles charging $100 million was wasted
     in Centaur program, based on GAO mvestigative report, Rep.
     Miller painted out :
        “That report was misinterpreasd by the press, and a closer
     look .at it will reved that no such conclusion was drawn b the
     Comptroller General.                   $100 million waste incyuded
                                   alleffed
     $76 million reportedly The in t e Advent project, the military
                               lost
     communications satellite project . . . .
        “While them a n be no cloiiht that certiin ~ z - c g z z ~inefimd
                                                                   s
     losses because of the unavailability of Centaur on schedule, it is
     incorrect and unfair to attribute the entire unrecoverable loss
     associated with the Advent pro,al.am to Centaur, as the press
     apparently did. Suffice it to say that the Advent project had
     its o m severe management and technical difficulties which led
     to its cancellation in June 1962.”
        He called the Nov. 27 flight test of AG-2 “a signiikant advance
     in the development of a new technology upon which much of
     America’s future space effort depends . . . .” (OR,12/2/63,
     21906 ff.)
  Political Committee of the U.N. General Assembly opened debate on
     report by the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
     s # c.
       1 Le




     741423-0
458            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,      19 6 3

       Addressing the Ill-nation Committee, U.S. Ambassador Adlai
   Stevenson said President Johnson instructed him to reaffirm the
    proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in exploration of the
   moon that President Kennedy had offered last September. But,
   Stevenson continued, “If giant steps cannot be taken at once, we
   hope that shorter ones can. We believe there are areas of work,
   short of integrating the two national prorgams, from which all
    could benefit. We should explore the opportunities for prac-
   tical cooperation, beginning with small steps and hopefully lead-
   in to larger ones.”
      ttressing that U.S. manned lunar program was only one part
    of the s ace program and that no more than 10 percent of the
   total U.g. space expenditure went directly for the lunar flight,
    he added : (‘Let me make clear that exploration of the moon is not
    a stunt, distinct from the outer-space program as a whole; nor
    is it, the exclusive concern of only two nat’
                                                ions.
       “Our policy of engaging in mutually beneficial and mutually
    supporting cooperation in outer space-with the Soviet Union ;\s
    with all nations-does not begin or end with a manned moon
    landing. There is plenty of work yet to come before that-and
    there will be even more afterward.” (Teltsch, N Y T , 12/3/63,
    1,14; L.A. Times, Wash.Post, 12/3/63,1)
December 2: NASA selected Douglas Aircraft Co. for negotiations
    leadin to follow-on study contract for refinement and evalua-
          !?
    tion o NASA manned orbital laboratory concept. Awarded on
    basis of Douglas performance of previous three-month study, the
    six-to-nine-month follow-on contract called for refining the NASA
    concept of a manned orbiting laboratory based on cylindrical six-
    man spacecraft. ( NASA Release 63-262)
 President Johnson’s active leadership in space program since early
    1958 was reviewed in Mi8sile.v and Rockets by Hal Taylor, who
    predicted the new President would give the space program even
    greater support than did President Kennedy. Added support
    could mean growth of military space projects, Taylor said, pos-
    sibly including assignment of manned space station development
    to USAF. But FY 1965 budget e i m a t e s would be virtually
    unchanged.
        Article in Aviation Week and #pace Technology indicated
    President Johnson was likely to ‘(play a more direct role than
     his predecessor in the nation’s military space and supersonic
    transport programs after the current transitional period, during
    which the emphasis is on showing the nation and the world that
    President Kennedy’s commitments will be fulfilled.” (M&R,
    12/2/63,14-15 ;Au. Wk., 12/2/63,26-27)
 On 21st anniversary of atomic age, Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer was
    presented the Enrico Fermi award, highest honor of the Atomic
    Energy Commission, by President Johnson in White House cere-
    mony. Citation honored Dr. IOppenheimer for his ‘‘wntr3bu-
    tions to theoretical physics as a teacher and originator of ideas
    and for leadership of the atomic energy program during critical
                                                                  459
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

    years.” Dr. O p nheimer headed select group of scientists who
    m 1942 ackiev3first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction at-
    Univ. of Chicago ; was director of Los Alamos Scientific L b r -
                                                                 aoa
    tory during World War 1 ; and since 1947 was director of
                                   1
    Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, N.J. (Finney, NPT,
    12/3/63,1)
December 6 Proposa,l that mixed-manned NATO forces take over um-
            :
    tml of 150 Minuteman missile sites in the U.S. was included in
    re rt of committee on NATO nuclear force t o Assembly of the
    &         European Union. The report,which strongly sup rted
    U.S. plan for a mixed-manned NATO nuclear fleet, stateBothat
    teams d e u of mixed NATO forces manning the U.S. Minute-
                  P
    man s i t s wou d have “mnsiderable political significance in dem-
    anstrating-to Americans as well as to Europeans-full NATO
    participation in the strategic deterrent based on the American
    Continent, which hitherto has been a purely American preserve.”
     (Middleton, NYT 12/3/63,15)
 Battelle Memorial institute predioted total US. &&D expenditures
    would reach $20 billion next year, $1.7 billion more than this year.
    Predicted breakdown : government, $13.9 billion ; industry, W.6
    billion ; academic and nonprofit institutions, $500 million.
     (M&R, 12/3/63,7)
 Indian Defense Mmistry spokesman announced Soviet MiG-21 air-
    craft to be built in India would be equipped with air-to-air guided
    missiles (AP, NYT,12/3/63)
  Prague radio disclosed that Czechoslovakia would buy Soviet Tu-
    124 jet airliners, new twin-engine craft desi ed for short-range
    and medium-range flights. (NPT, 12/3/63?
December 3-4: Fourth NASA Intercenter Conference on Plasma
    Physics held at NASA Hq., with Participants from NASA Hq. and
    installations as well as from universities and industries. (Pro-
    gram)
December 3: M-2 experimental wingless glider tested at Edwards
    AFB Calif., with Col. Charles Yeager (USAF) as pilot. The
    crait was towed to 9,000-ft. altitude, where Col. Yeager cut loose
    from the tow plane and glided down at rate of 4,000 ft. per min.
    Shortly before landing, Yeager tilted u p the M-2’s nose to reduce
    its 135-mph descent speed to 80 mph. T h e craft landed on its
    three-wheel gear and rolled to a sto in about 300 ft. T i was
                                                                hs
    &l. Yeager’s first flight in the NAsA-&veloped M-2 ;he remarked :
    “She handles great.” ( Wmh, Post, 12/4/63 ; Chic. Trib.,
    12/4/63)
 NABA scheduled the first S p a o m communications satellib tp be
    launched i t orbit in w h c h the satellite would truly remain st&
                no
    tionary with respect to the earth in orbit-synchronous, equato-
    rial, and circular-in the second quarter of 1964. Thrust-Aug-
    mented Delta (TAD)    launch vehicle would boost the spacecraft into
    22,300-mi. eccentric orbit from Cape Kennedy, and at apogee Syn-
    oom’s onboard kick m o b would place the satellite in circular or-
                      r
    bit. Equatorial       ition would be achieved by change of orbital
                  as t rd stage fires and again a kick motor fires a
    p1m-n-                                                             t
                                                   s
460           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   equatorial injection point. The s a m r a f t would then move to
    on-station position at 180” longitu dp over the Pacific Ocean, where
                                          e
    it would be stopped by onboard gas jets. The satellite will pro-
    vide the first continuous communications link between Asia and
    North America. (NASA Release 63-263)
December 3: A second disturbance on the moon has been observed by
    USAF lunar mappers at Lowell Observatory, USAF Aeronautical
    Chart and Information Center announced. Sioliting was made
    by Observatory Director Dr. John A. Hall a i 3 four other ob-
    servers Nov. 27 and lasted an hour and a half (first sighting
    Oct. 29 lasted 20 min.). Both sightings were near crater Aris-
    tarchus, both were ruby red, and both were seen when moon was
    in the same phase (sunlight returniiig to this surface area).
    Previous sighting was of three red spots, but this sighting was
    of single red area 12 mi. long and 11/2 mi. wide, insldei crater’s
    rim where one of first spots had been seen. Observation was
    confirmed bj astronomy graduate student Peter A. Boyce, a t Ohio
    State Univ.‘s Perkins Observatory. nr. Hall believed spots may
    be gases released from lunar interior by intense heat of the
    returning sunlight. (AP, San Diego Union, 12/4/63 ; T i m ,
    12/27/63, 54-55)
 AFSC announced recent three-day manned test of device to control
    the atmosphere in manned spacecraft was successfully conducted
    at AFSC Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Pat-
    terson AFB,. and the evaluation proved the automatic device was
    feasible for aerospace applications. Developed by Northrop
    Space Laboratories, the “nitrogen and oxygen indicator-controller
    assembly” senses percentage of oxygen, as well as total air pres-
    sure, inside simulated spxe capsule, automatically regulating flow
    of gases required to maintain desired nitrogen-oxygen ratio. I f
    controller fails, warning lights and buzzer alert crewmen to make
    necessary adjustments in oxygen or nitrogen manually. Volun-
   teers for the test were S / S g t Elvin H. Engle and A/2C Frank 0.
    Thornton. ( AFSC Release 310-23-105)
 Presidential Press Secretary Pierre Salinger announced President
   Johnson, in his review of the F Y 1965 budget estimate, was at-
    tempting to amive at a spending estimate “between $%? billion and
    $103 billion.” (Kenworthy, NYT, 12/4/63,1)
 Less than 24 hours after U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson’s re-
    affirmation of U.S. proposal for negotiations leading to U.S.-
   U.S.S.R. coo ration in lunar exploration, U.S.S.R. promised
                 ip”
    privately to mbassador Stevenson it would conduct a “detailed
    scientific study” of the U.S. proposals. Soviet sources disclosed
    two “stages” were being planned: first, “careful scrutin by the
                                                              d
    Soviet scientific community of possible areas of moon- ight co-
    operation ; thereafter, if conclusions are ‘positive,’ a joint stud
   b Soviet-American scientists.” (Frye, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/634
      B
 Ad ressing the Kokomo (Ind.) Chamber of Commerce, NASA Ad-
   minstrator James E. Webb remarked: “We are in a continuing
    competition for world leadership, and leadership in space has be-
    come an important element in this struggle . . . .
                                                                              461
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

        “It is logical that aggressive elements in the Soviet Union may
   hope to enter a new period of forward thrust by some startling
   breakthrough in space technology. The only may ve can make
   sure that this does not happen-the only way to safeguard our
   technological frontiers-is to pursue an active program of re-
   search and development over the entire range of space tmlmology.
   This includes manned space flight, the development of nuclear-
   powered rockets, electric propulsion for spacecraft, advanced com-
   munications, satellite observations of the global weather picture,
   lunar and planetary exploration, and acquisition of new under-
   standing of the basic forces operating in our solar system and
   the universe. The space frontier has many salients, many dif-
   ferent points of activity. We must not lag behind in any a m
   of space technology or our ability to deter aggression, in space
   and on earth, may be jeopardized . . . .
        ‘‘Most of those who question the value of the lunar program
   fail to appreriate that it involves much more than a single ex-
   pedition to the moon before 1970. Although the moon is the
   ultimate objective of the Apollo program, its main purpose is to
   develop our space cumpetence-our space muscle and space skills
   -at the most rapid pace consistent with good management, crew
   safety, and the efficient use of funds . . . .
        “Do we conclude that a vigorous effort to develop knowledge
   and capability in space science and technology, particularly given
   the long lead times involved in this development, is fruitless and
   extravagtnt until military requirements are clearly defined ? DO
   we fly in the face of history and assert that the enormous economic
      otential of space resewcli and exploration does not exist simp1
                                                                                  E
   kcause we cannot pinpoint all of the precise benefits R-hic
   such research will produce and which all the lessons of history
   tell us are there? Or do we, in the tradition which has made
                     __--
   L 1 1 1 3 L U U I l L L Y g*txd, ggpsp the op”rI?t”nitj. t G crG% 2 c!:a!!sEsn;l2g
             -
             .
             -
             .A
              -
   AT-:-


   new frontier and insure that the iiation will not sacrifice the op-
   portunity or risk the hazards which lie beyond?” (Text)
Decmber 3: Deputy Secretary of Defense Ramell L. Gilpatric dis-
   cussed management of military R B ~ Da t Chemical Engineering
   Achievemen$.Awards Dinner, New York City :
        “Ten ymrs ago, expenditures for defense research and develo -
                                                                                 E
   ment were at a level of about $2 billion or about 5% of the U. .
   military budget. Today the comparable figure is over $7 billion,
   or nearly 14% of the current Defense budget. Half of this
   total is for system development, a good deal of which represents
   prototype hardware. The other half represents the dollars that
   buy bra1n:power at the drawing board and in the labs-and now-
   adays I should add computer time . . . .
        “There are indications that we are seeing the beginning of a
      eriod of incmtsing Congressional concern and interest that may
   f&d t even tighter controls over m~expenditurn.. This change
              o
   in Congressional attitude is more than an expression of growing
   concern over deficit spending. I t reflects an increased awareness
   ofthenakionalirnportanceofmr). . . .
462           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

       “Today, fortunately, there can be no question about the suffi-
    ciency of American military power, either now or for the fore-
    seeable future. The 100% increase of strategic alert force mega-
    tonnage in the pzst, three years and the large and unquestioned
    U.S. lead in both bombers and missiles provide us with the kind
    of strength that permits us to go forward with our R ~ effort in
                                                                D
    a more orderly way . . . .“ (Text, DOD Release 1527-63)
December 3: New York Times editorialized : “. . . A singularly fitking
    international tribute to President Kennedy’s memory would be
    the realization soon of the dream of Soviet-American cooperation
    in space he voiced so eloquently in what we now know was his
    last formal statement, to all the world’s peoples.” ( N Y T ,
    12/3/63)
  Soviet Premier Khrushchev was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. had an
    ICBM that can fly around the globe in any direction.      “You wait
    for it at the door but i t climbs through the window,” Khrushchev
    was quoted as saying of the missile. (UPI, Wash. Post, 12/4/63)
 Article from Washington Post’s Parade magazine written by Par-
    ade editor Jess Gorkin was inserted in Congressional Record by
    Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D.-W.Va.) . Gorkin declared :
       “The conquest of space has come to mean more to the Kremlin
     than a mere matter of national pride; it has become part of the
     Communist dogma. The Soviets are fanatically committed to
    outdoing the United States in this race. Having declared that
     nuclear war isn’t necessary to achieve world domination, they
     hope to accomplish the same elid by dominating space. Make
    no mistake, it is powerful fuel, this mixture of national pride,
    political ambition and doctrinal zeal . . . .” (Parade, 11/24/63,
     in CR, 12/3/63,21995)
  H.J. Res. 787 to provide for erection of a memorial statue to the late
     Dr. Robert H. Goddard was ordered favorably reported to the
     House by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
    The legislation would require that NASA erect a bronze statue of Dr.
     Goddard in central hf;issachuset ts, the memorial giving appro-
     priate recognition to Dr. Goddard’s 1914 patents, first liquid-fuel
     rocket flight, and other pioneering achievements. (NASA Leg.
     Act. Rpts. II/196 and II/198)
  U.K.’s Labor Party issued statement that if Labor came to power
     it would discontinue development of the TSR-2 tactical-strike-
     reconnaissance/strategic nuclear bomber as a strategic bomber or
     as a contributor to Britain’s nuclear deterrent. As to the air-
     craft’s original role as a tactical waqpon, the Labor Party would
     reserve judgment until the aircraft’s performance has been flight-
     tested. (Aviation Daily, 12/3/63)
December 3-4: 14 N A S A officials participated in Florida Aerospace
     Industry Seminar in Orlando, with more than 1,500 Florida busi-
     nessmen, industrialists, and educators attending. ( N . w . ~Release
     63-260)
December 4: EXPLORER XVIII (Imp) satellite completed second of its
     long elliptical orbits (apogee, 122,800 mi. ; perigee, 119 mi.), and
     all systems appeared to be functioning as planned.
                                                                   463
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

        Lifetime of IMP-A, launched Nov. 26 from Cape Canaveral,
     revised by NASA from estimated 12 months to hundreds of years.
      (NASA Release 63-265; A d d , Februa       1964,ll)
                                           7
December 4: Zero radient synchrotron- rst major particle acceler-
     ator in the Micfwest-dedicated at Argonne National Laboratory
     near Chicago. Financed by AEC, the accelerator is one of the
    three largest in the world, generatee 12.5-bev energy. (Plumb,
    NYT, 12/5/63)
  NASA announced the Centaur stage ( A G 2 ) , launched from Cape
    Canaveral Nov. 27, wm orbiting the earth with several objects
     varying in size, believed to be insulation panels and nose fairing
    of the stage. Centaur project officials believed that after attitude
     control was discontinued in orbit, the stage began to tumble be-
     cause of venting of gaseous hydrogen, and the panels and nose
     fairin were separated. (NASA Release 63-265)
            ered its major manned space flight program contractors to
 NASA orc f
     freeze all new hirings and not replace any persons lost through
    normal attrition. Expected to save millions of dollars, the tem-
    porary action was taken wliile NASA was reassessing its budget
    programing for the current fiscal year, based on an expected
    appropriation of only $5.1 billion. (Simons, Wash. Post,
    12/6/63)
 USN disclosed new Subroc antisubmarine missile, a submarine-
    launched, rocket -propelled, inertially-guided nuclear depth bomb,
    would be operakional in 1965. h u n c h e d from standard torpedo
    tube, Subroc i powered by solid-fuel rocket motor which ignites
                    s
    underwater and propels missile up and out of the water. Rocket
    booster i automatically separated from de th bomb payload,
              s
                                                   P
    which continues on ballistic trajectory mti impacting water,
    where it sinks and detonates. (DOD Releases 1536-63 and 1537-63)
 Franco-Italian project to develop “Iris” rocket capable of delivering
    mni! te * n T T Viirnppgn C i t x r U-RE =p=~dpdhy -&sswintd Press.
                    ----
              ---9
    Powered with mixed solid-lkpid fuel, the rocket is being designed
    tQ deliver 65 lbs. of mail more than 400 mi. :i\vav. Rocket would
    be launched vertically to predetermined altitude-around 72,000
    ft.-then guided by radio to delivery point. 30 mi. from target,
    engine would be shut off, allowing rocket to glide; retrorockets
    would be fired to point its nose up, then Iris would descend back-
    wards to earth. (*4P,    Wash. Erqe. Star. 12/4/63)
 Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, in address at Queens College, Chnrlotte, N.C.,
    said photographs made by U.S. military satellites were providing
    excellent studies of Soviet military installations. ( 4 ,, P Wash.
    Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
December 4-7: 32 high school science students participated in Na-
    tional Youth Science Congress in Washington, sponsored by
    NASA and National Science Teachers Association of the National
    Education Association. (Wash. Ere. Stnr. 12/5/63)
December 5: X-15 No. 1 flown by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) to
    101,000-ft. altitude and 4,018 mph speed (macli 6.06), just 86 mph
    slower than record speed of 4,104 reached in June 1962 flight by
    Joseph Walker (NASA). Today’s flight was scheduled to reach
    3,900 mph, but an extra burst of power from the rocket engine
464            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    propelled the aircraft close to the record speed. Purpose of flight
    was to test new navigation instrument, cross-ranger indicator, and
    to measure effects of high speed flight 011 photographic techniques.
    Photographs taken by the X-15‘s camera were compared with
    those taken by camera in V-2 aircraft, piloted by Lt. Col. H a r q
    Andonian at the same time as the X-15 flight and along the s m e
    route-Edwards AFB to Delamar Lake, Net-. (AP, Bolt. Sun,
    12/6/63; UPI, Chic. Trib., 12/6/63
December 5: F-1 rocket engine static-f! red in 1 0 - s test,first in series
                                                       ~
    conducted by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. (Marshall
    Star, 12/11/63,2)
  USAF launched two unidentified satellites using Thor-Able-Star
    launch vehicle from Vandenberg AFB. (AP, Ralt. Sun, 12/6/63;
    Pres. R p t . on Space, 1963. 12764)
  U.N. General Assembly‘s Political Committee approved draft reso-
    lution and declaration on international cooperation in space
    sciences and law.
        The resolution endorsed recummendations by C.N. Committee
    on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which called for proposals
    on exchange of scientific information, consideration of agree-
    ments on legal principles “governing the activities of the states in
    the exploration and use of outer space,“ and other steps toward
    coo eration.
        $he declaration was an endorsement of lagal principles drafted
    jointly by U.S. and U.S.S.R. representatives last month. Pro-
    visions of the nine-point draft included statements that celestial
    bodies should be regarded as free territories not subject to national
    sovereignty ;exploration of space should ,befor the benefit of all
    men of all nations; and all nations engaged in space exploration
    should observe international law.
        With adoption of the two drafts, the Political Committee con-
    cluded its present consideration of space exploration. (Lubasch,
    NYT, 12/6/63,1& 17)
  House and Senate conferees met in executive session and filed a con-
     ference report on the differences between the Senate- and House-
    passed versions of H.R. 8747, F Y 1964 appropriations for inde-
     pendent ofices, including $5.l-billion appropriation for NASA.
    Two of the NASA amendments were reported in disagreement.
      (House Rpt. 1004, 12563; NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. II/198; L A .
     Times,Wash.Post, 12/7/63)
  NMA and Australian Dept. of Supply jointly announced ma*&
     space flight tracking and data acquisition facilities mere being
    moved from Muchea, Australia, to a new site being built near
     Carnarvon, on the west coast. Move mould consolidate at one site
              ground support facilities in Australia for manned Proj-
     NASA’s
    ects Gemini and Apollo. Site also would include tracking and data
     acquisition facilities for unmanned Orbiting Observatory satel-
     l i t d a o , Ogo, and Om. (NASA Release 63-266)
* Reacting to President Johnson’s Thanksgiving Day m
                                                               T
     nouncing he had “acted . . . to change the name of Cape anav-      an-
     era1 . . . [to] Cape K n e ” the City Council of Cape
                                end
     Canaveral and the Cocoa &amber of Commerce adopted
    resolutions opposing changing the name o Cape Cansveral.
                                                 f
                                                                  465
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

        Florida's Governor Farris Bryant defended President John-
     son's decision, in a Trtllahassee ressconference:
                                   %                    - thegeoR1e
     of Florida, in the year 2063, w1 look back and understan w at
                                                       LL*

     President J o h n has done and will approve."
        Arthur A. Baker, chairman of the Domestic Names Committee
     of the U.S. Bmrd of Geographic Names, said he
     name change as an accomplished fact. Edward P. C                 l   ~
     of the Board,also said he regarded the change as fact. Official
     name changing awaited action by the Board, which w s scheduled
                                                            a
     to meet next Jan. 21. (0, Post, 12/6/63; UPI, N.Y. Her-
                                    WmL
     & Trib., 12/6/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
D e c e d e r 5: Transmission of seismic data over long distances b
                                                                    E
     telephone lines has been achieved by USAF Cambridge Researc
     Laboratories (AFCBC) scientists, USD OAR announced. A signif-
     icant "first" in seismography, the technique pennits comparison of
     data from relatively quiet area of seismic activity supplied by
     New England stations with data from active S e p a n region and
     along West Coast of North and South h e m a and around
     Japan. (OAR Release 10-63-5)
                                                           Eighth S d
  President Lyndon B. Johnson transmitted NASA's
     mua.l Report to Congress, reporting projects and progress for
     the period July l-Decembr 31,1962. (8th Semiam. Rpt.)
 26 e m n s associated with Poet Mercury were presented the
                                   rjc
     x h n J. Montgomery Award by the San Diego Chapter of the
     National Society of Aerospace Professionals. Reci ients from
                                                         B
     NASA were Astronauts M. Scott Ca enter, L. Gor on Cooper,
     Jr., John H. Glenn, Jr., Virgil I. 8rissom, Alan B. Shepard
     Jr., Donald K. Slayton, and Walter M. Schirra; Dr. Robert R:
     Gilruth, MSO Director; D . Walter C. Williams, NASA Deputy
                                 r
     -4ssociate -4dministrator; Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Project Mer-
     cury Manager; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Project Mercury
     Fiight Operations "uireccor;iviaxime A. Fagei, Assisianc Director
     of Engineering and Development; Dr. Charles A. Berry, Medi-
     cal Operations Chief; and Lt. Col. John A. Powers (TTSAF) Mer-
     cury Public Affairs Offimr. (Xan Diego Union, 12/6/63)
  X-15 pilot Joseph A. Walker (NASA) was presented 1963 Pilot of
     the Year award by National Pilots Association in Miami. Award
     was made in recognition of Walker's contribution to aeronautical
     research and the general advancement of aviation. Participating
     in the X-15 program since its inception, Walker has flown the
     X-15 25 times, more than any other man; he has flown it to record
     speed of 4,104 mph and has attained record altitude, 304,200 ft.
      (mc Release 36-63)
  High-altitude research chamber was formally opened at Atlantic
     Research Corp., Alexandria, Va. Described as first such private
     facility in the Free World, the chamber would simulate conditions
     at altitudes up to 50 mi. The $200,000 facility was built with
     aid of NASA contract. (Wash. Post, 12/6/63; Wash. Eve. Star,
     12/6/63)
  U.S. is recovering more than three of every four satellites launched
     in its orbit-recovery program according to Maj. Gen. Benja-
     min I. Funk, AFSSD Commander, writing in Bell Aerosystems
466            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    Co. magazine: “In the recovery of satellites from orbit, we
    achieved a 75 per cent success record last year, and this rate has
    since improved even more.” (Troan, Wash. DaiZ News, 12/5/63)
December 5 : Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), ha                 of Sen-
                                                      m!n
                                                       r
                                                       (
                                                       a
                                                       i
    ate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, outlined his
    recommendations for improving Congressional dealings with
    science: (1) Congressional committees dealing with science shou!d
    be strengthened ; (2) these committees should make use of ad hoc
    groups; (3) information flow between Congress and scientists
    should be easier, to prevent needless repetitiousness in hearings;
     (4) all parts of Executive Branch should improve Congressional
    committee presentations; and (5) channels for gathering infor-
    mation through Library of Congress should be expanded and
    more heavily used. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/6/63, 354)
 Sen. Daniel B. Brewster (D.-Md.) , inserting in the CongressiomZ
    Record an article from Fortune magazine (Nov. 1963) on the
    Martin Marietta Corp., pointed out that “during the past year,
    the Martin Co. was one of the first to agree to an incentive type
    defense contract on a major project, the Air Force’s standard
    space launch system, Titan 1 1 This cost plus incentive type
                                    1.
    of contract has been cited by Secretary McNamara as a most
    effective method of reducing the enormous expense of defense in
    the 1960’s. I believe that Martin Marietta is to be congratulated
    not only for its accomplishments in space technology but also for
    its leadership in efforts to control cost. Martin’s willingnes to
    be the first company to accept such a contract on a $275 million
    project is a testament to its courageous and forward-looking
    executives . . . .” (QR,  12/5/63,22439)
 AFSC announced awarding two six-month study contracts for opera-
    tions analyses and preliminary design of long-range, low-level
    supersonic air-to-surface missile designated the Chemical Low
    Altitude Missile (CLAM). Recipients of the two $300,000 con-
    tracts were North American Aviation‘s Space and Information
    Systems Division and Lockheed California Co. (AFSC Release
    39-107-104)
 West German rocket firm, Weapons and Aviation Armament Corp.
    of Hamburg, test-fired four solid-fuel rockets to 90,000-ft. altitude
    and announced signing contract to deliver missiles to an unnamed
    foreign country. (Wash.Post, 12/6/63)
December 6: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Na-
    tional Association of Manufacturers’ 68th Annual Congress of
    American Industry, in New York City, said :
       “Although our decision to launch a vigorous effort in space
    was, in part, a response to a threat to our security, it also stemmed
    from recognition of the changing requirements for industrial and
    economic growth, and the fact that to maintain leadership in the
    new age of science and technology, our resoiirces must be organized
   on a national scale. Thus the technological advances which it
    produces will come not as the mere by-product of an effort
    launched to satisfy other needs, but as the fruit of an effort delib-
    erately undertaken to stimulate advances in the forces that make
    for economic growth, and meet the demands of a nation immersed
   in a new flood of scientific discovery and technical progress.
                                                                     467
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 63

         “Throughout history, and even in the early yeam of the present
      century, man has been slow in the application of basic discoveries
      to practical use. In the past,. the utilization of new technology
      has rarely depended so much on the worth of the discovery as on
      what one economist has called ‘the mentality of the times.’ The
      willingness of people to accept and appreciate change, the belated
      appreciation of a previously undetected need, an imaginative
      leadership able to foresee the tmtial applications and benefits
                                     K“
      of new ideas, coupled with t e wisdom and determination to
      insure that new knowledge is put to practical use, have always
      been key elements in the march of human progress.
         “Today, confronted with an unprecedentsd explosion of knowl-
      edge, and an ever shortening time lag between discovery or in-
      vention and practical use, the search for new knowledge and its
                                                                    not if
      application cannot proceed at a leisurely pa-rtainl
                                                                Ip
      the nation and its industries are to com te successfu ly with
      rapidly expanding foreign industrial capa&ielityin the world eco-
      nomic competition which exists today. Languor is a luxury which
      an open society can ill afford in an age when the fruits of dis-
      covery, secretly obtained, may be applied against it before their
      existence is even known. . . .” (Text)
D e c e d e r 6: Senate assed joint resolution (S.J.Res. 124) designating
                     P
      December 17 o each year as “Wright Brothers Day,” com-
     memorating first successful flights of heavier-than-air, mechani-
      cally-propelled aircraft by Orville and Wilbur Wright on Dec. 17,
      1903. (CR, 12/6/63,22573)
*.AEC announced second U.S. satellite wholly powered by nuclear
     energy was launched into orbit recently by a Thor-Able-Star
     booster from Vandenberg AFB, and signals from the satellite
      were being transmitted sucessfully with electricity from the Snap-
     9A isotopic power generator. Desiped to provide 25 watts of
     direct eiectricai current, the Snap-SA was the same type of gen-
     erator as that providing power for a satellite launched from Van-
     denberg earlier this year. The two Snap-9A’s are designed for
     operating lifetime of five ears. However, they are in orbits of at
                               i
     least 900 years so that by t e time they re-enter earth’s atmosphere
     they will be almost completely decayed. At that time they are
     designed to burn into minute particles which will be widely dis-
     persed in the atmosphere, thus increasing radioactivity in the
     atmos here negligibly. (AEC Release F-250)
          P
  ATBZT in ormed CornSatCorp that i t would prefer to rely on satel-
     lites rather than additional undersea cables to meet transatlantic
     communications needs in the near future. In letter from James
     E. Dingman, A T ~ T  Executive Vice President, made public Dec. 10
     by CamStatCorp, ATBT’S basic. position was reiterated: need exists
     for both cable and satellite circuits; however, AT&T would prefer
     to use satellite circuits across the Atlantic until there are ap-
     proximately as many satellite channels as cable circuits. (Com-
      SatCorp Release w/ltr)
  USAF announced that Cape Kennedy would be open to the general
     public for three hours every Sunday beginning on December 15th,
     to allow for “public drive-through.” Only on Armed Forces
468                                               19 6 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   Day in 1961 had the general public previously been allowed
    within the rocket and space launching complex. (UPI, NYT,
    12/8/63, A4)
Decmber 6: I n White House ceremony, President Lyndon B. Johnson
   awarded 31 Presidential Medals of Freedom, then added addi-
   tional awards to the late President John F. Kennedy and the late
    Pope John XXIII. Among those receiving this new award,
   created by President Kennedy, were Dr. Alan T. Waterman, Rob-
    ert A. Lovett, Edwin H. Land, and Mark s. Watson. ( Wmh.
   Post, 12/7/63, A8)
 Lt. Gen. Leslie R. Groves (USA, Ret.), speaking at panel meeting
    (“Satellite Sanity-Lunar Lunacy”) of National Association of
    Manufacturers’ 68th Congress, criticized Project Apollo as a
   wasted effort, value of which would be only prestige. He charged
                     a
   the lunar landin program was too expensive and, if continued,
    would bankrupt t e nation.
      NASA Administrator James E. Webb, attending the meeting,
   was invited by presiding officer Paul Bachman to the platform to
   answer General Groves. Mr. Webb defended values and costs
   of the national space program. I n his remarks, Mr. Webb
   pointed out that the national debt ($300 billion) is only half of
   the annual GNP ($600 billion), so he didn’t think the country was
   bankrupt. He defended the use of manned instead of instru-
   mented spacecraft and remarked, “I for one don’t think there
   is any doubt that man and his brain is superior to a machine.”
       Supporting Mr. Webb’s defense were panel members Dr. Robert
   Jastrow, Director of Goddard Institute of Space Studies, and
   Walter L. Lingle, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator.
    (Halley, NY T , 12/7/63)
 Addison M. Rothrock, Director of NASA Policy Planning Div., ad-
   dressing Mid-Winter Conference on Science Teaching at Jekyll
   Island, Ga., discussed “the need for close relation between
   our studies in science and technology and our studies in the
   humanities” :
      “In space we are presented with the foremost challenge in
   science and techno10 that man has known. As a nation we face
                         T
   other challenges, cha lenges presented to us in the humanities-
   challenges calli& for a mass assemblage of knowledge and intel-
   lect equal to that supplied by the 40,000 engineers and scientists
   that will by next year be working on our project to land men on
   the moon. And we have here a problem to which we have not
   found the answer: how to mount a mass attack by men with the
   kind of training acquired in the physical sciences to work on these
   problems in the humanities in which detailed, repeatable, and
   controlled experiments cannot be made. This, I think, is a great
   need, if not the greatest need of our time. I f the s ace program
                                                           K
   shows us how to assemble-and use well-efforts of t is magnitude
   and shows us the betterment for man that can result from doing
   it well, we will truly have made a great and lasting contribution
   to our nation and to our civilization.
         . . . we as a nation must understand more of science and its
      66

   implications . . . .
                                                                                             469
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

      “And though all children will not and should not attempt
    science as a calling, I think there should be an attempt as far a     s
    feasible to teach all children what science means and to teach
    them the i rtance of experimentation as a means of increasing
                m
                       and understanding; And for those who do not
    our knowl&
    major in science this need to ex.periment-to learn from experi-
    e n ~ h d d b e h e a v i l y e m p h a s m d. . . .
      “So please educate our youth well, teach them of the power
    that comes with knowledge of our universe and the people who
    inhabit it. Teach them sciences so that they can achieve triumphs
    in technology. Teach the the humanities so that they w i l l USB
    these triumphs for man’s%etterment. And above all help our
    children to grow in tolerance, help them to develop their Wisdom,
    help them achieve self discipline. And ‘Holding fast to basic
                                     outmoded practices, - -let us work
                                              meet every challenge to build
                                              resource: the human mind.’ ”
    (Text)
December 6: Editorial i I n d h n u p o h New8 stated :
                            n
      “The national interest, as well as the furtherance of Indiana’s
   economic well-being, would be served b the location ih this Stata
   of the National Aeronautics and Space Kdmiiistration’sprojected
   electronics research center.
      “. . . Indiana can offer transportation advantages, availability
   of trained yo        scientists, a favorable labor climah, coordination
   with e s t a b l i a private industry, good living conditions and
   ample s a m for expansion.
                       rg
      “Pu ue and Notre Dame provide outstanding exam les of
                                                                                         R
   what should be a toppriority site for installation of t e $50
   million facility proposed by NASA . . . .” (Id. Newa, in CR,
   12/10/63, A7511)
                                                         ,+
                                                         .        .u- I - iA c;m..intna L ber
                             R......
  m-,...,:-.-. L                                                    . -- .
                                                                     .
                       P
                       ’,
                        -              TT   ,f- :+.m
                                             .im. :
                                                                                                -E
                       IVY             & , b u x t u ~ ~ bV t 8   l l i i i ~ h V I IJIIIL-UIMI
                                                          u   ~
  UAOlb            m         AbLu%      L                  I

    attacks on areas in North Central U.S., was conducted by NORAD/
    SAC. (DOD Release 1524-63)
December 7: NASA launched two sounding rockets from Wall0 s Sta-
    tion to compare measuremenk of pressure, tempraturn, fmsity,
   and winds:
       Nike-Cajun carried 82-lb. instrumented payload t 64.4-mi.
                                                             o
    altitude, electin 1 grenades which detonated a t intmvals from
                        1
                                  8t
   20 to 60 mi.          272,OOO-ft. altitude an inflatable sphere was
   ejected, ascending to 319,OOO-ft. apogee, and was tracked for 20
    min. to 96,000 ft.
       Thirty-two minutes later a Nike-Apache carried 62-lb. instru-
   mented payload to 8’7.2-mi. altitude. Experiment chiefly con-
   sisted of pitot-static probe measurements. Approximately 6 min.
   of scientific data were telemetered to ground stations before
   Apache im acted in Atlantic Ocean 93 mi. downrange. (NASA
    Rpts of S. kct.hunchings; Wallops Release 63-108)
 Special committee of the FAI, meetin in Paris, decided that Soviet
                                                              4
   cosmonaut Valentina Nikolayeva- ereshkova was the “first abso-
   lute world champion among women in all types of competitive
   achievements in space,” according to Tass. (Tass, Krmnuya
   Zue&, 12/8/63,3, ATM-T Trans.)
470           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,         19 63

December 7: Details of Soviet antimissile missile were disclosed for
    the first time, by Hungarian Communist Party newspaper Nepsaa-
    badsag. The two-stage rocket has range of between 2,500 and
    3,750 miles, can operate effectively against target missiles at alti-
    tudes from 20 to 200 miles. Weapon is part of long-range radar
    system that automatically feeds data of approaching missiles into
    computers; data are passed automatically to antimissile missile
    stations,. which take over tracking ; then, when approaching mis-
    sile is within 600 miles, antimissile missile is fired automatically.
    (UPI, Wash.Post, 12/8/63)
 James J. Haggerty, J r writing in Amy-Navy-Air Force Journal
    and Register, said : c‘!bhe excitement and enthusiasm which char-
    acterized the early years of space research is dimming. The
    barrage of criticism leveled at the Administration for its lunar
   landing pro am has taken a severe toll and brought forth a
                 R:
    budget whic will move the manned moon shot back at least two
    years and there seems to be a general lack of concern over this
    abrogation of a sta.t& national goal . . . .
       “S ace exploration may soon run into its first real barrier,
         E
    whic might be termed the ‘megabuck barrier.’ I n the fantastic
    missions being considered for the next decade, there are myriad



                                                                a series
    space flight. But at the moment, with no such breakthrough on
    the horizon, the me abuck barrier appears more formidable than
                           (A-N-AF Journ. & Reg., 12/7/63, 14)
    the speed of light!
 Princeton-Pennsylvania Accelerator, a 3-bev proton synchrotron,
    dedicated at the James Forrestal Research Center of Princeton
    Univ. I n his remarks at the dedication, AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn
   T. Seaborg pointed out that the accelerator “is unique among
    large proton accelerators in the unusually ra id pulsing of the
    magnet-19 cycles per second.” (AEC Release kf-37-63)
December 8: Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.), forwarded to Presi-
    dent Johnson an appeal to preserve the name of Cape Canaveral,
    asking the President to clarify his executive order and make it
    clear that it applied only to the launch o erations center and
                                                  P
    missile range station. Residents of nearby lorida communities
    writing to their Congressional delegation largely favored naming
    the John F. Kennedy Space Center as a tribute to the late Presi-
    dent but preferred retaining 400-year-old name of Cape Canav-
    eral. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/9/63; Av. Wk., 12/9/63,25)
 Dr. Caryl P. Haskins, President of the Carnegie Institution of
    Washington, warned in his annual report that long-range plan-
   ning and general allocation of resources for scientific research
    were becoming “an absolute necessity.
       “We cannot, in the nature of things, simultaneously do all
    thin s well. And there is the very real danger that, without a
        P
    care ul and continuing general review of our over-all scientific
                                                                471
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3

     activities in relation to their probable bearing on human welfare,
    we could find ourselves irrevocably overconcentrated k certain
    spectacular areas of science where past performance and present
    magnitude lend p luster that promise for the future does not
    match.
       “. . . currents of such magnitude and import as those now
    sweeping science on its course, if allowed to flow undirected, can
     bring incalculable damage . . . [in roducing] masive im-
                                          P
    balances a m o q delicately related e ements of our research
    structure. . . .
       He warned that “we are firmly wedded to massiveness, and
    our long and triumphant experience in developing vast tech-
    nology leads us easily to equate success in research with sheer
    magnitude of effort . . . .   77

       Actually, the major advances “must inevitably rest, in the
    future as they have in the past, in the hands of a comparatively
    few highly original and gifted men and.women-a minuscule
    pro ortion of the entire scientific population . . . .” (Finney,
    N&, 12/9/63,1 and 43)
December 8: Soviet newspaper Kramuzya Zvesda (Red Star) reported
    that Soviet cosmonauts are undergoin intensive training for
                                           %
    “more complicated t s s ” Cosmonaut uri Gagarb, promoted
                           ak.
    to full colonel is direct’       new program of training the other
                                lYv
    veteran Sp- dJJerS. (UPI, ash. PO84 12/9/63)
                                               a
 Tenth anniversary of the Atoms for Peace Pro am, which began
    when President Eisenhower before the Uni           Nations had pro-
    posed makin nuclear power “a great boon for the benefit of all
    mankind.” FFinney, NPT, 12/8/63, A S )
 I n the Washi ton Post, Howard Simons reviewed reconnaissance
               ?
    satellites, re erring to previously released information and state-
    ments regarding a so-called “Samos” project, and inferring that
    “Samos” satellites were now operational. (Wash. Post, 12/8/63.
    El-5)
December 8-18: FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby visited MOSCOW,
    London, Paris, and Berlin, conferring with Aeroflot officials in
    MOSCOW,    with civil aviation o5cials in London and Paris, and
    surveying US. air carrier operations in and out of Berlin. (FAA
    Release 63-104)
December 9 : President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Dr. Edward C.
    Welsh “acting temporary chairman” of the National Aeronautics
    and Space Council. A Vice President, Johnson had served as
                              s
                         (Space Bus. Daily, 12/10/63,370)
    NASC Chairman.
 Report by three-man NAaA advisory committee concluded that
    “shielding [against radiation] of the crew for P o e t A p l l o is
                                                       rjc
    not possible within the time and weight limitations c the project.”
                                                          d
    The crew “will simply have to accept the relatively low probability
    of encountering a major solar flare during their relative1
                                                            P
    excursion to the moon.” Report estimated 10,000 lbs. o poly-  brief
    ethylene shielding would be required to ‘protect men in 10-ft.-
    diameter spacecraft for a week. For flights to Mars or Venus,
    more than 20,000 lbs. of polyethylene would be required. “The
    accomplishment of manned flights to the vicinity of Mars and
472           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    Venus may have to be delayed until some means are found for
    reducing these shielding weights,” report stated. (AP, N Y T ,
    12/10/63,24; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/63)
December 9 : GSFC held bidders’ briefing with 350 re resentatives of
    55 aerospace firms hearing outlined the “Unified !5 Band” method
    of providin tracking and communications for Apollo lunar
    missions. Anferees were notified of f r design and prodiiction
                                             im
    requirements for two complete systems and three partial systems.
    Contract would be awarded after April 1, 1964. (GSFC Release
    G-30-633)
 RCA announced completion of negotiations for a $23.5 million con-
    tract from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Grp. to provide a
    radar subsystem for Project Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module
     (LEM) . Grumman is prime NASA contractor for building the LFIM.
     (Wall Street J m d , 12/10/63)
  “It has been a long and rough road from the original upper stage
    studies by General Dynamics/Astronautics in 1956-57 to the orbit-
    ing Centaur of 1963,” Aviation Week and Space Technology edi-
    tor Robert Hotz wrote.
        “At Cleveland, it was a Lewis Research Center team headed by
     David S. Gabriel, Centaur project manager, with Edmund
    Jonash, Cary Nettles and Ronald Rovenger who developed and
    executed the rigorous round testing program in the wind tunnels
    and rigs that paid o d s o well in the recent flight performance.
    And on Capitol Hill, it was Representative Joseph Karth, Demo-
    crat of Minnesota, whose investigation into Centaur’s troubles
     shook the program out of its management difficulties and estab-
    lished its priority as a vital step in the lunar landing
    pro a m . . . .
       “ g n t a u r should merit a permanent page in the history of the
     space age as an excellent example of what can be accomplished
     when industry and government devote their best talents and un-
     flagging determination to reach for a distant but desirable techni-
     cal goal. It has taught lessons that must not be forgotten when
    new barriers loom on the frontiers of technology.” (Av.Wk.,
     12/9/63, in CR, 12/19/63, A7749-50)
  Christian M. Clitusen, JPL’S public information director since 1957,
     died at 49 in Altadena, Calif. ( N Y T ,12/11/63,47)
  Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman of AEC, spoke at Joint Meetin of
     the Indianapolis Engineering Societies and the Indianapolis %ci-
     entific and Engineering Foundation :
       “None of us today, I think, would presume to cover quite so
    wide a territory in our endeavors as Leonard0 [da Vinci] did, but
     we are living in a time when the example of his bold imagination
    can be a valuable source of inspiration.
        “Much has happened to close the gaps between what Leunardo
     dreamed of and what we have now achieved. History has wit-
     nessed in our country two revolutions-the revolution inspired by
     our Founding Fathers which gave birth to this Nation, and the
     Industrial Revolution, inspired by man’s inventive spirit, which
     gave us a place among the nations of the world. We are involved
     now in a Third Revolution-the Revolution of Science, inspired
                                                                       473
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     by our educated men and women-which is strengthening our po-
      sition as a leader of nations.
                     the last several decades, and especial1 the last two
       “DUriX                                              B
     decades, t is Nation and the world have witnesse a remarkable
     expansion and extension of knowledge. This knowledge has been
      and is being transformed into the outlines of a new and revolu-
     tionary society. We have all been art of a new tide of explora-
                                          %
     tion and discovery, not limited to t e dimension of the past but
     creating new dimensions of its own.
         “Indeed, the revolutionary accom lishments of the past
                                               P
     d e c a d e i n space-have extended mans reach far beyond this
     planet. We now know that the search for new knowledge, if
     not restricted to subjects of foreseeable and immediate ractical
      importance, results in an unexpected increase in our un C f  erstand-
      ing of physical or biological phenomena. The increases, in turn,
      give rise to far-reaching practical applications which could not
      have been anticipated from the original basic research. Our
      scientific knowledge and technology are advancing at an explosive
      rate. The time lag between the discovery of a fundamentally
     new scientific principle and its application in engineering is now
     very short, and these rapid developments are changing the lives
      of all of us in many ways which we only dimly perceive . . . .      99

      (Text)
D e c e d e r 9 : Dr. Eugene Fubini, Deputy Director of D D ~ L ~ was   ~E,
     commended by NzssiZeg and Rocket8 for speaking out in favor of
      “old-fashioned engineering.”
         “What Fubini IS seeking is something that has not yet been
      done, the application of modern technology to conventional war-
      fare problems on a massive scale. He has coupled this appeal for
                                    with a brief for simplicity and sound
      fresh thinking in t l d ~ ~
      engineering.
         ‘ 6 ‘Q!d-fg~hkxtd   pcoinporina mag romc bark in vogue,‘ he said,
                               0 - - - ---:--=
     ‘because one cannot have simplicity without good engineering.
      To make things simple takes a lot of ability and this is going to
     be the most important and the most difficult challenge facing us.’ ”
      (M&R,12/9/63 )
  Researchers at Technolo Audit Corp. continued, under NASA con-
                            I
                            F
      tract extension, to stu y possible use of a satellite as a navigation
      aid for advanced aircraft such as the supersonic transport.
      (iK&R,    12/9/63,9)
Decemher 1 : Cancellation of USAF D na Soar (X-20)            manned aero
               0
                                         H
      spacecraft project announced by ecretary of Defense Robert S.
      McNamara. Some of the funds saved would be diverted into
     broader, long-range exploration of the problems and potential
      of manned military operations in near space, chief project of which
     would be Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL). Attached to
     modified Gemini spacecraft (Gemini-X), MOL will be launched
      into orbit by Titan I11 launch vehicle, the two-man Gemini c!    rw
      then transferring to the house-trailer-sized MOL where they will
      conduct experiments and observations for two to four weeks,
      then return to earth in the Gemini-X spacecraft. Schedule called
      for launching late in 1967 or early in 1968. Also affected would
     r41-623 0--84--3i
474           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    be Project Asset, which will be expanded to increase number of
    launchings, increase shapes and materials studied, and “substan-
    tially expand our knowledge of precision reentry gained through
    this unmanned program.”
       Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert issued state-
    ment: “We welcome the assignment of the manned orbitin
                                                                    %
    laboratory project, and we will now concentrate our resources an
    best management effort on this job in the exciting field of space.
    This will assure effective Air Force participation in the manned
                                          -      -
    space program.”
       Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Curtis LeMay said that “the Air
    Force will provide the best space laboratory brogram in the na-
    tional interest that is possible within technical and management
    resources available to us.”
       NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer
    said : “The decisions announced by Secretary McNamara today
    with respect to the Dyna Soar Project and Manned Orbital Lab.
    followed discussions with NASA and were fully coordinated with
    the programs of this agency. The transfer of research resources
    and objectives from Dyna Soar to the Asset program will accom-
    plish objectives important to both agencim. The decisions an-
    nounced by Secretary McNamara are based on the best uses of
   resources to maximize our national capacity in space and NASA fully
    supports them.” (WD Briefing Transcript; NPT, 12/11/63, 1,
    22; Wash.Post, 12/11/63 ;AF P l c Letter, 1/1/64,1; S p e Bus.
                                     oiy
   D e , 12/12/63,386)
December 10: Both Houses cleared for the President the Independent
    Offices Appropriations bill (H.R. 8747), includinu $5.1 ‘billion
    NASA appro nation for FY 1964 ($612,000,000 y e s than re-
      uested). 8 f this amount, $3,926,000,000 was for msearch and
    !evelopent; $SSo,000,000 for construction of facilities ;and W94,-
    000,000 for administrative operations. House agreed to Senate
    amendments (unresolved in conference committee report):
    Amendment 82 provided that a joint venture to land a man on the
    moon may not be undertaken with any other nation without the
    consent of the Congress ; Amendment 84 provided that no part of
    NABA’S appropriation could be transferred to any other Govern-
    ment agency for research without approval of the Bureau of the
    Budget. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt. I1/202; GR, 12/10/63,22788-95)
 National Science Foundation announced $393,000 p a n t to Univ. of
   Minnesota for Project Pocibo (Polar Circling Balloon Observa-
    tory), a US. contribution to the International Quiet Sun Year
    ( IQSY) . 20 or more balloons will be launched during IQSY from
    Point Barrow, Alaska, recsearch laboratory and fly ak 100,000-ft.
    altitude, with 45-lb. instrumented payload to observe cosmic rays
    and the aurora borealis. ( N Y T ,12/11/63,22)
 Nobel Peace Prize for 1962 was presented to Prof. Linus Carl
    P a d i n g in Oslo. Gunnar Jtthn, chairman of award-selection
    comrmttee, emphasized Prof. Pauling’s relakionship with tho
    nuclear test ban treaty: “Can anyone believe that this treaty
    would have been reached now if there had been no responsible
    scientist who tirelessly, unflinchingly, year in, year out, had
                                                                  475
                                                   19 8 3
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    i’mpressed on the authorities and on the general public the real
    menace of nuclear tests?” ( N Y T ,12/11/63,1,20)
December IO: President Johnson briefed Congressional leaders
    on the defense budget, emphasizing that “the US. military pro-
   gram will continue to provide for a strategic force sufficiently large
    to absorb a surprise attack and survive with sufficient power to
   be capable of destroying the aggressor.” (Hiker, N.Y. Em&
    Trib., 12/11/63)
 Hook-up of three global satellite tracking networks i t a single
                                                              no
    central console a t NASA Goddard Space Flight Center was an-
    nounced. Console allows combinations of operators at 51 c n       o-
    munications p i n t s around the world in the satellite tracking and
    data acquisition network, the manned space flight tracking net-
    work, and the deep space instrumentation facilities. (AP, NYT,
    12/11/63)
 Col. Charles Yeager, Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot
   School at Edwards AFB, was forced to eject a t 10, O ft. after his
                                                       OO
    rocket-augmented NF-104A aircraft failed to recover from a flat
    spin from 90,OOO ft. Col. Yeager sustained first and second degree
    burns on face, neck, and left hand before bailing out. (NdR,
    12/16/63,13)
December If : Sen. Stuart Symin n (D.-Mo.) said in St. Louis that
    DOD’S cancellation of Dyna g a r (X-20) manned space flight
    project probably would accelerate production of Gemini capsule
    by McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St. Louis, thus benefitin employ-
                                                            %
   ment and economy of St. Louis. (St. Lou& Post- &patch,
   12/11/63)
 Following Secretary McNamara’s announcement of the Dyna Soar
    cancellation, New York Times editorialized : “Now the news that
   the expensive and difficult station-in-space project has been added
   to the list of tasks to be accomplished this decade makes it more
    imperative &an ever ihai a I I ~ WLard look be tiikeii at dxit =e zrc
    trying to do, the wisdom of the choices made, and the adequacy of
    our resources for the total effort.” ( N P T , 12/11/&3,46)
 NASA announced it would negotiate with IBM for electronic
    equipment and support in Saturn IB and Saturn V launch
    vehicle programs. Cost of work over next five years was expected
   to exceed $75 million. Negotiations would cover integration and
    checkout of the instrument units, the design and manufacture of
    data adapters, and development and production If digital guid-
    ance computers. (illarsfd Star, 12/11/63, 2)
 President Johnson issued statement to Cabinet aimed at holding
    down Federal employment and achieving greater economy mea-
    sures. He emphasized that 1965 budget totals for civilian em-
    p l o y t “must be held below the levels in the 1964 and 1963
        ps
         t   . . . .” (Wicker; NYT, 12/12/63,1,28)
    bu
 Prof. inus C. Pauling, in his Nobel speech at Oslo Univ., called
    for: U.N. supervision of nuclear stockpiles; acceptance of Com-
    munist China into the U.N. so that meaningful disarmament can
    take place; a control system for nuclear weapons under which a
                                                                 r
    country could use them only with U.N. approval; a general a
    ment to halt =D of biological and chemical weapons and pro ibit
   their use. ( N P T ,12/12/63,3)
476             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

Decsmber 11 :Dr. Gertrude Blanch, USAF Aerospace Research Labora-
    tories scientist, was awarded “Exceptional Civilian Service”
    medal for her work in mathematics. ( USAF OAR Release 12-63-2)




                                                     (UPI, Wash. Post,
      12/13/63)
    Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) announced renaming of Cape
       Canaveral to Cape Kennedy “will not be official unless it is acted
      on by the Florida Legislature.” Gurney quoted Arthur Baker,
      Chairman of Board of Geographic Names, as saying name change
      will apply only to federal maps and documents, is not compulsory
       for the people of Florida. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/13/63)
    Japan launched Lambda-2 sounding rocket with instrumented pay-
9

      load to 376-mi. altitude in experiment designed to gather data on
      the upper atmosphere for IQSY. Rocket as built by Tokyo Univ.
      Industrial Engineering Research Center and fired from K a p
      shima Space Center in southern Japan. ( M d R , 12/23/63, 10;
      Space Bus. Daily, 12/19/63,428)
    At news conference on the henomena of pneumatic tire hydro-
       planing, at NASA Hq., Wa!i ter B. Horne and Robert C. Dreher
      of NASA Langley Research Center described results of experi-
      ments conducted with automobiles traveling mi wet roads. On
      highway curve where maximum safe speed is posted as 45 mph,
       automobile with tire pressure of 25 psi did not reach hydro-
       planing speed until about 52 mph; automobile with tire pressure
       of 16 psi attained hydroplaning speed at 40 mph and swung out
      of control. Mr. Horne said: “In this country, most aiitomohiles
      use tire inflation pressures between 16 and 30 pounds per square
      inch. This is a hydroplaning speed between 42 miles an hour
       and 55 miles an hour.
          “This hydroplaning speed range is well within the higher legal
      speed limits on roads in this country. Therefore, automobiles are
      real susceptible to hydroplaning.” He exploded the popular no-
      tion that reducing tire pressure makes driving on wet roads safer.
       “About the only place where it does any
         ressure is when you are driving on san
      righer flotation.” (AP, Wash. Eve.
       Sheet; ?+SA News Conf. Transcript; N A e A TN -2056)
    Titan I1 missile launched from AFMTC in successful flight test down
       the Atlantic Missile Range. (UPI, Wash. Post, 12/13/63)
    NASA awarded Douglas Aircraft Co. two Saturn contract modifica-
       tions: $48,064,658 contract for delivery of four S-IVB flight
       stages and support equi ment and modification of S-IVB dy-
       namic test stages; and &090,000 contract for modifications to
       S-IV stage. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/13/63,397)
    AEO announced low-yield nuclear device was exploded undtrground
       at Nevada test site, 22nd underground nuclear test announced by
      AEC this year and 103rd explosion since U.S. resumed testing
       Sept. 15, 1961. (AP, N.Y.Herald Trib., 12/13/63)
                                                                           477
                                                          19 6 3
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

December 12: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara initiated ac-
     tion to discontinue or substantially reduce activities a t 33 defense
     installatiom+26 in U.S. and 7 overseas-no longer required by
     the armed fmm. Action, when completed, would produce more
     than $100 million per year savings. (MH) Release 1562-63)
D e c e d e r 13: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS xxm into earth orbit (apo-
     gee, 381 mi.; perigee, 149 mi.; period, 92.9 min.; inclination to
     the equator, as0), the satellite carrying scientific instrumentation
     for L'continuing the study of outer space" in accordance with
     March 16, 1962, Tsss announcement. Tass said o n k r d equip-
     ment was functioning normally. (Tass, Kramayu Zuezdiz,
     12/14/63, 1, ATBB-T Trans.)
  U.N. General Assembly approved broad program for cooperation
     in exploration of outer space, unanimously adopting two resolu-
     tions on outer space presented by committees: (1) draft setting
     forth U.N. space program for 1964, expressing belief tlmt in-
     t e r n a t i o d cooperation can be fruitful in space exploration,
     and calling for use of space satellites for communications and
     meteorologxal purposes; (2) draft setting groundwork for legal
      guidelines covering spaw exploration, urging formal interna-
     tional agreements to provide for such kues as return of astro-
     nauts and space vehicles forced to land on foreign territory. (AP,
     Wash. Post, 12/14/63)
  Cancellation of five follow-on flights of the Ranger lunar impact
     spacecraft a.nnounced by NASA Associate Administrator for Space
     Sciences and Applications D . Homer E. Newell. Decision to
                                        r
     cancel the follow-on series repI.esented $90 million Saving in the
     Ranger project. Dr. Newell said: "By this move, we are placing
     greater reliance on the remaining four Ran IS, the Surveyor
     landers and the Lunar Orbiters for unmannef?unar exploration
     prior to manned landings on the Moon. A t . same time, this
                                                      . thethe ~ - ; e i d l A ~ A
     move wiii contriiuuie io 1i-q           %"iiOiiiiG iii                X
     program." (NASA Release 63-276)
  Launch of the SA-5 vehicle was delayed due to failure of mnnect-
      ing fittings in critical high-pressure pneumatic and hydraulic
     lines. Pnmary c m of Che failures was attributed to the use of
                             a
      a specified heat treatment that did not provide o timum stress cor-
                                                          P
     roson resistan- for the specific stainless s i m alloy used. The
     defective parts were r e p 1 4 with parts h e a t - t m t d by a differ-
     ent process designed to provide more consistent properties and
      much improved resistanm to .stress corrosion failure. (MSFC,
     RP-VE-N Comment)
  Two sounding rockets launched at White Sands Missile Range in
     US.-Sweden coordinated study of ion and electron concantrations
             9
             '
     in D-re on of the ionosphere. Arcas sounding rocket carrying
     Swedens scientific experiment was fired to 60-mi. altitude, its
      1 2 - l k of instrumants to obtain measurements o ion densities
                                                             f
                    k altitude down to 25 mi. At apogee, parachute was de-
     ploye and instrumentation exposed.
      &OmB"
         Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched 62 min. later, ca.rried
     U.S. experiments in 100-lb. payload of instrumentation designed
     to measure ion and electron densities, ultraviolet radiation i the   n
478           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    upper atmosphere, and a camera supplied by Univ. of Leicester,
    England, to photograph x-ray emision ; payload did not achieve
    desired altitude (about 110 mi.) because of malfunction in the
    launch vehicle. Cause of malfunction was not yet known.
       US.-Sweden experiments were part of rogram sponsored by
                                                B
    Swedish Committee for Space Research an NASA, whose Gaddard
    Space Flight Center has responsibility for U.S. coordination.
    Both firings were conducted by P h sical Science Laboratory of
    New Mexico State Univ. under U.S?Amny contract. (NASA Re-
    lease 63-277)
Decem6er 13: Appointment of Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace I1 as con-
    sultant to Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administra-
    tor for Manned Space Flight. President of the Lovelace Founda-
   tion fpr Medical Education and Research, Dr. Lovelace would
   be consultant on medical aspects of current manned space pro-
    grams. ( NASA Release 63-274)
                                                                    a
 Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Fli ht
   Center, said he believed Soviet Union is buildin super-roc et
                                                       8
    that wou14d dwarf any flown before. “We woul be foolish to
   think they are standing still,” he remarked. Dr. von Rraun was
    at Michoud 0 erations, near New Orleans, formally accepting the
   first Saturn !I booster built by private industry (Chrysler
                   -
    Corp.). (UPI, Chic. Tm‘b., 12/15/63; Mnrshnll Xtnr, 12/18/63,1)
 McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of S t Louis shipped the first of two
    Gemini mission simulators to Cape Kennedy, Fla., to rovide NASA
                                                           E
    astronauts and ground crews with realistic training efore actual
   launchin of the two-man spacecraft. (AP, Kansas City Times,
    12/14/637
 Ap roximately 110 persons in NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s
   $omputation & Data Reduction Div. moved into new offices at
   Clear Lake, second large group to occupy new quarters. With
   completion of Technical Information Div.’s move later this month,
   more than 250 MSC employees would have been relocated at Clear
   Lake. (MSC Release 63-254)
 Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) mid on House floor that U.S. air-
   craft manufacturers should achieve mach-3 supersonic transport
    “through logical evolution. I f we begin today on the mach 2-
   plus commercial transport we will see that within no more than
   a year after the first one flies it will be modified-at relatively
   little expen-to      give substantially better performance. Our
   aircraft industry has demonstrated this sort of design flexibility
   throughout its history . . . . There is a natural evolution that
   takes place when economic and engineering considerations become
   compatible. There is no reason to fear that this will not take
   place in the case of the supersonic aircraft. When we upset this
   normal progression we incur additional ex ense and introduce
   both operational problems and safety hazar f;s . . . .
      “Our aircraft industries and our airlines have competed suc-
   cessfully in the world marketplace for more than 50 years. There
   can b;e no logical justification for risking destruction of these in-
   dustmes by insisting that they accept more overnmental help thrtn
                                               Ei
   they need. And that is just what we shal be doing if we persist
                                                                479
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

    in demanding a mach 3 commercial transport at this time.” (CB,
    12/13/63,23391-92)
December 13: Army Corps of Engineers awarded $1,701,368 contract
    to C&B Construation Co., Memphis, for‘construdion of NASA
    Marshall Space Flight Center’s components test facility at Hunts-
    ville, Ala.. (DOD Release 1569-63)
 Final test-firing of Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile at White
    Sands Missile Range was announced by DOD. The successful fir-
    ing was test of propulsion and pidance components of the missile.
    Army would continue to fire Nike-Zeus a t Kwajalein Island in the
    Pacific (DOD Release 1566-63)
December 14: First anniversary of MARINER11 fly-by of planet Venus,
    providing data that clouds surrounding Venus are cold and dense
    and that Venus has surface temperature of 800°F. After pass-
    ing the planet, MARINER II continued in perpetual solar orbit.
    Since launch Aug. 27, 1962, X~RINER 1 has traveled 754 million
                                           1
    mi. in 474 days. It is cumntly ahead of earth at straight line
    distance of 76,172,000 mi. Analysis of XARINER 1 tracking data
                                                     1
    provided new determinations of the Astronomical Unit, the mass
    of Venus and the moon, and locations of points on earth. Com-
    munications records included ending commands to the space-
    craft flying by Venus (36 million mi.), and reception of signal
    from the spacecraft at distance of nearly 54 million mi. (NASA
    Release 63-275)
        successfully launched Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg
  WAF
                                                    (M&R, 12/23/63,
    AFB in flight down the Pacific Missile Range.
    10)
 Marie Marvingt, 88-year-old sportswoman and aviatrix, died in
    Nancy, France. With copilot she flew English Channel in bal-
    loon in 1909. First Frenchwoman to hold pilot’s license (1910),
    she participated in many air shows, held women’s records for
    distance and endurance. ( EYT7i2jiG/’C3,35j
                                 h, n
December 15: President Johnson announced the five recipients of
    1963 National Medal of Science : Dr. Vannevar Bush,. president
    of MIT corporation and formerly resident of Carnege Institu-
                                      E
    tion of Washington, director of 0 ce of Scientific Research and
    Development during World War 1 , NACA Chairman 193941;
                                        1
    Luis W. Alvarez, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Lab-
    oratory; John R. Pierce, Executive Director of Bell Telephone
    Laboratories; Dr. Cornelius B. van Niel of Hopkins Marine Sta-
    tion, Stanford Univ., and Dr. Norbert Wiener, Professor Emeri-
    tus of MIT. (AP, NYT, 12/16/63,36)
 Interview by Howard Simons of Dr. Donald F.Hornig appeared
    in the Washkqtm Post. Chairman of the Chemistry Dept. at
    Princeton Univ., D .Hornig was appointed Science Adviser to
                        r
    the President on November 7, accompanied President Kennedy
    and Vice President Johnson on a tour of military and space in-
    stallations in November, and was recently rea5rmed as Science
    Adviser by President Johnson. Dr. Hornig has been one of the 18
    members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee since
    1960.
480           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       Dr. Hornig was reported as saying that the place of basic re-
   search was distorted by the legacy of World War I1 when concen-
   trated scientists were able to convert the most abstract scientific
   notions into impressive useful devices :“The days of pie-in-the-sky
   p r o m k of basic research are over. The mood 20 years ago was
   one that suggestd b turning loose great numbers of scientists
   m i m l e s happened. &ell they did happen, and I suppose it was
   logiml that after the war the mme notion would carry over.
       “Only it doesn’t work that way today. Miracles of the kind per-
    formed during the war are a little harder to find. Scientists are
   no lon er concentrated nor are their e.fforts. They do come, of
          %
   course, ut over periodsof years . . . .
       “The meaning of Sputnik,” Hornig said, “was that it demon-
    strated the Soviets were capable of big-time technology ; capable,
    if you will, of playing in the big leagues.” H e declined to label
    the American attempt to send men to the moon as a “race.”
       “The moon is, after all, the first im ortant object beyond the
                                            E
    earth. . . . There are valid scientific o jectives to be pursued on
    the moon’s surface all linked to gaining new insights into cos-
    mology and to providing clues to man’s destiny. That is, where
    we came from. . . . (H. Simons, Wmh. Post, 12/15/63, E 3 )
December 15: DOD decision to develop military communications satel-
    lite system, probably beginning operation in 1966, reported
    in New Y m k Times. Funds were contained in proposed DOD
    budget for F Y 1965, recently presented to the White House.
    Plans called for 24-30 satellites in random olar orbits with alti-
                                                 I:
    tudes ranging from 5,000-12,000 mi., lin ing military forces
    around the world. No contracts would be awarded, however, u,ntil
    discussions with CorhSatCorp resolve question of whether WD
    should use commercial facilities for its military purposes. (Fin-
    ne ,N Y T , 12/16/63,1)
Decemxer 16: Modifications to X-15 No. 2, made when the aircraft had
    to be repaired after accident in Nov. 1962, were aimed at perform-
    ance goal of mach 8 at 100,000-ft. altitude, 30% faster than basic
    design but lower than X-15’s 354,000-ft. record altitude. X-15
    No. 2 ultimately will make possible 4 min. 15 sec. of flight above
    mach 5 with more extensive experimental payload capability.
     (M&R, 12/16/63,39)
 Activities at Kitty Hawk, N.C., commemorating 60th anniversary of
    powered flight (Dec. 17,1903) :
       Youth Seminar on Flight, with 200 state delegates, observers,
    and representatives of youth attending, was moderated by Astro-
    naut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., USMC). Panel members were
                                                      e;
    Max Conrad, pilot of stock-model business aircraft ; Capt. Harold
    Blackburn, TWA jet ilot ; James Nields business           Jacqueline
                        f)
    Cochran, record-ho ding aviatrix; and Maj. Ro rt Rushworth
     (USAF) ,X-15 pilot.
       Full-scale replica of the Wright Flyer, built by volunteers from
     National Capitol Section of AIAA, was installed in museum at
    Wright Brothers National Memorial. Secretary of Commerce
     Luther H. Hodges was featured speaker at annual banquet of
     Kill Devil Hills Memorial Society a t Nags Head, N.C.
                                                                                               481
                  ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       Soaring Society of America presented to Wright Memorial
    Museum and Visitor’s Center a plaque commemorating Wright
    Brother’s lider flights. Presentation was made by Floyd Sweet
    of NASA I past president of the Society. (60th Anniv. Com-
                &,   .
    mittee Release; Wash. Post, 12/15/63; Soaring Society of Amer-
   ica Inc. Release, 12/16/63)
Decemder 16: At ceremonies commemorating 60th anniversary of
   powred flight a t Kitty Hawk, N.C., Wdtm Bonney, director of
   public information for Aerospace Corp. and former director of
      ublic information for NACA and NSSA, recounted historic events of
    f;ec. 17, 1903. He quoted Orville Wri ht on kis initial, 120-ft.
                                                              i
                                                              f
    flight :‘(‘This flight lasted only 20 w o n s, but it mas,nevertheless,
    the first in the history of the world in tyhich a machine carryi
                                                                                              ”8”
    man had raised itself by its own power into the air in full flig t   ,
   had sailed forward without reduction of speed, and had finally
    landed a t a point as high as that from which it started.’
       “There were three additional flights that bleak December day,
    with the brothers alternating at the controls. The longest and last,
    with Wilbur the pilot, was of 59 seconds’ duration and was for a
   distance of 852 feet. . . .” (Text, CR, 12/17/63,23663)
 Although USAF was assigned responsibility for manned orbiting labo-
    ratory project, NASA would continue roviding technical and infor-
   mation support, u s A F officials said. bonthly NASA-UW coordina-
    tion meetings, “mutual information sessions,” would continue to
    be held. (SpaceBus. Dail 12/16/63,401)
 Nine enormous star-like o a e d s emitting strong radio energy
   have been observed by astronomers in recent months, ac-
   cording tQ scientists reporting at International Symposium on
    Gravitational Collapse in Dallas, sponsored by Southwest Center
    for Advanced Studies, Univ. of Texas, and Yeshiva Univ.
    Identification of the new objects was accomplished by British-
                       - --L-----                    ---:--
                                                          :-~^-2--.--~+-+--h~;~..~
                     1
                     :
    Aiii~~iCaii-auSii-aiiaii u v i i w i i l c I I 5 u  a L l l W~ L I G l U l l l G b L J m L u I I y UU.
                         Lu
    Discoveries were described as the most important in astronomy i   n
    many decades. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/17/63,1,35)
  AFCRL research project to find if there were any correlation between
    phases of the moon and rainfall on earth involved checking 1O O,O
    dates over 92 years of observations, checking each date against
    the lunar phase. Result of research, reported ILFCBL’S Dr. Fred
    Ward, indicated there was no correlation between rainfall and
    the lunar cycle. (OAR Research Review,12/16/63,2)
  USAF launched Titan I1 ICBM from silo a t Vandenberg AFB, Calif.,
    in successful flight down Pacific Missile Range. (MdR, 12/23/63,
    10)
  USN launched Hydac sounding rocket, built b Douglas Aircraft
                                                                      i6
    and Lockheed, from Pt. Arguello, Calif. ( &R, 12/23/63, 10)
  Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, chief Soviet space scientist, quoted as saying
    he “believes” that by 1968 there would be 100-tonspace stations
    and an automatic scientific station on the moon. (Space Bw.
    Daily, 12/16/63,400)
  Using a selected cross-section of Americans, the Harris Survey in-
    dicated that the majority of Americans favored the exchange of
482             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

   musicians and artists, and students with the Soviet Union, as
   well as favoring the sale of wheat and other food.
         With regard to “Scientific Cooperation” :
               Sending Man to the Moon Jointly :
                    Favor __________________________________                   35%
                    o p s _________________-_______________
                     p oe                                                      54%
                    Not sure______________________-__---____                   11%
               Exchanging Scienthts and Engineers :
                    Favor __________________________________                   34%
                    oppose _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - ___ - _ _ _-_-_ 54%
                                                                 ___ _
                    Not sure________________________________                   12%
       Selling equipment with potential military application to Rus-
    sia was adamantly opposed. (L. Harris, Wash. Post,
                         -
    12/16/63,1)
December 16: Edward M. Shafer, NASA Attorney-Adviser since Sep-
    tember 1959, was appointed NASA Assistant General Counsel.
     (NASA Announcement 63-275)
 13-man Army and USAF team of parachutists jumped from USAF
    G130 flying at 43,500 ft., delaying their parachute openings until
    below 2,500 ft., to claim new world record for mass free-fall.
    Previous record was 36,650 f t . set by 9-man Soviet team in 1961.
    The chutists were all participating in series of tests called “Opera-
    tion Halo” (high altitude/low opening) conducted a t El Centro,
    Calif. (DOD Release 1578-63)
 Four airmen ended simulated 30-day space flight mission inside a
    space cabin at USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio,
    Tex. The airmen breathed pure oxygen at simulated altitude of
   27,500 ft. in preparation for future manned space flights. (AP,
   Wash. Eve. Stur, 12/17/63)
December 17: President Johnson addressed U.N. General Assembly,
    em hasizing continuation of efforts to achieve world peace.
       ! . . The great transition from colonial rule to independence
       ‘
   has been lar ely accomplished. The decade of development has
                   Q
    successfully egun. The world arms race has been slowed. The
    struggle for human rights has been gaining new force.
       “And a start has been made in furthering mankind’s common
    interest in outer space, in scientific exploration, in communica-
    tions, in weather forecasting, in banning the stationing of nuclear
   weapons, and in establishing principles of law . . . .
       “The greatest of human problems, and the greatest of our com-
    mon tasks, is to keep the peace and save the future. All that we
    have built in the wealth of nations, and all that we plan to do
    toward a better life for all, will be in vain if our feet should slip,
    or our vision falter, and our hopes ended in another worldwide
    war. I f there is one commitment more than any other that I
    would like to leave with you today, it is my unswerving strength-
    ening of the peace. Peace is a journey of 1,0oO miles, and it must
    be taken one step at a time . . . .” (Text)
 Sen. Leverett Saltonstall (R.-Mass.) speaking on Wright Brothers
    Day in the Senate, said: “. . . The attention to detail and the
    years of experimentation were fundamental to the triumph which
    we commemorate on Wright Brothers Day.
                                                                          483
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

       “The pioneering spirit, the determination, and the ability exem-
      lified by the Wright brothers are the essence of human progress.
    !e
     hy were neither inhibited by the predictions of failures from
    those who had not tried, nor were they dissuaded by the tragedies
    of those who had tried. As we recall that historic day, let us
    draw ins iration from the tmo men who made this aged dream a
    reality. I n this space age, our efforts must also be a combination
    of bold design and prudent pre aration.” (OR,             12/17/63,23705)
December 17: I n a letter to NASA A k i n i s t r a t o r James E. Webb, Rep.
    Clarence D. Long (D.-Md.) criticized NASA for failure to fulfill
    Public Lam 88-113 whereby ‘“a detailed study of the geo-
   graphic location of, the need for, and the nature of, the proposed
    center’ ” should be made. Long was referring to the selection of a
    site for and the building of a $50-million electronics research cen-
    ter. He implied that the XASA “factfinding committee” set up to
    conduct this study had not given su5cient consideration to all
    suitable locations-the Baltimore area in particular-and, there-
   by, had failed to serve the national interest. (C‘R, 1/22/64,934)
 I>r. Nicholas E. Golovin of the President’s Office of Science and
    Technology told National Space Club in Washington that low
    reliability of Scout booster (50%) was because of difficulties in
    four-stage booster teclmology. A basic difficulty to be overcome
    in future space systems, he said, lyas development of long-lifetime
   components and subsystems. Today’s missile system technology
   requires operational lifetime of less than a half hour; but Apollo
   would require 400 times that long and Mars fly-by mission, up to
   20,000 times that long. The other basic problem for future space
   systems, he said, was achieving greater reliability with less flight
   testing. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/18/63,417)
 Wright Brothers Day. Events commemorating the 60th anniver-
   sary of powered flight were highlighted by dedication of First
   Fiight Airport at Kirry Xawk, K.C., the 3,GOO-ft. i - i i i ~ ~ z yparx!!e!-
   ing flight path of Wright Flyer. Airport was built b State of
                                                                 3
   Xorth Carolina, FAA, and National Park Service.                   edication
   speeches Irere made by Governor Terry Sanford and Secretary of
   Commerce Luther H. Hodges. Other articipants in ceremony
                                                 f
   included Sen. ,4. S. Monroney (D.-Ok a.), CAB Chairman Alan
   Boyd, TAC Commander Gen. Walter C. Sweene ,Jr. (USAF) ,and
   Park Service Director Conrad L. Wirth. I r m y , Navy, Air
   Force, Marine, and Coast Guard joined for first time in display of
   air power, with more than 70 airplanes flying over the site.
    (NYT, 12/16/63; NYT, 12/18/63,30)
 Luncheon in Wright brothers’ hometown, Dayton, O., commemw
   rated 60th anniversary of powered flight and 50th anniversary of
   Air Force Silver Wings. General Mark Bradley, Commander
   of AFCL, Wright-Patterson AFB, made presentation to Maj. Gen.
   Benjamin D. Foulois (USA, Ret.) one of first military officers to
   fly an airplane. National Aviation Hall of Fame president,
   James Jacobs, announced four selections to Aviation Hall of
   Fame: Octave Chanute, General Foulois, Frank Purdy Lahm,
   and Samuel Pierpont Langley. Luncheon was sponsored by Day-
484           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     ton Area Chamber of Commerce and National Aviation Hall of
     Fame, Inc. (CR, 12/17/63, 23666-67)
December 17: A t Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet in Hollywood,
     Calif., the Timers Aero Club of NAA awarded “Elder Statesmen of
     Aviation” awards to John K. Northrop, Floyd B. Odlum, and
     (posthumously) James Kindelberger. Also FAI medals were
     p m n t e d to Paul F. Rikle, glider pilot and Director of
              Flight Research Center, and Joseph A. Walker, NASA
     NASA’s
     X-15 pilot. General Curtis E. LeMay, USAF Chief of Staff,
     said in address to Wright Memorial Dinner : “. . . When Orville
     and Wilbur Wright made their historic flights, 60 years ago, little
     did they know that their effort would have such an impact on the
     nation’s strategy and on its military forces.
        “We should learn a lesson from this.
        “We cannot in today’s world stop our search for new sources
     of national strength. Further, if this Nation ever finds itself
     falling behind in the technological race-and lacking men possess-
     ing the vision and courage of the Wright Brothers, and the great
     Aerospace flyers who followed them, then in my opinion our days
     at a great Nation will be numbered and so will the days of free-
     dom.” (AirForce and Space Digest, 1/64,84; Text, DOD Release
     1572-63)
  I n preface to 1963 edition of Jane’s All t h World’s Aircroft, editor
     John W. R. Taylor wrote that U.S. had achieved “a measure of
     equality” with U.S.S.R. in “space race.”
        “This may seem a strange comment to make . . . .
        “But the real measure of achievement in aviation is a day-to-
     day service, not once-only exploits, and here the Soviet picture
     looks less self-assured than it did at the end of 1962 . . . .
        “Nor has Russia’s space program gone with its customary
     smoothnem and unsullied siicces~.
        “The results achieved have been spectaculnr and highly credit-
     able but there is good reason to believe that the ‘space twin’
     flights of Lt. Col. Bykovsky and Miss Tereshkora. failed to ,achieve
     all their objectives, which may hare included orbital renderous,
     and contact with the Mars probe was lost before it could add to
     our knowledge of that exciting planet . . . .
        “By comparison, America’s Mercury man-in-space program far
     exceeded its original-more limited4esign objectives with the
     final 22-orbit flight of Gordon Cooper, while the Mariner 2 space
     probe sent back invaluable, if depressing, data concerning con-
     ditions on the planet Venus ending our hope of finding any form
     of life known on earth.” ( UPI, Wash.Post, 12/18/63)
 Donald Wills Douglas, founder, board chairman, and chief execu-
     tive officer of Douglas Aircraft CQ.,was presented 1963 Wright
     Brothers Memorial “roph at Aero Club of Washington’s annual
                               9
     Wright Brothers Memoria Banquet. ( NAA Release)
 Speaking at Boston College Seminar, Franltlyn W. Phillips, D i m -
                    North Eastern Office, said :
     tor of NASA’s
        “At the request of the Congress, NASA is conducting additional
     studies on a need for an Electronics Center, the nature of the
     Center, and its geographical location. The results of these three
                                                                        485
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 3

    studies mill be presented to Mr. Webb, who after making NASA’s
                                                                      r
    decision on the location of the Center mill forward these re rts
    to the House .and Senate S ace Committees for their consi era-
                                   P
    tion on or about the first o February. These Committees have
    45 days in which to take action on NASA’s           report. If they take
    favorable action or for that matter if they take no action in the
    45 days after submittal of the report, NASA can proceed with its
    plans. On the other hand, should these committees take n-ative
    action of any kind, it mould force a further reconsideration of
    the mpoeal.
       “ h e proposed Electronics Research Center will employ a
                                                                          P
      roximately 2,000 people of which six to seven hundred wou d
    k    scientists and engineers. Estimates of the inv&ment to be
    made in constructing the Center amount to 56 million dollars.
    When the Center is fully operative, it will have an annual opemt-
    ing budget of $20 to $30 million, and will be expected to disburse
    considerably more than that through a contract research and
                                                                         (Text)
    development program with industry and uni~ersities.~~
Decemher 3 : First successful flight of the c-141 Starlighter took
             7
    place a t Dobbins AFB, Ga. Featuring four fan-jet engines, the
    plane can c m any ocean nonstop at speeds of more than 500
    mph. (AFSC Operational BighEjghts, 13)
*‘US. launched an unidentified probe using Blue Scout booster.
     (Pres.R p t . on Space, 196’3,lj27/64)
December 18: In press wnference, President Johnson discussed prep-
    aration of F Y 1965 budget :
       “I am working from a budget of $98.8 billion this year. It
    appears that we will expend about that amount, and maybe a
    little under or a little over, but substantially $99 billion will be
    the ex enditures this year. That was the amount of Mr. Ken-
           %
    nedy’s udget. There are built-in increases of $1,790 million that
    Z= ~ a ~ & t . ~ - r j 1 2 i t ~ q ~ ~ X T ~ Z S
                                    2“ ”
                       .~ .                        fer 9 iiiciith, iiiijihq i =
    tired pay, civilian pay, National Aeronautics and Space contracts,
    the Agency for International Development, Post Office rise, Fed-
    eral Aviation Agency, urban renewal, and public assistance
    grants. . ..
       “In the Roosevelt war yenrs we spent as high as 46 percent of
    our gross national roduct for administrative budgets. During
                            B
    the transition perio under Mr. Truman we spent 29 percent. I n
     1954, under Mr. Eisenhower, we spent 18.6 percent. We are
    hoping that me can come under that figure in our budget next
    year-in other words, that our budget expenditure as a percent-
     age of our gross national product mill be less for the fiscal year
     1965 than it has been for any of them periods I mentioned . . . .        99

       To the question, “Mr. President, have you reached a hard de-
     cision on changin the space program, including eliminating the
                        f
     Rover project?” t e President replied: “No.” (Transcript, CR,
     12/19/63,24005-007)
  Flight of X-15, with Maj. Robert Rushmorth (USAF) as pilot, can-
     celed minutes before scheduled drop from mother ship because
    of mechanical troubles in the rocket aircraft. (UPI, Wash. Post,
     12/19/63)
486          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

December 18: Editorializing about possible cuts in Rover project,
   New York: Times said :
       “. . . The effort to build a nuclear-powered rocket for eventual
    manned exploration beyond the moon is a longer-term project
    [than Project Apollo], one which might eventually be accom-
    plished by joint work of Soviet and American scientists, or per-
    haps even by a broader international team. Any proposal to kill
    this program in its entirety appears to us unsound; while to con-
    tinue it at a substantially reduced rate would retain the gains of
    past research and continue slowly to increase our capabilities in
    this field. Such a course of action would mean minimum loss for
    the nation’s near- and medium-term space goals, give us bargain-
    ing power in negotiations for a joint effort with the Soviet Union
    and still provide useful savings.” ( N Y T , 12/18/63, 40)
 USAF launched three Atlases from Vandenberg AFB: Atlas D fired
    down the Pacific Missile Range in Abres (advanced ballistic re-
    entry system) test ; Atlas- Agena D booster rocket combination
    launched an unidentified satellite; and Atlas F fired down the
                                           ( N Y T . 12/19/63, 18)
    PMR with mock nuclear warhhqd.
 NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified before Senate Select
    Committee on Small Business, Subcommittee on Retailing, Dis-
    tribution, and Marketing Practices’ hearings on the role of effects
    of technology on the nation’s economy. Webb said that NASA’s
    “pull 011 the nation’s yo01 of scientific and technical manpower
    has been substantially less than many alarmists have stated.”
    Reiterating that NASA is a “management agency,” he pointed out
    that 93% of NASA’s ace research money goes to private industry,
                          s
    “thus encouraging tphe growth of research and development un-
    der private industry.” (Space Bus. Daily, 12/19/63, 425)
 NASA-Military Sea Transportation Service agreement signed for
    ocean transportation of Saturn V’s three stages from California
    and Mississi pi production and test sites to Florida launch site.
                f
    Two ships o the LSD class, USNS Point Barro7o and possibly the
    U S N S Taurus, - 1 be modified to casly S-IC stage and the smaller
                    1
    S-I1and S-IVI3 stages. (NASA       Release 63-278)
 NASA grant of $493,150 to Dept. of Interior’s Geological Survey for
    lunar mapping was re orted. (Space Bm. Daily, 12/18/63,420)
 USAF’S AFSC/BSD awarded$1,800,000 contract to Aerojet General Corp.
    for development and fabrication of Titan I1 propulsion system
    for Project Gemini. Award was made under existing cost-plus-
    fixed-fee contract. (DOD Release 1581-63)
 USAF launched Minuteman ICBM from Cape Kennedy in success’ful
    5,000-mi. fli ht to target area near Ascension Island. ( M d R ,
    12/23/63,107
 U.S.S.R. has issued new postage stamps showing routes of Soviet
    space flights, Radio Moscow reported. (UPI, Miami Herald,
    12/18/63)
December 19: EXPLORER XIX was launched b NASA from PMR on a
                                            9
    Scout booster. The 17.8-lb. polka-dot bal oon satellite was placed
    in orbit by a new fourth stage (X-258) of the Scout booster.
   Apogee was lower than planned and resulted in an orbital period
    almost six min. less than planned. This, plus a very weak signal
                                                                           487
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

     from the tracking beacon on the satellite, caused several days’
     delay in confirmin satellite i d a t i o n and in defining the orbital
     data. Optical a n f radar tracking confirmed orbital data as:
      apogee, 1,488 mi. ;perigee, 366 mi.; period, 115.8 min.; inclination,
     78.62’. EXPLOBEB XIX, like EXPLORER IX, is an atmospheric density
     satellite. Because of its large surface area and very low mass
     such a satellite is very sensitive to fluctuations in density in the
     upper atmosphere. These changes, largely caused b variations
                                                                 I
     in solar radiation, can be measured by fluctuations in t e satellite’s
     orbit. EXPLORER XIX was launched into polar orbit and, when
     tracked b NASA and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
     for a g d portion of an a - y r . solar cycle, should provide atmos-
     pheric density data on the earth’s high latitudes comparable to
     those provided by EXPLORER IX for the lower latitudes. (EX. XIX
     Project Office, LBRC, W. J. O’Sullivan; NASA Releases 63-271 and
     281)
D e c e d e r 19: COSMOS x x m earth satellite orbited by U.S.S.R. (apogee,
     254 mi.; perigee, 131 mi.; period, 90.5 min.; inclination to the
     equator, 65’). Tass said the satellite carried scientific instru-
     mentation for “continuing the study of outer space” in ampdance
     with program announced March 16,1962, and the onboard qui -
                                                  ~ornsomobkaya r a u &  ~
     ment was functionin normauy. (T-
                            4 rans.)
     12/20/63, 1, ~ ~ 8 8 - T
  President Johnson signed H.R. 8747, F Y 1964 Appropriations for
     Independent Offices (P.L. 88-215). The President isued a spe-
     cial statement criticizing Congressional amendment prohibiting
     U.S. participation in manned lunar landin program with any
     other country “without the consent of the &ngress,” calling the
     restriction unnecessary and undesirable. (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt.
     II/211; Finney, NYT, 12/20/63)
  AFBC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF) wired con-
        atuiations u) Fiiiiam Bergan, Presiderii of i v i t t r i i ~ i&., and k
     g a j . Generals Waymond A. Davis and Benjamin Funk of AFW
     for solvi “pogo-stick &ion’’ in the Titan I1 booster for Project
     Gemini. T h e sharp surging accelerations during early stages of
     flight were noted early this year. To solve the problem, Martin
     CQ. engineers redesigned the fuel distribution system to include
     “surge chambers.” I n the two test-flights of Titan 11’s incorpo-
     rating the modification, the booster met NASA-USAF requirements
     for manned spam flight. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/20/63)
  The Black Report was submitted to President Johnson by Pmi-
     dential advisers Eugene R. Black, former World Bank president,
     and industrialist Stanley de J. Osborne. The report said:
        “We conclude that one of the basic philoso hies of the current
                                                        E
       r o p m , namely that of tying the United tates effort to the
     Eoncorde and therefore cumpreesing the time of develo ment and
                                                                   P
     construction, is dangerous, technically and economica 19.
        “We feel that a superior aircraft which is avaihble in two to
     three years of the first ‘Concode’ deliveries will still be able to
     catch the bulk of the world market.” (Wash. DaZy N m ,
     2/13/64; CN,2/14/64)
488              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3

December 19: James Reston, writing of President Johnson’s attack
    on poverty, said the President was faced with havin “to choose
    not necessarily between the moon and the slums, but %e tween the
    problems of today and the problems of tomorrow.
       “. . . some of the President’s scientific advisers have recom-
    mended that . . . [the F Y 1965 budget request for Project
    Rover] be cut again to $100 million, which is less than half the
    Rover project budget for the current [fiscal] year.
       L‘There is, of course, no assurance that money saved on this
    project would be approved by the Congress for an attack on
    poverty and illiteracy in the slums, but President Johnson’s
    decision on this will give some indication of the set of priorities
    he proposes to establish for his Administration . . . .” (Reston,
    NYT, 12/20/63,28)
  NASA and Government of Malagas Republic announced agreement
                                     P
    for installation of transportab e tracking station at Majunga,
                                                ase of such U.S. satel-
    Madagascar, for monitoring injection
                                            Eh
    lites as Nimbus, Echo, and Orbiting eophysical Observatory.
    (NASA Release 63-279)
  $9,847,000 contract for electrical and mechanical equipment for
    three launcher umbilical towers for Saturn V launch vehicle was
    awarded by John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to two-cum-
    pany team of Paul Smith Construction Co. and E. C. Ernst Co.,
    Inc. (Xpace Bus. Daily, 12/20/63,432)
  Despite renaming of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy, the nearby
    town of Cape Canaveral would retain its name by choics of its
    4,000 residents. Committee on Domestic Geographic Names said
    it would never approve a new name for a town over protests of
    its pOpdaOe. (DlgginS, Wash. Post, 12/20/’63)
  Martin-Marietta Corp. of Baltimore announced its research efforts
    had demonstrated continuous electrical current generated by
    magnetohydrodynamics ( M H D ) . Scientists of Martin Marietta’s
    nuclear division said they achieved this goal-passing a stream of
    high-temperature ionized gas through a magnetic field to generate
    electricity-by solving the major problem of equipment’s melting
    from the heat necessary in the MHD process. They used principle
    of magnetically induced nonequilibriuni ionization of gasLs,     in
    which temperature of the electrons is made higher than that of
    the as itself; the electrons then conduct electricity without
             f
    pena ty of overheating. Experiments employed helium gas seeded
    with molten cesium droplets to enhance ionization. Dr. Mostafa
    Talaat, project director, said current generated was a few
    thousandths of an ampere. First practical use of MHD power
    generation, combined with heat derived from nuclear reactor,
    was estimated at 5-10 years away. (Schmeck, N Y T , 12/20/63,
      31 )
  Dr. J. N. Bahcall of Cal Tech’s Kellog Radiation Laboratory out-
   lined a t American Physical Society meeting in Pasadena a pro-
   posed experiment to determine temperature of sun’s interior.
   A tank the size of an Olympic-size swimming pool, sunk at
    bottom of 5,000-ft. shaft drilled into the earth to screen cosmic
   rays, would be filled with 100,000 gals. of chlorine-37 isotopes.
   Neutrinos from sun bombarding the pool would change chlonne-
                                                                          489
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

      37 into argon-37. Measuring rate of change would help physicists
      determine solar tem erature as well as sun‘s structure and com-
      position. (Becker, EYT 12/20/63,31)
December 20: NASA selected -8oeing Co. for negotiation of incentive-
      type contract to build Lunar Orbiter spacecraft, contract ex-
     pected to exceed $60 million. One of the five bidding firms,
     Boeing would provide probes that are three-axis stabilized, use
     Eastman Kodak-developed camera system, and BCA power and
     communication subsystems. Five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft would
     be launched to take close-range photo phs of lunar surface, as
     well as to measure such conditions as raT=
                                              iation and micrometeoroid
     density. Lunar Orbiter complements Ranger and Surveyor lu-
     nar probe projects, providing scientific data about the moon in
     preparation for Project ApoUo manned lunar landing. (NABA
     Release 63-280)
  ~ ~ sManned Spacecraft Center announced Grumman hircraf t En-
           .4
       rineering Corp., prime contractor for development of Apol10
   . k n a r excursion module (LEX), had awarded $8,370,000 contract
     to Hamilton Standard Div. for design, development, and produc-
     tion of environmental control system for LEM. ( x s c Release 63-
     257)
 25th Minuteman ICBM fired by USAF from Vandenberg AFB made rou-
     tine training flight down PMR. M&R, 12/6/63,10)
                                      6,
 Gordon M. Bain, FAA Deputy A inistrator for Supersonic Trans-
     port, suggested at meeting of Society of American Travel Writers
     in New York that he believed the US. supersonic transport air-
     craft could be economically used on routes a short as “perhaps
                                                      s
     1,200 miles.” Maximum range of the U.S. SPT would be around
     4,000 mi. (Clark, NYT,12/21/63)
Decender $1 :TIROE \.?II (A-53) meteorological satellite was placed
     in orbit by N ~ A using a Thor-Delta booster at AMB. Initial orbit-
                        ,
     al data : apogee, 474 mi. ; perigee, 431 mi. ; p e r i d , YY.3 min. ; in-
    clination, 58.49O. TIROS vm, in addition to the usual wide-angle
     TV camera transmitting cloud-cover pictures once an orbit to a
     rather sophisticated ground station, featured the first orbiting of
     the automatic picture transmission system (A=), designed to
     provide real-time local weather information to any area in the
     world by means of a simple, inexpensive ($32,000) ground station.
     $IT equipment in the satellite was a 24-lb. package including a
    new wide-angle (108’) Tegea-lens TV camera, with its storage
     and slow-scan transmission system. Preliminary results from the
    new system were excellent. (NASA Release 63-269 ;OSFC Tracking
    Off.)
  President Johnson ordered establishment of nine-member Committee
    of Defense and Economic Agencies in the Executive Branch, to
    study problems arising out of shifts and reductions in defense
    spending, or possible disarmament, and to assure they are accom-
    plished with as little economic dislocation as possible. (NASA
    Le . Act. Rpt. II/215)
       P
  CSAF aunched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with unidentified satel-
    lite from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (UPI, Wash. Post, 12/22/68;
    PTW. p t . on Space, 2&%2?,1/27/64)
          R
     741-838
490           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963

December 22: Communications Satellite Corp. issued to industry a
    Request for Proposals for Engineering Design of a Commercial
    Communications Satellite, to include satellite design for either
    a medium-altitude system or a synchronous-orbit s stem. The
    RfP’s were directed to development of ComSat%rp’s basic
    comsat system, with initial global coverage to be achieved not
    later than 1967 for medium-altitude system or 1968 for
    synchronous-orbit system. Design proposals, due Feb. 10, would
    be evaluated and ComSatCorp would select one or more for six-
    month design contracts. (ComSatCorp Release)
December 93 : NASA announced it would negotiate contract extension
    with General Electric Co. for plant- and test-support services
    at NASA Mississippi Test Facility. Extension was expected to
    exceed $25 million. NASA had selected GE in February 1962 to
    support Project Apollo including systems integration, checkout,
    and reliability-including plant and test support at MTF. (NASA
    Release 63-283)
 JPL awarded contract to Motorola, Inc., for fabrication and system
    integration of receiving subsystems operating at S-band frequen-
    cies in the Deep Space and Manned Space Flight tracking net-
    works. Contract was follow-on to present contract awarded
    March 1962 under which Motorola designed and fabricated mod-
    ules for S-band recaiving subsystems for Deep Space Network.
    The additional equipment mas for the NASA Unified S-Band
    System, in which receiving equipment for both networks are
    identical except for slight difference in operatin frequency.
                                                        ?
    Unified S-Band System allows all communications unctions be-
    tween ground stations and spacecraft to be accomplished at sin-
    gle frequency ; provides more efficient power transfer between
    ground station’s directive antennas; and reduces by hundreds of
    times the galactic noise received on UHF frequencies. (NASA
    Release 63-284)
 General Dynamics was proposing combination of fluorine-and-
    ii uid-oxygen Atlas and Centaur upper stage as a. cheaper
      1
    su stitute for Titan 1 1 booster for USAF Manned Orbiting
                             1
    Laboratory (MOL), MissiZes and Rockets reported. (M&R,
    12/23/63,9)
 Manned Spacecraft Center announced building contractors had been
    invited by Corps of Engineers to submit contract proposals for
    construction of Spacecraft Control Technology Laboratory at
    MSC. The laboratory will be a $1,500,000 addition to the Space-
    craft Research Office and Laboratory and will contain facilities
    for noise and vibration testing. (MSC Release 63-261)
 Aerojet General Corp. reported it had developed new solid fuels
    that can propel a missile a mile in one second after ignition.
    Based on combination of mechanical and chemical methods, the
    propellants have fastest burning rate ever obtained in nonex-
    plosive solid fuels, Aerojet said. ( M & R , 12/23/63, 9)
 Dr. Glen Wilson, staff member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical
    and Space Sciences, said in Missiles and Rockets interview : “Con-
   trary to some published reports, President Johnson is not pre-
    disposed to a military emphasis on space. H e will judge the re-
                                                                     491
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

      quirements of DOD and NASA strictly on merit, if his past perform-
     ance is any measure.” Dr. Wilson recalled Johnson was Chairman
      of Senate Armed Services Committee’s Preparedness Investigat-
      ing Subcommittee, later was Chairman of Senate Committee on
      Aeronautical and Space Sciences from its inception until he be-
      came Vice President. Dr. Wilson stressed that “it must be noted
      that Johnson was one of the few men on the Hill to recognize the
      supreme importance of the SPUTNIK I launch, and he instigated an
      extraordinary session of Senate hearings a few weeks later.”
      (M&R9 12/23/63,16)
D e c e d e r 23: D e ut Assistant Secretary pf Defense for A4rms    Con-
                  Bp&
      trol A&ur       a r advised defense industry to seek nondefense
     markets as insurance against declining defense budgets. Barber
     estimated there was a better than even chance of some East-West
      arms control agreement with mutual inspection provisions during
      1964. (M&R, 12/23/63,16)
 Article in Steel, the MetuZ-Making W.eekZy, included remarks by
     Louis B. C. Fong, Director, NASA’s     Technology Utilization Pro-
     gram, and Dr. Earl P. Stevenson, member of NASA’s         Industrial
     Application Advisory Board :
         “Spin-off is in the form of ideas and innovations, not finished
     products ready to roll off production lines and change American
     buying habits overnight,” explained M .Fong. “A recent study
                                             r
     by Denver Research Institute, Denver, uncovered examples (of
     spin-off) and added that these examples do not include all, nor
     can they be considered statistically representative of, the transfers
     which have taken place.
        “NASA centers have come up with about 850 innovations thought
     to have industrial potential. The majority have been in the me-
     chanical and electrical fields, 34 percent each, followed by mate-
     rials, 22 percent, energy sources, nine percent and life sciences,
     one ercent.
        “&me (the interval between the inception of an innovation
     and its commercial application) is an inherent problem. It takes
     four to seven years to make an idea into something practical. I t
     will be tough to sped up that r m that occurs between con-
     ception and use,” Mr. Fong stateb:
        Dr. Stevenson commented that :
        “Small firms, a well as large aerospace contractors, can benefit
                        s
     from spin-off. Techniques . . . being developed in the iabrica-
     tion of rockets and space vehicles are not . . . of the assembly
     line and mass production [varieties], but rather those of the job
     shop.” (Steel,the Metal-Making Weekly,12/23/63)
 General Electric Co. received $2,000,000 increment to existing USAF
     cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for work on Titan I1 launch vehicle
     program. (DOD Release 1593-63)
December 24 : NASA and AEC announced revision in Project Rover, can-
     celing develo ment of Rift (Reactor-In-Flight-Test) sta e and
                  R
     deferring flig t objectives of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for gocket,
     Vehicle Application). Rover’s Kiwi ground reactor program
     was unchan ed. Work towards develo ment of flight systems
                                               P
                 3
     was deferre until technology learned mm Kiwi and Nerva is
492           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

    “satisfactorily established.” Revision was expected to save as
    much as $180 million of planned and programed funds in F Y
    1964 and FY 1965. NASA and AEC nom will concentrate on ground
    reactor and experimental engine research, development, and test -
    ing “with articular emphasis on analYziiig and understanding
               P
    power leve s, temperatures, o erating life, and problems of fre-
    quent and reliable restarts.” ~ N A S ARelease 68-285)
December 24: Perth, Australia, was ablaze with Ohristmas lights far
    into the ni ht. Perth was celebrating its new tradition a “City
                                                               s
    of Lights”%egun Fab. 20,1962, when its lights were a beacon for
    Astronaut John H. Glenn’s orbital Mercury space flight. (Lukas,
    NYT, 12/28/63, 6)
 U.S.S.R. fired missile into Pacific target area south of Hawaii and
    east of Johnston Island, part of testing series beginning early
    this month and extending through Jan. 25. (AP, Wash. Post.
    12/27/63)
December 25: FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby, just retimed
    from discussions in Moscow on technical as ects of a Moscow-
    New York air agreement, reported that U.S.$R. plans to develop
    a supersonic transport appeared “very similar” to the U.S. SST
    program in scope and progress. What he learned of Soviet SST
      lans ave him neither causa for panic nor “any Sense of umfi-
    $ence.’‘ Halaby stated : “They could have spoofed me but I have
    the impression their pro e IS about the same a ours.”
                                 m                     s
       Halaby said that the goviets planned to develop a new engine
    and were persuaded that aluminum would not be a suitable air-
    frame metal, Soviet target date for commercial fli ht, Halaby
    said, is in the 1970-73 time-period, paralleling U.8. estimates.
    The SST appeals to the Soviets because of long distance runs from
    Moscow to domestic points as well as New York, New Delhi, and
    Djakarta. (MacKenzie, Wmh. Post, 12/26/63, 1)
 Secretary of Defense Rdbert S. McNamara was considering USAF
    proposals for initiating research on a new manned bomber, New
    Y o & T i m s reported, a parent1 favoring a low-altitude manned
    penetrator aircraft. (lI$ymon$ NYT, 12/26/63, 1)
December 26: NASA announced it would negotiate extension to exist-
    ing contract with Control Data Co . for procurement of com-
                                         T
      uters and associated equipment for pol10 spacecraft Pre-Flight
    %xeiptance Checkout Equipment (PACE) stations. Cost of the
    equipment for the nine stations was expected to exceed $25 million.
    General Electric Co. would receive lthe equipment as government-
    furnished equipment, would deliver first two PACE systems to
    North Amencan Aviation, Inc., for checkout of Apollo command
    and service modulss. Four systems would be delivered to John F.
    Kennedy Space Center, two to Grumman Aircraft Engineering
    Corp., and one to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release
    63-286)
 Spectroscopic studies of Mars indicate Martian atmosphere is too
    thin (10 millibars pressure) for wing- or parachute-landings by
    spacecraft, according to Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar
    and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona. Until re-
    cently, pressure on Mars was generally considered to be 85 milli-
                                                                                                             493
                                            AND AERONAUTICS, 1963
                   ASTRONAUTICS

   bars, based largely on observations by Dr. Audouin Dollfus of the
    Paris Observatory. Earlier this year, D .Kuiper had estimated
                                                r
    surface pramre to be 17 millibars, but more precise analysis led
    him to 10-millibar mnclusioa. NASA scientists planned further
    observations for March 1965, when M a n is closest to earl%, to
    gain decisive evidence. (Sullivan, NPT, 12/26/63,1)
December 2 : NABA Administrator James E. Webb submitted to Sen.
             6
    Richard B. Russell, Chairman of Committee on A m d Services,
             recommendationson S. 960,bill to establish joint committee
    NASA’s
    to investi te defense and space contracts, and S. 961, bill to
    amend U.!?Me        on procurement to require NASA to establish am-
    tral file on contract communications. Regardmg S. 960, &. Webb
    said “it is not apparent to this agency that more effective machin-
    ery is needed for the investigation of the NASA pmurement pro-
    gram by the Congress than exists today . . . .” Regarding 961,                                        s.
    Mi. Webb said “it is felt that current practices provide ample
    opportunity for the committees of the Congress to review and
    investigate the handling of any particular procurement action of
    NASA without resorting to the a s s e m b l v of a mass of miscellane-
    ous communications in a central Qe.            (NASA Leg. Act. Rpt.
    II/217; Letter, 12/26/63)
 Unnamed NASA official said NASA had revihwed Pratt and Whitney’s
    prototype of fuel cell for Apollo spacecraft and had accepted the
    fuel cell. Recent criticism had previously been re orted that the
    fuel cells fell short of NASA’s    requirements. (&mons, Wash.
    Post, 12/27/63)
 U.S.S.R. has not yet named delegates for working groups to work
    out details implementing U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreements reached
    this year by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Academician A. A. Blagon-
    ravov. Howard Simons reported in Wmhington Post. U.S. and
    U.S.S.R. had agreed on coordinated communications satellite ex-
                                  ‘... +
                                  ,,id .,
                                       ,:
                                       .‘
    -,v:-,..tm L L ~ , - W‘ I I D .
                        # L t #L-
                          ..L                                  , n ..., : . ‘ - . . . . , . . ,
                                                               . . :. &                                  c:-....r.
                                                                . -.  ,
    yuI I I I I U I I                  A l a a g X f i G L X b U l e p p L l L g bUUyGlU l r l U A I .   UllllUlllJ
                       Vv

    also pointed out Soviet lack of definite response to proposal for
    negotiations leading to U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in lunar ex-
    ploration, presented by President Kennedy Sept. 20 and reiterated
    this month by President Johnson. (Simons, Wmh. Post,
    12/26/63)
 AFW/SSD awarded $1,396,000 increment to existing contract to Aero-
    jet General Corp. for work on Titan I11 liquid rocket engines for
    space programs. (WD Release 1599-63)
December N: NRL astrophysicists reported on “galactic X-ra
                                                                                                           9
    tronomy” at, American Astronomical Society meeting he d as-       at
    Georgetown University. B launching rocketborne ‘Ltelescopes,”
                                             d
    NRL scientists have detecte two x-ray sources previously unre-
      orted. One, a mysterious x-ray source near the constellation
    !&orpius, is so strong that its x-ray output is one billion times as
    bright as the earth’s sun. This may be the hitherto elusive neu-
    tron star theorized by S. Bowyer, E. T. Byram, T. A. Chubb, and
    H. Friedman. The other x-ray source, located near Scorpius in
    the Crab Nebula, is the remnant of a super stellar explosion that
    occurred in 1054 A.D., according to N% reports.
494           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 03

       Detectors in a rocket launched on April 29, 1963, spotted the
    mysterious x-ray emitter near Scorpius. “One possible hypoth-
    esis,” Friedman said, “is that the x-rays come from an invisible
                                                                      .
    cloud of extremely hot as, of the order of a million degrees . . . 9,
                           f
    Friedman concluded t at the development of more sensitive de-
    tectors for use on rockets and orbiting satellite observatories
    would help make less mysterious the strange phenomena now
    being observed in space. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/28/63, B2)
December 27: At AAS meeting in Washington, S. Karrer and C. C. K i m
    reported new evidence suggesting planet Mars has toxic clouds
    of oxygen and nitrogen compounds, robably nitrogen dioxide
                                            P
    gas. By spectroscopic techniques spitting the light from the
    planet’s telescopic image, they found the pattern yielded by nitro-
    gen dioxide gas. Kiess said that phenomena of the Martian ap-
    pearance. through earth telescopes can be explained by changes in
    the nature and color of nitrogen and oxygen compounds under
    changing Martian temperatures.           (Barbour, Wash. Post,
    12/28/63, €32)
 At AAS meeting in Washington, Dr. G. E. Moreton described photo-
    graphs of H-Alpha rays showing that solar flares produce shock
    waves which depress the sun’s surface. The photographs were
    taken last Sept. 20 a t Lockheed Solar Observatory, Burbank,
    Calif. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/63)
  Application of space research in consumer products reported by
    Dept. of Agriculture researchers Mary Jane Ellis and Philip B.
    Dwoskin. Aiding the housewife are much advanced “programmed
    cooking”--ovens with automatic temperature holds-and proc-
    essed foods-for example, 51 varieties of processed potato prod-
    ucts. (Slevin, HTNS, Wash.Post, 12/27/63, A20)
 At American Association for the Advancement of Science meetin
    in Cleveland, Prof. Kenechi Mneda of Kyoto Univ. describe8
    proposal for Japanese space booster submitted by Japanese engi-
    neers. Headed by Prof. H. Itokawa of Tokyo’s Institute of In-
    dustrial Science, the engineers are designing a multistage, solid-
    fueled booster capable of putting about 100 lbs. into low earth
    orbit. Development of the rocket, known by Greek letter “MU,”
    is not yet approved by Japanese Government. (Hines, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 12/27/63)
 At AAAS meeting in Cleveland, Dr. Allan Brown, biology prof.
    at Univ. of Pennsylvania, urged that U.S. initiate a pro-
    gram to land a scientific probe on Mars in 1969, because the
    Martian “surf,ace could be sampled durin spring and summer
    when there would be the best chance of I fetecting plantlife or-
    ganisms.” He recommended adapting Saturn I B booster to carry
    a several-hundred -pound instrumented payload. Dr. Brown esti-
    mated significant scientific probe of Mars could be achieved in
    1969 at cost of $2.9 billion over six years. He suggested inter-
   national cooperation on the project “should be more easily
    achieved than in any other area of space research or exploration
    in which both U.S. and Soviet programs are involved.” ( M d X ,
    1/6/64, 14)
                                                                     495
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

December 98: NASA Manned S p a u ~ m f Center announced award of
                                              t
     $272,522 contract to S.I.P., Inc., to build and install space environ-
     mental chamber and associated equipment a t MBC for use in ther-
     mochemical tests. (MSC Release 63-263).
December 99.- Soviet news aper Prwda announced Soviet radio-
     astronomy station had Lunced radio signals off lanet Jupiter
     when the planet w s 370 million mi. f o earth last 8 eptember and
                                            rm
                        a
     October. The radio signals took one hour and six minutes to travel
     the 740-million-mi. round trip from the earth to Jupiter and back.
     Academician ’C’ladimir A. Kotelnikov, dimtor of the Institute
     of Radio Engineering and Electronics, was quoted as s         w the
                                                                 a
     experiment was designed to study reflective properties of Jupiter’s
     surface and radiowave propagation over long distances. (Shabad,
     NPT, 12/30/63)
  I n letter to NASA Administrator James E. Webb,*New York Con-
       ressional delegation urged NASA to select site i New York stab
                                                        n
     for its proposed electronics research center. NASA had received
     more than 30 bids from areas in at least 19 states for location of
     the center. (AP, NYT, 12/30!63; H&E, 12/23/63,9)
  FCC Chairman E. William Henry said in year-end statement: “Con-
     tinued experiments with ‘Telstar’, ‘Relay’ and ‘Syncom’ hold forth
     the promise that space satellites, in the next few years, can ro-
                                                                   8
     vide reliable and economic communications.” (UPI,Wmh. oat,
     12/30/63)
December 30 : Astronomers at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-
     tory announced it was virtually impossible for EXPLOW XIX bal-
     loon satellite to be sighted by the naked eye, because even in the
     most favorable conditions the satellite appears only of the fourth
     magnitude (on borderline of visibility). So far, all sight-
     reported to the Observatory were from the Southern Hemisphere
     and mere assisted by powerful binoculars or telescopes. (AP,
     &-IT,w//31/83,    4j
  Department of Defense announced that the last of the Titan I1
     ICBM’s become operational, giving the U.S. 534 ICBM’s
             had                                                     ready
     to fire. Titan 11’s can be fired in less than one minute, and re-
     portedly can carry 24-megaton warheads 9 O miles or more.
                                                     ,O
                                                     O
     (DOD Release 1606-63; UPI, Wash. Post, 12/31/63, Al)
9 At AAAS meeting in Cleveland, biophysicist Dr. Harold C. Urey ex-

     pressed disappointment with cutback in scientific exploration of
     the moon reparatory to manned lunar landings. Criticizing ad-
              P
     vocates o exploring the moon by instruments instead of men, he
     repeated his view that only personal observations by trained men
     will provide answers to scientific questions about the nature of the
     moon. I n this connection, he deplored criteria for selecting astro-
     nauts, arguirig that the emphasis should be on trained geologists
     rather than jet pilots. Later at press conference, Dr. Urey stated
     that there is no scientific reason to believe the moon is devoid o  f
     water and that “most probably” there are pools of water below
     the rocky surface.
        Dr. Urey discussed eruptions on moon near the crater Ari-
     starchus, observed by Lowell Observatory and others. He said
     sightings may have been carbon in a form not found on earth.
496           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

     Action of water on calcium carbide beneath moon’s surface may
     have released acetylene gas, which was then broken down by the
     sunlight into a molecular form of carbon in which the atoms are
     paired. Such substance could exist in moon’s near-vacuum atmos-
     phere, but on earth the atoms would join and form graphite.
     (Sullivan, NYT, 12/31/63, 5 ; Wash. Post, 12/31/63 ; N Y T - m ,
     Chic. Trib., 12/31/63)
December 30: Plans for orbiting 18 unhatched chicken eggs in B i w t e l -
     lite were described at AAAS meeting by Dr. G. N. Hoover, Chief of
     Life Sciences, North American Aviation, Inc. One of several Bio-
     satellite experiments planned for life specimens, the experiment
     was expected to yield data on effects of weightlessness on incubat-
     ing eggs. (Troan, Wash.Daily News, 12/30/63)
  C . Leo DeOrsey, attorney for the original seven NASA astronauts,
     announced the astronauts had sold their interest in the Cape
     Colony Inn in Cocoa Beach, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/31/63)
  Dr. Richard Sharp of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. told American
     Geophysical Union meeting in Boulder, Colo., that a polar-
     orbiting satellite had discovered last May that most of the Aurora
     Borealis is invisible to the naked eye. The seemingly thin sheets
     of shimmering light actually are several hundred miles thick.
     The satellite studies also confirmed that auroral light is produced
     by electrons. (Sci. Serv., N Y T , 12/31/63,20)
December 31: Brig. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), Vice Comman-
      der of Air Force Ballistic Systems Div., was appointed Deputy
      Director of Project Apollo in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight,
     effective Jan. 15. General Phillips would assume major respon-
     sibilit for mana ement and administration of Apollo, while
      Dr. deorge E. Mgueller, Associate Administrator for Manned
      Space Flight and Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight,
      would continue having major res onsibility for technical direc-
                                        P
     tion of Project Apollo. (NASA Re ease 63-287; DOD Release 1605-
      63 1
  USAF awarded to United Technology Center a $15,390,000 increment
      to existing contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery,
      and flight testing large segmented solid-propellant motors. USAF
      also obligated to Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $1,380,000 increment
      to existing contract for =D on solid-propellant motors. (DOD Re-
      lease 1609-63)
During December: I n its “Statement of Purpose,” the Subcommitee
      on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee
      on Science and Astronautics outlined scope of Federal Govern-
      ment’s support of =D and reviewed responsibilities of the Con-
      gress in answering questions of basic policy and evaluating the
      Federal R&D effort. Report pointed out that Government pro-
      vides “more than two-thirds of the total research and development
      money being spent in the United States. Of this total, 75 percent
      is spent in industry, 8 percent in colleges and universities, and 15
      percent within the Government itself, according to studies of the
      National Science Foundation.” (“Government and Science No.
      1: A Statement of Purpose,” Rpt. of the House Subcomm. on
      Science, m, 1963)
                                                                  497
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63

During Decentber: Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Paul J.
     deFries spent two weeks at U.S. scientific stations in Antarctica
     gathering data on their experiences. Some factors might relate
     to the problem of supplyi astronauts during long stays on the
    moon. ( ~ a r star, &a, 1)
                            s~
  AEO Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seabor received the 1963 Franklin
     Medal, highest honor of The Frankin Institute, citing him “for
     outstandin contributions to our country as a distinguished scien-
              %
     tist, as a t oughtful and imaginative educator, and now as the
     leading representative of science in our nation’s service.” (A&A,
     1/64,7)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center issued $49,000 contract amendment
     to North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems
     Div. for extension of study on Apollo spacecraft modifications
     for manned space sciences laboratory. Amendment called for
     studies and concepts of linking two or more modified Apollo
     spacecraft. (SpaceBus. DuiZy, 12/4/63,338)
 Ten senior executives, representing NASA’s     major Apollo program
                                     x
     contractors, visited the Manned S acecraft Center in Houston for
    a briefing on the current status of pollo. (SpaceNews Rozcndzlp,
     1/8/64, 2)
 Staff members of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, U.S.
    House of Representatives, visited the Manned Spacecraft Center
    and were gwen thorough briefings by MSC key personnel.
     (Space News Rouhdup, 1/8/64, 2)
 1,OOOth radiosonde transmitter released by Atmospheric Measur-
    ing Group a t NASA’s      Missisippi Test Operations. Milestone
    came just over one year after the p u p was establishecl
    at MTO. The radiosonde transmitters are sent aloft several times
    daily attached to six-ft. balloons to study temperature, humidity,
    and wind direction and velocity in the atmosphere. ( M a d i d
    Star, 12/11/63,1)
 Summary article entitled “Ames Hypervelocity Free-flight Re-
    search” by Alvin Seiff in Astronautk8 and Aerospace Engineering
    reviewed shock-tube wind tunnel and light-gas gun experiments a t
    Ames Research Center. Model speeds up to 41,000 fps and a t air
    densities from 0.0002-0.16 times that at sea level have been
    achieved. (A d A E , 12/63,16-23)
 Preparations continned for NASA-CNES launching of U.S. instru-
                 y oad with French Centaure rocket from Colomb-
            fi’
    merited lgeria, next February. (M&R,
    Rechar,                                      12/2/63,8-9)
 , gimbaled integral nozzle (GIN) was sucessfully testedon the Lock-
 4
    heed “Char” motor by experts a t the A F Rocket Propulsion Lab,
    designers of the exhaust system. Partially submerged in the a f t
    section of the rocket case, the flanges and actuating components
    were shielded from the exhaust gases by the case itself. The
    concept would lead to a gimbaling system requiring less o erating
                                                            1
    power than present operational swivel-type nozzles.           hpvy,
    high-temperature-resistant silicone grease was used to lubricate
    the ball-and-socket gimbaling system. (MdR,         2/17/64, 21)
 U.K. completed first static-firings of Blue Streak rocket planned as
    first stage of three-stage booster for ELDO. Tss were conducted
                                                   et
    a t Woomera, Australia. (M&R, 12/23/63,9)
498           ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

Dukng Demmber :NASA’s         trend toward more incentive-type contracts
   was outlined in Commerce Clearing House report, pointing out
   that in early 1962 NASA had no incentive-type contracts, by end
   of June 1963 NASA had awarded 10 large incentive contracts with
   others in negotiation, and by June 1964 the number of incentive
   contracts was expected to be increased by a large margin.
   Incentive-type contracts were expected to lower costs and im-
   prove work performance, in place of cost-plus-fixed-fee type.
    (Goodman, Wmh.Post, 12/18/63)
 Dr. Willard F. Libb received patent for space vehicle construction
                       Y
   designed to resist Vlash heating” of re-entry into the atmosphere,
   the design relying largely on reflection by highly polished glass
    fibers. ( NYTNS, Louisville Courier-JoumZ, 12/13/63)
 Trap I 1 (Terminal Radiation Airborne Program) system for
          1
    measuring radiation involved in high-speed re-entry e T r i m e n t s
    mas delivered to USAF Aeronautical Systems Div. for installa-
    tion in modified C-121 aircraft. (M&R,12/23/63,13)
 Choice of 5-psi, 100% oxygen environment for Apollo spacecraft
    was documented in Journal of Aerospace Medicine by Edward
    L. Michel, George B. Smith, Jr., and Richard S. Johnston of
    NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. They said it ranks higher
    than ”-psi, 50/50 oxygen-nitrogen environment in weight, leak-
    age rates, system simplicity, reliabilit and decompression pro-
                                            ?
    tection, lower in fire dysbarism and ate ectasis protection. (MQR,
    1/27/64,27)
  U.S.S.R. has failed in at least 13 attempts to send probes to Mars,
    Venus, and the moon since October 1960, Astronautics and Aero-
    space Engineering reported, and these failures were chiefly caused
    by inability of fourth stage to send the payload out of parking
     orbit. A&AE concluded, “it seems clear that the Russians have
    need for an improved upper stage to launch deep-space vehicles,
     and that Polyot I fills the bill.” (AQAE,12/63,90)
During 1963: Man’s conquest of space moved from spectacular hazard
    toward routine accomplishment, from the exhilarating peaks and
    slumps of first-generation hardware and experiments to the
     steadily improving reliability and capability of second- and third-
     genemtion launch vehicles and satellites. NASA launched 13 major
     space shots, with mission results of 11 successes, 1 partial success
     and 1 unsuccessful, compared with the 1962 record of 19 succeSses,
     4 partial successes, and 3 unsuccessful. Project Mercury ended
     with L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; Project Apollo began
     its flight tests with two unmanned capsule tests. Communica-
     tions satellites demonstrated near-synchronous orbit and Saturn
     and Centaur boosters moved toward operational status with suc-
     cessful test flights. U.S.S.R. conducted a 129-orbit tandem flight
     and orbited an unmanned prototype of a new manned maneuver-
     able space capsule. NASA Administrator James E. Webb cited R S
              greatest specific accomplishment of 1963 the fact that
     NASA’s
     his key staff people in Headquarters and the Centers had “learned
     to supervise the efforts a t hand,” that he now has “the men
     matched with the job and the job matched with the men.”
      (NASA HHR-8 ; H H R - ~ O ;Space B S Daily, 1/3/64,10)
                                        U.
                                                                499
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3

During 1963: During the year the             delivered two Minuteman
                                    BMD
    wings to the Strategic Air Command, making an average of one
    ICBM delivered per day in 1963. (AFSC Release 312-R-114,1/1/64,
    1)
 On a date not released, DOD launched a pickaback satellite attached
    t a principal satellite payload boosted by Thor-Agena D. (Pres.
      o
    Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
 On a date not released, DOD launched a pickaback satellite attached
    to a principal satellite payload boosted by an Atlas-Agena B.
     (P~e.9. on S ace, 2963 1/27/M)
             Rpt.
                   if
 The highli ht in elivery of missile systems to the operational in-
            %
     ventmy J- the Ballistic Missile Division (BMID), Sorton ~ m ,
     Calif., was the turnover of six squadrons of Titan I1 missiles to
     the using command in 1963. The first squadron was delivered
     on June 13, 1963, at Davis-Monthan AFB, Ariz., and the last two
   . squadrons were turned over on December 30,1963, at Little Rock
     AFB, Ark. The turnover completed the Titan I1 program and
     gave the nation an inventory of 54 of the powerful weapons.
     (AWC Release, #312-R-114,1/1/64,       1)
 The X-19, first of a new tri-Service family of vertical take-off and
     landing (Vtol) aircraft, flew for the first time. (AFSC Release,
     #312-R-114, 1/1/64, 2)
 More than 150,000 visitors visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Cen-
     ter, more than 50,000 visits recorded by persons on business. Big-
     gest single attraction was Space Orientation Center, drawing
     about 83,000 visits during the year. (Mar,oha2ZStar, 1/22/64, 1)
 I n coordinating the military and civilian scientific and industrial
     efforts of the United States toward the development of aero-
     space weapon systems, m had managerial responsibility for
     some 40 per cent of the Air Force budget, or approximately 10
     cents of each Federal dollar. ( CR, 2/18/64,2910)
Through 1M: Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes linre
     been conducted from Air Proving Ground Center's ( APGC) Eglin
     AFB, Fla., aeros ace launch facility on Santa Rosa Island. The
     probes includefat least 87 in the "Project Firefly'' program.
     The project involved intense investigation of the earth's atmos-
     phere and near space. (AFGC Release, 312-R-114, Atch #2,
     1/1/64, 1)
                        APPENDIX A
  SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE
                                FLIGHTS
                      A CHRONICLE FOR 1963
   The followi tabulation was Compiled from open sources by Dr.
               ?
Frank W. An erson, Jr., Assistant NASA Historian. Sources in-
eluded the United Nations Public Registry, the Sutellite Situation
Report issued by the Space Operations Control Center at GOqdard
S a e Flight Center, public information releases o the Department
     c                                                       f
 P
o Defense, NASA, and other agencies, and the Report to the C m -
gress f r o m the President of the United States: United States Aero-
nautics and Space Activities, 1963. Russian data are from the U.N.
Public Fkgistry. the Sate llite Situatih Report, translations of Tass
News Agency statements in the Soviet presS, and international news
services’ reports.
   Launch dates are local time at the launch site. Orbital data are as
near initial data as possible, being actual initial orbit, or those first
                                     Report, or those found in the Presi-
reported in the Satellite Sit&&
dent’s Report on Space, 1963. The new satellite identification system
(adopted for 1963 by COSPAR and used by the U.S. in official list-
ings) shows one Soviet s a t e l l i t ~ 1 9 6 3 - 1 4 h a t was reported and
tracked by U.S. sources but not acknowledged by the U.S.S.R. either
in the press or in reports to the U.N. Public Registry.
   It is of interest that 1963 was the f r t year in annual editions of this
                                        is
appendix that the total number of US. launches fell below that of the
previous year (44compared to 57 in 1962). On the other hand, the
total number of payloads put into space continued to increase (66 t o
62 in 1962) because of the large step-up in DOD’S use of multiple
satellites on a single launch vehicle (21 secondary satellites compared
with 5 in 1962).
   As we have cautioned in previous years, the “Remarks” column of
these appendixes is never complete because of the inescapable lag be-
hind the flight of the analysis and interpretation of the scientific
results.
                                                                   501
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3
                                          503
               AND AERONAUTICS,
ASTRONAUTICS                      19 63




   N

   a
   i
   <
                                     196 3
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,




                        m
          R       k     d
                        Zi
          N'      m
                  i




ii
          V

          f
                                                 505
         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,   19 63




741423
506   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 3
                                     507
MTFtONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1063
    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 3




b
f

t
i




                4
                -
                R
                a
                c1
            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTLCB, 19 63




                                       f




                                       sr:
'   D   X   W
$       8   4                          Y   Y

                                       8   8
m       m   m
                                19 6 3
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,




             D    f   t
             d   d
                                     511
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1963
512               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 3




          B
          R




              f
      B
      z
                APPENDIX B
      CHRONOLOGY OF MAJOR NASA LAUNCHINGS
     JANUARY 1,1963, THROUGH DECEMBER 34 1963
  This chronol                                       during 1963 is in-
                      of major NASA launch-
                ??
tended to prom e an accurate and ready historical reference, one
compiling and verifying information reviously scattered over several
                                       P
sources. It includes launchings of a 1 vehicles larger than sounding
rockets launched either by NABA or under “NABA direction” (e.g.,
NASA launched and tracked mm-1 for AEC).
  An attempt has been made to classify the performance of both
the launch vehicle and the payload and to summarize total results
in terms of primary mission. Three cahgories have been used for
vehicle performance and mission results-successful (S), partially
successful (P), and unsuccessful (U). A fourth c a t e r , unknown
 (Unk), has been provided for payloads where lam vehicle mal-
functions did not give the payload a chance to exercise its main
experiments These divisions are necessarily arbitrary, since many of
the results cannot be neatly ca.tagorized. Also they i ore the fact
that a great deal was l a r n e d from shots that may haveTeen classified
ns uI1successfuI.
  A few unique items require separate treatment. Their dates have
been kept in sequence, but their history has been relegated to footnotes.
  Dates of launchings are referenced to local time at the launch site.
  Sources used were all open ones verified where in doubt from the
project &cw in NASA H . For &her information on each item,
                           4
see A pendix A of this vo ume and the entries in the main chronology
     P
as re erenced in the index. Pre red February 1964 by Dr. Frank W
Anderson, Jr., lkshmt NABA g b r i a n (ATPE) .
                                                               513
514   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 63
                                 INDEX

A5A, 433
A-52,247
        See American Association for the Advancement of Science.
AAAS.
        See Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board.
MCB.
Aachen, Germany, 185
       See American Broadcasting Corp.
ABC.
Abelson, Dr. Philip H., 148,149,164,331,440
       See Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory.
ABI.
         See A m y B~€lidc Missile Agency.
ABXA
Abres (advanced ballistic re-entry systems), Project, 78
     launch, 173,418,488
Acceleration conditions, 4 5
                          .3
Accelerator, 278,321,463,470
Accident. aircraft, 426
AC Spark Plug Div. (General Motors), 242,392
ADO. See A r Defense Command.
            i
Adcole digital sun sensor, 244
Adenaur, Chancellor Konrad,105
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecule, 315
Adey, Dr. W. R., 227
Advanced ballistic reentry systems (Abres). See Abrea, Project.
“Advanced hypersonic manned aircraft.” See Aerospace plane.
Advanced Manned Penetrator (AMP), 427
Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso), 73,264,397
Advanced range instrumentation ship. See Aris.
Advanced research and technology program, 381
Advanced Research Projects Agency ( m a ) , 19, 173,184,275, 299,311,402,415,
  433
Advent, Project, 457
Advisory Committee on Biotechnology and Human Research, 221
Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research ( BATO). See bo-.
Adzhubey, A., 218
       See Atomic Energy Commission.
AEC.
        See Arnold Engineering Development Center.
A=.
Aegean region, 465
Aero Club (Washington, D.C.), 484
AemSpace Luncheon Club, 6
-4erobee, 56
     launch, 95,158,247,388
         Hi, 409
         Jr., 131
          150,107,195,244,250,258,279,333,366,384,387
          150A, 3 , 123, 131, 139, 184 188, 268, 278, 281, 336, 357, 391, 429, 434
                 0                    ,
          300A,146,280
“Aerodynamic Characteristics of Airfoils a t High Speeds”, 106
Aerodynamica, 280,369
Aeroflot, 20,471
Aerojet-General Corp., 88,145,281,313,322,424,451,490
     contracts, 340,486,493
Aeromedical Research Laboratory (USAF),393
Aeromedicine, 317
                                                                       515
516                                  INDEX

Aeronautical Systems Div. ( ASD) ( USAF) ,28,360,498
Aeronautics, 110,282,342,419,420
Aeronautics and Aerospace Engineering, 412
Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board ( AACB) ,315,391
Aeronomy, 262
Aeronutronics Div. (Ford Co.) ,232,239
Aerospace industry, 374,379
Aerospace (magazine) ,362
Aerospace Corp., 99,295,362,481
Aerospace Industries Association ( AIA), 218,373
Aerospack Management, 454
Aerospace Medical Association, 175,222
Aerospace Medical Health Center (Brooks AFB, Tex.) ,442
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories (AFSC)      ,393,460
Aerospace medicine, 41,46,70,272,442
Aerospace plane (ASP), 31,168,251
Aerospace Research Pilot School ( USAF), 114,207,475
Aerospace Test Wing, 6555th, 263
Aerospace Test Wing, 6595th, 360
Aerospace weapon systems, 499
Aerothermodynamic/Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests (Asset).
   See Asset, Project.
Aetna Life Insurance Co., 187
        See Air Force Association.
AFA.
A F Aero-Propulsion Laboratory, 263
AF Avionics Laboratory, 263
AFCRL Space Physics Laboratory.         See Air Force Cambridge Research Labora-
   tories.
A F Flight Dynamics Laboratory, 263,455
         See Air Force Logistics Command.
AFLO.
           (American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations), 32
AFIAXO
A F Materials Laboratory, 263
            See Air Force Missile Development Center.
AFMW.
AFMTO. see Air Force Missile Test Center.
           See Air Force Offlce of Aerospace Research.
AFOAR
Africa, 295,296,298,342,345,353
A F Rocket Propulsion Laboratory (Edwards AFB, Calif.), 497
AFBC. See Air Force Systems Command.
           See Air Force Space Systems Div.
AFSSD.
AFBWC. See Air Force Special Weapons Center.
A F Weapons Laboratory (Kirtland AFB, N.M.), 176
AOARD (NATO) (Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research), 348
Agena (Seealso Thor-Agena) ,38,74,272,311,342,397,407
     B, 334
     NASA-DOD agreement, 334
Agency for International Development (AID), 485
Agriculture, Dept. of,494
       See Aerospace Industries Association.
AIA.
         See American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
AIAA.
AIAA/ASD Vehicle Design and Propulsion Meeting, 419,421
AID. See Agency for International Development.
       See Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory.
AIO.
Air Defense Command ( ADC) ,456
Air density, 295,299,342,449,497
Air Force and Space Digest, 329
Air Force Association ( AFA) ,107,338,340
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories ( AFCRL) , ,56,84,244,465
     instrument, 147,377,390
     research
           ionosphere, 103,279
           radiation, 130,138
           weather, 25,201,481
Air Force Caribbean Air Command Tropic Survival School, 229
Air Force Flight Test Center (AFFN) (Edwards AFB, Calif.). 338
Air Force Historical Foundation, 73,279
                                                                                517
                                      INDEX

Air Force Logistics Command ( AFLC 1,383,483
Air Force Missile Development Center (aPaaDC), 68
Air Force Missile Test Center ( AFM'N), 21, ! % 476
                                             k,
Air Force No. 1 (Presidential jet aircraft), 4 6
                                              4
Air Force Ofece of Aerospace Research ( A ~ A B )9,85,84,91, mg,335,390,411,465
                                                  ,
Air Force SatelliteControl Facility (Sunnyvale, Calif. ) ,441
Air Force W o of Aerospace Medicine. See USAF School of Aerospace Medicine.
                ol
Air Force Silver Wings, 483
Air Force Space Systems Division (AWSD), 2 , .258,350,362,455,485,48&493
                                                 5s
A i r Force Special Weapons Center ( ~ W C ) 335
                                               .
Air Force Systems Command ( A W C )
      aeronautical systems, 419
      air defense, 42
      citation, 301
      contract data management, 384,499
      contract, 466,488,493
      development, 179
                              -
      facilities, 68,331,338
      organization, 38,176,263
      procurement (management), 189
      IUD programs, 4,112, lSS,281,315,326,340,342,437,487
      report, 342,380,460
      Vandenberg dw transfer, 307
      x-20.19
      x-2% 183
Air France, 229
Air power display, 483
Air pressure, 269
Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., 400
Air Proving Ground Center ( APQC) (Eglin AFB, ma.), 499
Air Space Transportation (Astra), 280
Air t r a 5 c control
      centers, 256,432,466
    operations, 377,456
     requirements, 94
Air Training Command (ATC) ,207
Air Transport Association Engineering and Maintenance Conference, 407
Air travel, 20,153,434
Ahraft, 28,116,306,378,439,492
     cvmmerciai, 333,367,41u, 3 49
     configuration, 151,185,281,338
     development, 283,306,338,394,397
     research goal, 6,122,283,419
     supersonic, 278,434,439
     test,4 . 6
            85
     transport, 378,426,433,434
     use of, 335,395
     Wright brothers, 62,343,467
Aircraft carrier, 401
Aircraft, supersonic commercial air transport (SCAT) (See also Aircraft, super-
   sonic transport), 367,380,478
Aircraft, supersonic transport (EST),141,248,434,489,458
     cost, 13,306,311,378,384,429
     dereloynient, 71, 78, 209, 253, 282,287, 312, 320, 394, 407, 474, 478, 487, 492
     Government-industry program, 251,306,336,397,407
     plans, 6,230,251,252,253,314,397,408
     research, 16,34,69,fJO,94,114,119,136,2f31,328,344
Aircraft supersonic transport, foreign
     France-U.K. (Concorde), 140, 141, 144, 198, 229, 2 4 2.53, 312, 320, 367, 4 6
                                                               3,                   0,
        410
     U.S.S.R.379,417,422,492
-lircraft, tactics€ fighter, experimental (TFX) ( F - l l l ) , 16, 283,332,400,446
Aircraft, vertical takeoff and landing (Vtol), 282
Airglow, 14, 257
Airlift system, 321, 398
518                                 INDEX

Akher Saa, 295
Alabama Research Institute, Univ. of, 83
Alabama Society of Professional Engineers, 66
Alabama, Univ. of, 83,240
Alamogordo, N.M., 106
Albania, 391
Albrook ARB, c. Z., 229
Albuquerque, N.M., 65,79,367,439
Aldrin, Maj. Edwin E., Jr. (USAF) ,392
Alexander, George, 68
Alexandria, Va., 323,415,465
Alexandrov, Yevgeny, 11
Alford, William J , 278
                 .
Alfred P Sloan Fellowship, 136
        .
Algae, 78
Algeria, 212
Algol engine, 426
Alhaaen (moon crater), 12
Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory (ABL) ,165,184
Allen, William M., 178,308
Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co., 337
All-Union Symposium of Radioastronomers, 88
All-Woman Transcontinental Air Race, 273
ALOUETTE I, 359
     birthday, 357
     results, 92,182,263,357
Alouette (program), 32,263,334
Alpha radiation measurements, 107
Alphonsus (moon crater), 235
Altadena, Calif., 472
Altimeter, 390
Altitude, measurements, 390
Alvarez, Luis W., 479
        See American Medical Association.
AMA.
Amateur Rocketeers of America ( ARA) ,155,362
“America in Space”, 136
American Airlines, 207,397
American Association for Contamination Control, 178
American Association for the Advancement of Science ( M A B ) , 148,259,440,   494
American Astronautical Society, 14,16,17,    136
American Astronomical Society, 232,493,494
American B a r Association, 312
American Bridge Div. (U.S. Steel Corp.) ,268
American Broadcasting Company ( ABC) ,106.132,375,447
American Citizenship Award, 214
American Council on Education, 369,372
American Editorial Cartoonists, 192
American Expeditionary Force, 257
American Geophysical Union, 144,146,147,151,170,496
American Helicopter Society, 179
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics ( A I M ) , 38,74,232
     meetings, 55,98, 124,136, 155,156,157,159,161,245,248,366,373,      395,419
     National Capital Section, 343,423,480
American Institute of Biological Sciences, 136,232,326,327
American Institute of Chemical Engineers, 184
American Legion, 285
American Management Association, Inc., 352
American Mathematical Society, 27
American Medical Association ( A M A ) , 176
American Meteorological Society ( A M B ) , 20,24,25,147
American Newspaper Publishers Association Research Institute, 235
American Nobel Memorial Foundation, 152
American Ordnance Association, 188,199
American Physical Society, 23,28,155,157,256,488
American Psychological Association, 331
                                                                    519
                                     INDEX

American Red Cross, 245
American Revolution, 167,472
American Rocket Society (ABS) (See also American Institute of Aeronautics
  and Astronautics), 28,s
American Science and Engineering Corp., 388
American Society of International Law (ASIL) ,40
American Society of Lubrication Engineers, 251
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), 55,204
American Society of Newspaper Editors, 149,150,151
American Societx of Qnalits Control I A S ~ ) 96
                                              .
American Telep6one and Telegraph C. (AT=), 10,104, 134, 184,248,274, 283,
                                     %
  299,353,447,467
American University, 188,236
Amery, Julian, 112
“Ames Hypervelocity P’ree-Flight Research”, 497
Ames, Milton B ,Jr., 133.257
               .
Ames Research Center (ABC),221,257,264,280,365,381,404
    contract,77,175,184,203
     research programs, 1,70,271,283,336,387,497
     supersonic transport, 16,94,344
Amherst, Mass., 326
       S e Advanced Manned Penetrator.
        e
AMP.
Ampex Corp., 237
       See Atlantic Missile Range.
AMK
AYS. See American Meteorological Society.
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 30
Anaheim, Calif., 379
“An Approach to American Strategy”,289
Anders, Capt. William A. ( us-) ,392
Anderson, Sen. Clinton P., 215,244,272,372
     appropriations, 293,300,373,440
     Congress+cience, 441,486
     lunar program, 131,209,291,304
     space program, 90,143,190,319,395,422,457
Anderson, Adm. George W. (usru),137
Andover, Me., 3,184,188,189,241,281,353,425
Andrews, Rep. George W., 384
Andreyev, Maj. Yvgeniy, 2l8
Andromeda Nebula, 40
        *no
.-..-x-
nueuua, ~ a   u
Animal, 214,355,392,411
ANNA I (geodeticsatellite), 63,308
Annapolis, M . 117
             d,
Anniversary, 32,33,85,96,118
Antarctic, 347,367,394,453
Antarctica, 332,348,396
Antelope Valley College, 191
Antenna, 27,s
     furlable, 438
     parabolic, 428,454
     tracking, 325,402
“Anti-xi-zero” antiparticle, 310
Antigua, B.W.L. 37
Antimissile defenses, 281
Antiradiation, 96
Antisatellite defense systems, 394
Antisubmarine, 14
Aoso. See Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory.
AP. See Associated Press.
APC (Area positive control). See Air traac control.
-4p~c. See Air Proving Ground Center.
       See Applied Physics Laboratory.
APL.
“Apollo and Ita Critics”, 165
520                                INDEX
Apollo, Project, 78,149,180,193,210,233,254,      276,290,316,353,393,433,461,483
     astronaut, 4,169,180,298,388,392,431
     criticism, 165,179,190,191,215,237,468
     facilities, 29, 51, 421,464
     funds, 14,112,383,384
     lunar landing program, 17,226,293,326,339,378,487,489
     management, 54,125,135,380,420,496
     plans for, 276,327,435
     progress, 84,375,382,386,497
     reliability, 158,174,388
     support of, l42,192,2l4,237,238,245,407
Apollo (spacecraft), 25,72,392,403,406,471,493,498
     equipment, 25,33,51,189,219,350,359,397,423,431,490,492
     launch vehicle, 273,411,414,451
     modules
           command 1,51,62,107,178,242,325,334,382,392,406,423
           lunar excursion ( LEM ) ,1,25,90,180,219,406,472,489
      simulators, 221,343,387,497
      test, 62,126,132,178,257,397,431,439,498,514
“Apollostok”, 358
Applications N t s 203
                 oe,
Applications Reports, 203
Applied Physics Laboratory ( APL) (John Hopkins Univ.) ,308,454
        See Automatic picture transmission.
AFT.
ARA. See Amateur Rocketeers of America.
Aral Sea,259
ABC. See Ames Research Center.
Arcas (sounding rocket), 209,301,322,477
Archer (sounding rocket), 410
Arc of the meridian, 37
Arc jets, 437
Arctic Circle, 301
Arctic Ocean Basin, 231
Area positive control (APC),432
“Area rule”, 297
Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory ( AIO),415
Arecibo, Puerto Rico, 415
“A Report Covering Evaluation of Areas Considered f a r Proposed           Elec-
                                                                    NASA
  tronics Research Center”, 311
Argentina, 32,2l2,425
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission, 213
Argentine Department of Education, 42!i
Argo (Javelin) (sounding rocket)
    D-4.263,357,359
    D-8,m
Argon3’1,489
Argonne, Ill., 179
Argonne National Laboratory, 179,463
Argus, Project, 383
Ariel (program), 112
~ I E L 92,182
      I,
Aris (Advanced Range Instrumentation Ship), 140,176
Aristarchus (moon crater), 235,460,495
Arizona, 6
Arizona, Univ. of, 492
Arlington National Cemetery, 448
Armaments, 391,393
Armed Forces Day, 4.67
Armed Forces Dinner, 202
 Armed Services Technical Information Agency (ASTIA), 416
Armour Research Foundation, 100
Arms control agreement, 491
                                                                           521
                                    INDEX

Armstrong, Neil A., 28,238
Army Air Force Scientific Advisory Group, 176
Army Ballistic Missile Agency (-MA), 34
Army Corps of Engineers, 221,319,345,425,479,490
Army Engineer Research and Development Laboratory, 2’71
Army Materiel Command, 328,401
Amy-iVaqpAir F m Journal aud Register, 358, 470
Army Trsnsportation Corps, 115
Arnold Engineering Development Center ( m),       95
Arnold, General H H. (“Hap”) ,176
                        .
         See Advanced Research P o e t Agency.
                                      rjcs
ARPA.
        See American Rocket Society.
ABS.
Amentyev, V., 119
Arthur S Flemming Award, 56
          .
Artificial cloud particle measurements, 301
Artificial Satellites Conference, 308
Artists’ Cooperation Program ( N A S A ) , 255
Ascension Island, 173,230,486
        See Aeronautical Systems Division.
ASD.
Asia, 50,353,460
MIL. See American Society of International Law.
          See American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
ASME
        See Aerospace plane.
ASP.
         See American Society of Quality Control.
ASQC.
Assassination, 4 6   4
                                                Sturctural Systems Environmental
Asset, Project (Aerothermodynamic/stic
   Tests),4,345,474
Associated Press (AP),        87,132.463
Association of Symbolic Logic. 27
           See Armed Services Technical Information Agency.
ASTIA.
           See Air Space Transportation.
ASTBA.
Astrobee 1500 (sounding rocket), 132
Astronaut, 5,56, 173,177,187,286,340,359.379,431,443,477,496
                       So,
     achievement, 61,373,414
     award, 246,283,385
     life stories, sale of, 48,268,269,343
     performance, 36,41,245-246,296,388
      m r u i t m m t , EX, 243,2&,259,2?3,322,XI,ZS2
      training, 4,28,136,186,221,268,271,298,340,  478
      women, 34,256,273,277
Astronautics, 136
Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, 74,115,129,171,455,498
Astronautics Award (AIM), 246
Astronautics Engineer Award, 104
Astronautics Space Research Medal (BIB), 330
Astronomers, 56,116,481
Astronomical Unit (AU), 2,479
Astronomy, 73,274,481,493
 Astrophysical Institute (Univ. of Liege, Belgium), 429
 ~8trophysica.Z    Journal, The, 368
Astrophysics, 317
 Astrophysics Institute (Kasakhstan Academy of Sciences), 193
 Astroscience Center ( A m o u r Research Foundation), 100
 “Astrovoice”, 54
           See Ariation/Space Writers Asmciation.
 ASWA.
 AT&T. See American Telephone and Tele-graph CO.
 Athena, Project, 42
 Atkinson, Dr. James D., 289
 -4tlanta Constitution, 452
 Atlantic City, N.J., 251,273
522                                    INDEX

Atlantic Missile Range (AMB) (See also Cape Kennedy, Cape Canaveral, and
  John F. Kennedy Space Center)
     awards, 76,205,365
     conferences and reports, 197,200,202
     facilities, 169,221
     launches
           manned space flight, 195
            missiles, 5,9,                    70.78,134,147,
                           25,44,46,50,57,59,62,
              163,173,188,201,202,2l3,219,230,231,257,263,266,275,278,
              283,298,318,320,327,377,406,415,424,429,431,476,486
            probes, 449,462
            mtellites, 54,119,184,247,283,389,449,459,462,489
            vehicles, launch, 110,290,418,
                                         431,450,463
     launching programs, 4
     management, 21,390,441
     name change, 451,452
     operation of, 307
     prelaunch activities
            Gemini, 371
            Mercury, 44,100,186,192,194
            Saturn, 18,19,143,271,320,348
      research, 437
      strikes, 147
      tours, 230,433
     'tracking, 37
Atlantic Monthly, 291,329
 Atlantic Ocean. 111. 134. 149. 278. 297. 312. 336. 344. 345. 3 8 357. 360. 406,
                                                               4,
                               .    .      .   .        .
                         ,
               ,                   ,             I




   439, 469
 Atlantic Research Corp., 203,322,410,465
Atlas
      booster, 100,147,153,296,324,342,418,433,455
      missile, 28,53,72,78,89,105,163,242,266,272,285,29&  323,
          325.32'7.335.337.380.406
            D, 43,'379,'431,'486,'
                                 504
            E,161,229
            F,105,173,373,486
      operational, 435
      R&.D program, 68
      USAF responsibility, 334
 Atlas-Agena, 252,326,334
      launch, 334,342,389,486
 Atlas-Agena B,12,504,507,512
       launch, 189,239,279,499
 Atlas-Agena D, 133,272,335,391,400,486,509,511
 Atlas-Centaur. See C e n t y r .
 Atlas, Dr. David, 25
 Atmosphere, 262,284,290,396
       measurement, 77,449,498
       research, 15,282,342,434,449,476,477478,499
 Atmospheric Measuring Group ( NABA Mississippi Test Operations), 497
 Atom, 26,74,149,270,370
 Atomic age, 458
 Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), 78, 109, 116, 1 2 ,134,212,230, 236, 351,463,
                                                    '7
   467,470,472,491
       awards, 130,390,458,497
       budget, 15,20,315,337
       nuclear agreement, 203,206,220
       organization, 213,237,253,258
       reactor, 3,20,208,343
       reports,41,360,383
        research, 138,234,310,328,402,476
 Atomic Industrial Forum Conference, 4 l   4
 Atomic weapons ban, orbital, 353
 Atoms for Peace Program, 471
 ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate molecule.
                                                                       523
                                              INDEX

AU. See Astronomical Unit.
Aubiniere, Gen., 362
A ~ B 7A(see also MA+, 55,238
Aurora borealis, 342,474,496
Aurora, N.Y., 225
Australia, 7,95,175,241,279,295,311,400.481
    radio ~ v measuremene, 139,1@, 241
                    e
    tracking stations, 32,295,325
Australian Commonwealth Scientiflc and Industrial Researrh Organization, 188
Australian Weather Oflice, 318
Austria, 197
Auter, Henry F ,243
                .
Automatic data processing equipme&. See Computer.
Automatic picture transmission (APT), 77,489
Automation, 378
Automobiles, 390,476
Avco Corp., 54,132,253
    Research and Advanced Development Div., 361
Aviation, 342
Aviation Education Workshop, 254
Aviation Hall of Fame, 483
Aviation/Space Writers Association (ASWA), 147, 206,209, 373
Aviation Week. S e e Aviation Week and space Technology.
Aviativn Week and Space Technology, 12,42,68,98,155.165, 204, 226, 237, 252,
  268,306,318,403,411,419,428,429,436,    437,438,458,472
Aviation World (FZugweZt),454
Awards
    civic, 301
    government, 56
         foreign, 30,130,153,386,390,474
         U.S., 38,56, 76,90,156,273,278,281, 287,338,365,368,385,442,443,416
    institu,tions
         general, 136,379,390
    societies
         astronautics, 262,340,367,465
         aviation, 107,265,279,324,330,359,483,484
         engineering, 128.279

                           -
         foreign, 330
                                        -
         industry, 47
                                   -A
                                    ,
                        i Q 04 0 K P
        .-&.-.-+4'7,,        .          OOC
                        I,
                         "     W)
        InlCYCILlC,

            space, 22,76,104
Award for Outstanding Achievement in Bioclimatology, 25
Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Advance of Applied Meteorology, 25
Award for Outstanding Services to Meteorology by a Corporation, 25
Azikiwe, Governor General Dr. Nnamdi (Nigeria), 296
B-17 (Flying Fortress), 306
B-29 ( Superfortress), 252
B-47 (Stratojet), 27,400
B-52 ( Stratofortress), 27,107,189,258,321,387
B-58 (Hustler), 209,302,335,389
B-70. SeeRS-70.
Baar, James, 396
~ ~ 0 - 1 1 ( r t s aircraft),397
            1B i i h
Bachman, Dr. Charles H., 445
Bachman, Paul, 468
Back-up interceptor control (BUIC) See BUIC.
Bacteria, 294,326,331,355
Bade, William G., 27
Bahcall, Dr. J N., 488
                 .
Baikonur, U.S.S.R., 241,244
Bain, Gordon M ,   . 287,320,380,406,4lO.
                                        47,489
Baker, Arthur A., 465,476
Bakersfield, C l f ,273
                 ai.
Baldwin, Hanson W.. 285
Balewa, Prime Minister Sir Abubaker Tafawa. 321
524                             INDEX

Balfe, Capt. Paul J. (USAF), 188
Ball Bros., 244
Ballistic Missile Div. (BMD) (AFSC) (Norton AFB, Calif.), 499
Ballard, Frank, 353
Balloon, 65,106,140,142,150,216,219,474
    flight, 76,314,317,323,331
    history of, 30
    landing, 78,328
    mylar, 244,295
Balloon-launched sounding rocket. See Rockoon.
Balloon-parachute. See Ballute.
Balloon Research Center, 331
Ballute (balloon-parachute) ,127
Baltimore, Md., 117,483
Banana River, Fla., 57
Bangor, Wash., 83
Barbados, B.W.I., 29
Barber, Arthur, 491
Bardeen, John, 150
Barges, 115
“Barnard’s Star B,” 145
Barnes, J. H ,
             . 182
Barnicki, Roger, 275
Barre, Dr. Robert L., 250
Barrett, Maj. John 0. ( USAF), 389
Barron, Dr. Charles I., 163
Barron’s National BU8h?88 1 Fiiluunoial Weekly, 193
Bartholomae, Mrs. Sara, 86
Bartlett, Sen. B. L., 289,310
Baseball, 106
Base-heating studies, 451
Basic Construction Co., 303
Basic Research Resume8 for 1961 and 1963,91
Bassett, Capt. Charles A., I1 (USAF), 392
Battelle Memorial Institute, 459
Batten, Harry A., 48,269
Batteries, 406
Bauer, Siegfried J., 227,367
Baumholder, Germany, 88
Bay of Pigs, 418
Bayonne, N.J., 140
Beacon-Arrow (sounding rocket), 23
Beale, Ambassador Sir Howard, 325
Bean, Lt. Alan L. (usn)   ,392
Beatty, Nev., 322
Becker, John V., 22
Becker, Dr. Robert O., 445
Belem, Brazil, 177
Belgium, 133,197,332
Belgium National Space Research Committee, 367
Bell, Jack, 260
Bell Aerosystems Co., 17,170,240,242,275,357,465
Bellcomm, Inc., 101, 135
Bell Telephone Hour, 186
Bell Telephone Laboratories (BTL) ,1,2,23,71,150,172,184,222,304,479
Belokonev, A., 218
Beloussov, Vladimir V.,328
Beloyarsk, US.S.R., 52
Bendix EclipsePioneer Div., 305
Bendix Systems Div., 153
Benedict, Dr. Manson, 237
 Bennett, Sen. Wallace F., 159,163,273
Bennett, William O ,169
                     .
Berea, Ohio, 240
Berenice (French rocket), 273
                                                                            525
                                    INDEX

Bergen, William B., 454,487
Berger, Rainer, 16
Bergson, Henri, 415
Berkeley, Calif., 27,131,141,252,328
Berkner, Dr. Lloyd V, 24,238
                      .
Berlin, Germany, 471
Berlin’s Institute for Elements of Space Travel, 7
Berlin, Univ. of (Germany), 7
Berlin Wall, Germany, 394
Bermuda, 32,188,192,194,208,302,348
Bernardo, James V , 342
                    .
Berry, Dr. Charles A.,296,465
Bethesda, Md., 240
Beverly Hills, Calif., 252
Bevins, Postmaster General John, 107
Beynon, Dr. W.G., 314
Big Dipper, 304
Big Lift, Exercise ( DOD) ,398
Bikle, Paul F., 22,235,265,282,484
Bilaniok, Dr. 0 M.,
                . 213
Billingham, Dr. John, 70
Billings, Mont., 403
Bioastronautics, 275,354
“Bioastronautics Review”, 354
Biological effects, 354-355
BiOlOgi~t13,56
Biomedical, 272, 393
Bios. See Biosatellite.
Biosatellite (Bios), 77,320,395,411,496
Bioscience, 49,244,254,  3!B-327.411
Birdling’s Flat, N.Z., 209
Biryusov, Marshal Sergei S., 65,111,141,423
BIS. see British Interplanetary Society.
Bisplinghoff, Dr. Raymond L., 19, 109, 161, 163, 177, 182. 198, 228, 281. 283. 381
Bisson, Edmond E,  . 251
Black Brant (Canadian sounding rocket), 279,410
Blackburn, Capt. Harold (TWA) ,480
Black, Eugene R ,311,487
                 .
Black Knight (British rocket), 295,311
Black Mesa. Utah, 351
“Bhck %port”, 487
Blacksburg, Va., 127,308
Blagonravov. Dr. Anatoli A., 20, 89,100,198, 219,227,303,
                                              212,              314,318,336,350,
   376,427,493
Blanch, Dr. Gertrude, 476
Blewaier. B/G JoseDh 5. (USAF).311
BlGmaier; Gl. Joseih 9. ( W S A F ) , ’ ~ ~
Block, Louis, 377
Bloemfontein, South Africa, 72.79,196
Blue, Dr. James, 441
                .%,
Blue Scout, 502,      506,508,511
     launch, 59,129,163,242,485
     Jr.. 38,91,201,290
     malfunction, 129
Blue Streak (British rocket), 433,497
BMD. See Ballistic Missile Div.
IIMEWS (Ballistic Missile Early Warning System). See Red Mill, Project.
 BOAC (British Overseas Airways Corp.),229
Board of Geographic Names, 476,488
BOB. See Bureau of Budget.
Bochwn Institute for Satellite and Space Research (Germany),   266
Bode, Dr. Hendrick W., 123
Boeing 377 ( Stratacruiser ) ,271
Boeing 707 ( Stratoliner), 306
526                                    INDEX

Boeing Airplane Go., 94,220,222,275,296,334,419
     aircraft, 48,119,202,206,344,387
     contracts, 16, 68, 107, 114, 178, 197, 230, 234, 262, 271, 283, 292, 308,427, 489
     space chamber, 275,280
     strikes, 23,28,143,148,176
Bologna, Joseph M.,   86
Bolling AFB, D.C., 176,283
Bolshevik Revolution, 423
Bomb detection device, 387
Bomb, nuclear, 210,294,425
Bomber attacks, simulated, 469
Bonn, Germany, 270,429
Bonney, Walter, 481
Bono, Philip, 246
Boone, Adm. Walter F. (UBN,Ret), 48,70,382
Booster, 271,315,357,419,483
Booz, Allen Applied Research, Inc., 335
Borman, Maj. Frank (USAF), 28,424
Bossi, Enea, 7
Boston College, 148,484
Boston Globe, 47
Boston, Mass., 16,20,47,62,97,98,106,131,178,211,240,254,311,400,432
Boston Univ., 39
Boulder, Colo., 35,496
Boundary layer, 281,438
Bourdeau, R. E., 367
Bow, Rep. Frank T., 82
Bowyer, S ,493
           .
Boyce, Peter A., 460
Boyd, Alan S ,. 390,483
Boyden Observatory (South Africa), 72,W
Bozeman, Mont., 405
Brackett, Ernest W., 49,51,99,178
Bramlet, James B., 157
Bradley, Gen. Mark ( USAF) ,483
Branch, B/G Irvin L. ( USAF), 236
Brandenburg Gate, Berlin, 394
Brasilia, Brazil, 164
Brattain, Walter Houser, 150
Brazil, 32,177,284,287,312,425
Brazilian Commission for Space Activities, 177
Breen, Whilden P., Jr., 80,143
Brewster, Sen. Daniel B., 466
Bridgeport, CUM.,96
Briefing Conference on National Patent Policies and Practices, 207
Briggs, Dr. Lyman J., 106
Brigham Young Univ., 273
Brisbane, Australia, 193
Brissenden, Roy F ,. 23
Bristol, U.K., 161
Britain. See United Kingdom.
Britain, Battle of, 205
British Aeronautical Board, 12
British Aircraft Corp., 140,231,397,410
British Astronomical Association, 116
British Aviation Corp., 229
British-French supersonic airliner (Concorde) ,194,253
British Interplanetary Society (BIS), 205,206,330
British Overseas Airways Corp. ( BOAC). See EOAC.
British West Indies (B.W.I.), 37
Brookhaven National Laboratory, 141,213,258,310
Brooks AFB, Tex., 55,139,393,443,455
Brown, Dr. Allen, 494
Brown Deer, Wis., 59
Brown, Dr. Harold, 240,242,269,394,438
                                                                           527
                                     INDEX

Brown, Harrison, 335
Brown, Gov. Pat, 73
Brown, Walter L,    23
Brussels. Belgium, 270,378
Bryant, Farris, 451,465
       See Bell Telephone Laboratories.
BTL
Buchanan, Roger I., 365
Buchheim. Dr. Robert W.. 283
Buckley, Ikmond C., 163 ’
Budapest, Hungary, 83,185
Budget, Bureau of (BOB).66,185,294,360,384,474
Buettner, Prof. Konrad J. K., 25,58
Buffalo, N Y ,184
          ..
BUIC (Back-up Interceptor Control), 42
Bulletin of the Atomic G c i a t i e t s , 172
Bulova Watch Co.. 169
“Bungling in Space”,380
Burbank, Calif., 494
Bureau of Aeronautics ( W E N ) , 377
Bureau of Minee, 212
Bureau of Naval Weapons ( USIP) ,322,454
Burlington, Mass., 153
Burnham 1960 I1 comet, 429
Burroughs International Test Pilot Award, 442
Burroughs, Richard H., 442
Busemann, Dr. Adolf, 344,456
Bush, Dr. Vannevar, 430,444,479
“Business Man of the Year”, 1      0
Butylbenzene, 3 09
B.W.I. See British West Indies.
Byram, E T., 493
          .
Byrd, Sen. Robert C., 224,462
Bykovsky, L/C Valery F., 241,244,251,254,259,372,484
( - 7 (Dakota), 331
24
C-97 (Stratocmiser), 3 84
C-121 (Constellation), 498
G130 (Hercules), 367,482
C-133 (Cargomaster), 178,387
C-135 (Stratolifter) ,398
C-140A (Jet Star). 34.252
C-1418 ( Starlifter), 321.485
W B Construction C . 479
                   o,
CAB. See Civil Aeronautics Board.
Cadle, Don D., 65
Cahill, Dr. L ,
             . 380
Cairo, U.A.R., 179,295,319
Cajun (sounding rocket), 326
Caldwell, N.J., 282
Calf, 4 6
       2
California, 107-109,110,111,229,272,279,486
California Institute of Technology (Cal Tech), 17,4 , 95, 229, 238,321, 335, 385
                                                       4
     Kellog Radiation Laboratory, 488
California, Univ. of (Berkeley), 27,76,2l4,222,237,248,268,275,334
Caliiornia, Univ. of (La J o b ) , 421
California, Univ. of (Lo8 Angel-) (uc~b),      227,328
Callaghan, Richard, 382
Cal Tech. See California Institute of Technology.
Cal Tech Guggenheim Laboratory, 185
Cal Tech Radio Observatory, 95
Cambridge, Mass., 272,388
Cambridge Univ. (U.K.), 155
Camera, 63,101.244,270,280,281,306,317,326,388,474       489
Cameron Station, Alexandria, Va., 415
Campbell, Joseph, 116
Campbell, William Wallace, 56
528                                INDEX

Canada, 32,115,206,212,213,257,279,357,372
Canadian Bristol Aerojet, Ltd., 410
Canadian Defence Research Board, 32
Canadian space program 279,321
Canada's Dept. o t Transport, 321,449
Canal Zone, 229
Canard control surtaces, 344
Canary Islands, 44,298
Canberra. See RB-57F.
Canberra, Australia, 82,295,325
Canberra (British bomber), 371,389,400
Cannon, 29
Cannon, Rep. Clarence, 374,376,384
Cannon, Sen. Howard W.,   46,243
Canoga Park, Calif., 6
Canterbury Plains, N.Z., 209
Canterbury, Univ. o t (N.Z.), 20$
Cape Canaveral, Fla. (See also Cape Kennedy and Atlantic Missile Range), 147,
 176,268,319,345,402,424,464
   construction, 57,401
   name change, 451,464465,470,478,488
   tours, 230,433
Cape Colony Inn, 496
Cape Kennedy (Seealso Cape Canaveral and Atlantic Missile Range), 451, 464-
  465,467,476,488
Cape Town, South Africa, 18,367
Capitol Hill, 421,472
Capitol Radio Engineering Institute, 128
Capsules, ballistic, 361
Carey, Pvt. 1/C R., 271
Carey, William D., 360,361
Carl-Gustaf Rossby Award, 24
Carnarvon, Australia, 82,326,414,464
Carnegie Foundation for Advancement of Teaching, 266
Carnegie Institution of Washington, 331,440,470,479
Carnegie Museum, 260
Carpenter, LCdr. M. Scott (u~N),   26,28,238,257,280,2%, 339,465
     appearances, 3,55,155
Carpenter, Roland L., 454
Carson Sink, Nev., 298
Carswell AFB, Tex., 302
Carter, Dr. Launor F., 263
Case, Sen. Clifford P., 58,97,131,143
Caspian Sea, 259
Cassidy, William B., 156
Catalogue of Radio Sources, Third Cambridge (U.K.), 117
Catalytic Construction Go., 58
Cathode experiment, 280
Catholic Univ., 192,425
Catlin, Ephron, 47
CBB. See Columbia Broadcasting System.
CDA. See Command and Data Acquisition Station.
Celestial bodies, 464
Cell, solar, 41
Centaur, 324,336,401,510,514
     AC-2,410,450,457,463,490
     development, 7,100,320,457,472,498
    OAO report, 370,374,376,380,457
    program, 38,436
    tests, 257,296,315
Centaure (French rocket), 497
Central Inertial Guidance Test Facility, 68
Central Methodist College (Mo.), 334
Central Pacific, 214
Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNEB). See National Center for Space
  Studies (France).
                                                                     529
                                     INDEX

centrifuge, 68,108
Century 21 Exposition (Seattle,Wash.), 448
century of progress, 30
Ceramics, advanced, 305
Cernan, Lt. Eugene A. (USR  1,392
Certificate o Outstanding Achievement (RABA), 90
             f
Cervenka, A. J., 73
cesinm, 488
Gemma 180 (aircraft), !23l
CF-100 (WAF), 437
C H 3 B , (helicopter), 230
Chadwick, Sir Jamea, 149
Chaffee,LLBogerB. (nea),392
ChdZ m ge magazine (GE), 453
Chamber of Commerce
    Albuquerque, N.M.. 439
    Billings. M o a , 403
    Charleston, W.Va., 421
    Charlotte, N.C., 17
    cocoa, Fla., 484
    Dayton, Ohio, 483,484
    Houston, Tex., 289
    Kokomo, Ind., 4 0 6
    Los Angeles, Calif., 298,367
    New Pork, N Y ,
                  . . 98
    n.s. 2k 323
          ,   ---
    waco, Tex., 84
         --7




Chance Vought Astronautics Div. (Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc.), 25
Chance VoGht Carp., 197,442
Channte, Octave,483
Chapel Hill, N C ,
               . . 18
Chapman, D .Dean E, 5
             r           W
“Char” motor, 497
Charles Franklin Brooks Award, 24
Charles, Robert H., 239
Charleston, W.Va.. 4 42
Charlotte, N.C.. 17,463
Charyk, Dr. Joseph V., Tt,91,llS,Zl3,429
Chebotarev, Prof. G e ,
                     l b 9,441
Chemicai Xngineering Achievement Awares, 6 i
Chemical Industry M d l 358
                      ea,
Chemical Low Altitude Miseile (CLAM). See Missile, air-to-surface.
Chemical trails (see also Sodium-vapor experiments), 222
Chemistry, 435
Cherokee (rocket), 326
Chicago and Midwest Space Month,136
Chicago, Ill., 100,105,136,149,177,230,235,463
    meetings, 7,31,39,180-181,235,249,253,312
Chicago International Trade Fair, 249
Chicago, Univ. of,117,270,459
Chico, Calif., 244
China, Communist, 194,298,353,379,415,475
Chin*
    Communist, 4lS
    Nationallet, 4 .
                   l6
Christchurch, N Z ,112
                 ..
Christropher Columbus International Prize for Communication, 388
Christ wad Welt, 140
Christmas, 492
Chrysler Gorp., 173,387,478
Chubb, T A., 4 3
        .       9
Chula Vista, Calif., 27
Churchill, Manitoba, 270
Churchill Research Range ( o s u ) (Fk Churchill, Canada), 278
Churchill, Sir Winaton. 134,m
530                               INDEX

“City of Lights” (Perth, Australia). 492
City of Los Angeles Commendation Award, 301
Civil Aeronautics Board ( C A B ) , 19,254,255,333,390,483
Civil Aeronautics Research Institute. See FAA Civil Aeronautics Research
     Institute.
Civilian Industrial Technology Program, 92
Civilian pay, 485
Civil Service Commission. See U.S. Civil Service Commission.
CLAM (Chemical Low Altitude Missile). See Missile. air-to-surface.
Claremont, Calif., Air Museum, 191
Clark, Frank L. 365
Clark, Sen. Joseph S., 303,378
Clausen, Christian M., 472
Clauser, Dr. Milton, 275
Clay, Gen. Lucius D. (USA,Ret), 2’79
Clayton, Dr. Donald D., 155
Clear, Alaska, 343
Clear Lake, Tex., 282,290,333,337,478
Clemence, Gerald M., 327
Clement, Gov. Frank, 95
Clement, Stuart H., Jr., 379
Cleveland Abbe Award, 24
Cleveland Clinic, 426
Cleveland, Ohio, 256,354,375,472,494,495
Cliff, Edward P., 465
Clifford, George, 379
Chlorine37 isotopes, 489
Cloud seeding, 401
Clouds, cumulonimbus, 293
Clouds, gas, 88,114
Clouds, hurricane, 293
Clouds, noctilucent, 301,388,419
CNEB. See National Center for Space Studies (France).
Coastal sentry, 84,224
Cochran, Jacqueline, 74,480
Cocoa Beach, Fla., 98,252,496
Cocoa Chamber of Commerce, 464
COIN (Counter-Insurgency) . See Aircraft, counter-insurgency.
Cold war, 347,351,393
College of Osteopathic Medicine & Surgery, 232
Collier Trophy, 385
Collin, Everett E., 290
Collins, Capt. Michael ( USAF), 392
Colomb-Bechar, Algeria, 497
Colorado, 65
Colorado, Univ. of, 222,456
Columbia Broadcasting System ( m a ) ,132,389,423
Columbian Women, 18
Columbia Univ., 25,141,173,204,235, 237,345
     School of Journalism, 272,278
Columbus, Christopher, 185,194,200,201,217,360,370,415
Columbus Day, 386
Combustion instability, 231,438,448
Comcor, Inc., 38
Comet, 114,332,432
     Burnham 1960 11,429
     experiments, 382,383
     man-made, 139
Command and data acquisition station ( CDA) ,341
Commerce Clearing House report, 498
Commerce, Dept. of, 9,19,92,212,222,333,385,480,483
Commission of Exploration and Utilization of Outer Space (Soviet Academy of
  Sciences), 314
Commission on Science and Technology, 60,87,212
Committee of Defense and Economic Agencies (Executive Branch), 489
                                                                          531
                                    INDEX

 Committee for Economic and Cultural Development of Chicago, 84
 Committee for Economic Dereiopment, 191
 Committee on Domestic Geographic Names (Board of Geographic Names), 488
 Committee on Space Research (COSPAB);~,6 228,227, 314,330
                                             1,
 Committee, Select House, on Research, 298,337
 Commoner, Dr. Barry, 171,234
 Communications
     carriers, 262
     deep space, 278
     exchanee. 296.314.347.482
     experiGehts,i ,  w i19.&7,383
     frequency allocation, 419,425
     global, 35,304,317,396,417,429,~,467,490
     international
          companies. 269
          systems, 312,327,347,390
     laser, optical, 44,101
     NASA facilities, 371
     problems. 355
     satellites, 2655267,269,274,379,416,4%?-460,461,477,495
                                             ~            ~




          system, 112,319
          transmissions via, 267,328,339
     testa, m,   341
     “ n f e S-Band” method, 472,490
      Uiid
Communications Satellite Corp. ( ComSatCorp)
    communications
          national, 229
          international, 213,216-217,247-248,416,4aO,487
    contract, 271,29!4,317,490
    operation of,358,408,419
    organization, 429,452
    stock issuance, 285,301,417
Communist
    Bloc, 353
    rulers, 405
    system, 405,462
    world, 381
Communist China. See China, Communist.
Complex l2 (at AMB), 334
Complex SJ MILA), Si,37i,4
              (at                %
Computer
    biomedical, 105
    complex,272
    defense, 42
    digital, 432
    electronic, use of, 335
    library, 172
    model 1218,443
    Saturn I B and V,475
    services award, 317
    technology, center for, 272
    use of, in Federal Gov’t., 401
    X-15,38
ComSatCorp. See Ckmmnnications Satellite carp.
              Continental Air Defense Command.
GONm.
                       Va), 22p
Concord College (W.
Concorde (see also Aircraft, supersonic transport), 14&14l, 229, 253, 312, 320,
  379,390,398,410,487
Condon, John E , . 336
Conference on Communications Frequency Allocation (ITU) (see also World
  Conference on SpaceCommunications), 416,419,425
Conference f o r Engineers & Architects, 190
Conference of European Posts and Telecommunications, 429
Conference of National Organizations, 251
Conference on Higher Ettucation, 253
Conference on Outer Space (Third Midwest Assembly), 345
532                               INDEX

Conference on Peaceful U e of Space, 131,180-183
                           ss
Conference on Plasma Physics ( NASA), 459
Conference on Science Teaching, Mid-Winter, 468
Conference on Space Science & Space Law, 247,250
Congressional Ofece of Science and Technology (COST),289,310
Cmgreuaional Record, 187,353,377,384,466
    aircraft, 183,306
    science and technology, 212,2!53,360
    space program
         astronaut, 256
         facilities, 273,311
         manned lunar landing, 291
         objective, 48,288,430,452
         research, 56,169,319
         U.S.S.R., 303,462
         waste, 185,378,421
Congress of American Industry (68th Annual). See National Association of
  Manufacturers, 68th Congress.
Connecticut General Life Insurance Co., 197
Comer, John T., 91
Conrad, Lt. Charles, Jr. (TJBN), 28
Conrad, Max, 480
Constan, Dr. George N., 256
Constitution, 167
Construction, Ofice of (NASA Hq.) ,323
Consultant, 268
Contamination of spacecraft, 173
Continental Air Defense Command ( CONAD), 377
Continental Airlines, 367,410
Contracts (see also under agencies, such as NABA, WAF) ,51,383,454,493
Control Data Corn. 492
Control system. 261,377,411
Cook Electric Co., 162
Cook, Gen. Orval R. ( USAF, Ret), 13,251
Coolidge AFB, Antigua. B.W.I.. 37
Cooling, 336
Cooper, Dr. John Cobb, 40
Cooper, L/C K.B ,184
                  .
Cooper, Maj. Leroy Gordon (USAF), 28, 198,200,202, 218, 2 6 238, 303304,354
                                                            2,
    appearances, 202,209,    257
    awards, 205,208,219,340,465
    flight preparations, 1,101,131,192
    flight results, 386,498
    simulated flights, 186,189,192
    space flight, 196,19S,200,227,245,255,344,371,4&1
Coopers Island, Bermuda, 168
Copenhagen, Denmark, 340
Gopernicua, 167,415
Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., 136
Cornell Univ., 136,415
Corona, 251,258,280,310,339,366
Coronagraph, 280
Corporate Leadership Dinner, 342
Corp., Space Communications (csc) (see also Communications Satellite Corp.),
  27, 91
    and U.S., 59,90,99,163,169
    ollicers, 72,91,161
    organization, 17,39,139
    stock,57,114,155
corps of Engineers (ma), 98,138
Cortright, Edgar M., 52,56.90,182,355,450
Cosmic durrt, 304
Cosmic noise, 335
Cosmic radiation, 355
Cosmic ray, 74,79,328,331,332,474,488
Cosmologist, 117
                                                                533
                                       INDEX

coemologg, 480
Cosmonaut
       death of, 213,218
       flight, 347
       life of, 355
       marriage of, 417
       medical, 20,4546,355
       ww 83
           i.
       woman 86, 11,374
Cosmonautice Day, 139
 oosrnoe     (UniVerEie). 432
Cosmos (program). 119,227
COBMOB XDI, 101, 502
COBMOB W ,,      1-
                  @
OOBMQB XV, m,       508
                 - 508
C 0 6 M 0 6 XVI, 1
COBMOB XVlI, 209,505
                  a    506
008MOB XW,
c o 8 M o 8 X3XI 298,       506
C06M06 XX, 392, 509
                  47m
                   25
COSMOB     XXI,
                  4 3 510
                   3,
cQ8MOB     XXl&
       Xm 477, 511
        X
COBMOB
       lcw,481,511
COSMOB
COBP~B. See Committee on Space €bearch.
COST. See Congressional m c e of Science and      Technology.
 Cost-plus-fixed-fee ( m m )contracting (DOD), 454
 Cost-plus-incentivefee ( CPIF) contracting ( W D ) ,454
 Coughlin, William J, 361
                     .
 cpm. See Cost-plus-fixed-fee contracting (wD).
 mm. See Cost-plus-incentivefee contracting (rmo).
 Crab N b l , 493
       eua
 Crafton, Lt. Robert W. ( UBIP), 222
Crash, airplane, 271, 441
“Crater hopper”, 280
Crayons, use of, 287
Creative writing in science, 408
Cree (payload), 87
Creve Coeur Club, 65
crimea, U.S.S.R., 274
Cdmean Astrophysical Observatory (U.S.S.R.) , 419
Crocker, E. A. 170
Crossfield, A. Scott, 384
Cross-ranger indicator, 4 X
                          t
Cmz, E. S., 179
Cryogenic environment, 276
Cryomagnet, 95
C6C. See Corp., Communications Satellite.
Cuba, 347,374,391,393,441
Cumberland Plateau Seismological Observatory, 58
Cunningham, R. Walter, 392
“Current Developments in Space Law”,     40
Curtis, Sen. Carl T,187
                   .
Curtiss-Wright Corp., 256
Cutler, C. C., 222
Cuxhaven, Germany, 177
CVA 6 . See Aircraft carrier.
     9
C X 4 (cargoaircraft), 438
CX-X (cargo aircraft), 438
Czechoslovakian Academy of Sciences, 30
Czechoslovakian Socialist Republic, 30
D-558-I1 (Skyrocket), 191
DAC-RW( sonnding rocket), 410
Da Rosa, Aldo Vieira, 177
D a Vinci, Leonardo, 472
Daddario, Rep. Emilio Q., 84,322,332,424
534                                  INDEX

D a i b Eeratd (London), 433
D'Aiutolo, Charles T., 53
Dallas, Tex., 25,155,156,157,179-180,20s,209,277,446,481
Damping device, 431
Danville, Ill., 114,151
Dark Ages, 415
Darwin, Australia, 82
Darwin, Charles R ,415
                   .
Data processing equipment (see also Computers), 277
David, Charles E., 365
David C. Schilling Trophy, 340
Davis, M/G Leighton I. ( USAF) ,105,205,254
Davis-Wonathan AFB, Ariz., 499
Davis, Noah S ,278
              .
Davis, M/G Waymond A. (uam),487
Day, Postmaster General J. Edward, 255
Daytona Beach Operations, (NASA), 252
Dayton, Ohio, 419,421,483
Dazzle, Project, 295,311
DC-8,257,279,306,339,426
D.C. Board of Zoning Adjustment, 17
      See Defense Documentation Center.
DDc.
De Broglie, Prince Louis, 74
De Fries, Paul J., 4 '
                    87
De Gaulle, President Charles, 12,234
De Vaucouleurs, Dr. Gerald, 234
Deacon-Judi (sounding rocket), 168
Dearborn, Mich., 30
Deauville, France, 341
Debus, Dr. Kurt, 115,175
Decker, James L., 54
Decker, Martin M., 231,265
Declaration of Independence, 167
Decomposition unit, 278
Decontamination, spacecraft, 339
Deep Freeze, Operation ( USN) ,367
Deep Space Instrumentation Facility ( DSIF), 32,179
Deep Space Network, 27
Defender, Project, 184
Defense, Department of (see also USA, USAF, U S N ) , 212, 216, 220, 269, 318, 319,
  356,398,399,401, 475,491
     appropriations, 168, 350
    awards, 205
    bomber, 492
    budget, 215,255,400,461-2
    communications satellite system, 319,327,403
    contracts, 59,162,239,255,466
    defense installations, 477
    flight testa, 203,231
    funds, 14,15,68,83-4,24)6,249, 315
                                   262,
    international relations, 400
    launch, 202,257,351,389,391,400,499
    management, 116,234,2723,441,453,461-2
    NASA-DOD, 21, 56, 5 , 87, 98,121-2, 199, 207,277, 300, 315, 319, 334,391, 400
                         9
    nuclear propulsion projects, 367
    organization, 22,2l6, 260
    reports, 18,41,414,424,431,452,478,495
    research, 337
    satellites, 380,441
    Skybolt, 1
   solid rocket propellant, 203
   space projects, 72,90,167-168,193,199,200,210,~~9,  316,338,377,399
   submarines, 111
   Titan 111,262
   transport, supersonic, 7,19
   weapons, 394
                                                          535
                                   INDEX

Def'ense Documentation Center (DDC), 415
Defense Supply Agency ( DEA) ,415
Delamar Lake, Nev., 256
Delaware, Univ. of, 235
Delta (see also Thor-Delta ) ,76,235,352,395,407
Delta Dart. See F-106.
Delta Day, 76
Delta, Thrust-Augmented (TAD),395,459
Dembling, Paul, 382
Demler, M/G Marvin C. ( USAF),454
Demon. SeeF-3B.
Denmark, 197,340
Dennison, James T., 278,354
Dennison Manufacturing Co.,   278
Density, atmospheric. 20,61,110,469,487
Denver, Colo., 136,232,256,270,291,491
Denver Research Institute, 327,491
Deorsey, C. Leo.48,187,379,496
Dept. of Commerce Gold Medal for Exceptional Service,56
Dept. of Space Science (Rice Inst.), 2
*igmplghe&gG03€-,%
Des Moines, Iowa, 232,340,
Dessler, Dr. Alexander J., 2
Destroyer. SeeWB-66.
Detergents, synthetic, 422
Detroit, Mich., 342,398
Deutsch, Dr. Stanley, 246
Die T &&,       9
                                 ,42
Dietz, Maj. Harold W.(my)
D i l d o , F C.. 367
             .
Dingman, James E ,    . 461
   . , -- -
Diode. 89O
     -.
Dipole, 22, SI
Disarmament, 346,353,393,440,475,489
      test ban. 53.58.91.103.298.347
                                  .
                      ,.       ,
Disconnector, 2%
Discoverer (satellite), 63
Disney, Walt, 98
Distance estimation, 37
                                  msrr?fnnnf,333
                  CiVi?ian Be+-*
?xs+t.g!2ishd
Distinguished Publir Service Medal ( DOD) ,234
Distinguished Service Medal ( NAEA) ,205
Distinguished Service M e d a l ( UEAF) ,148
Dixon, Thomas F ,   . 34,47,77
Djakarta, Indonesia, 492
Dobbins AFB, Ga., 485
Dobronravov, Vladimir, 420
Dobrynin, Ambassador Anatoll, 389
Doctor, Norman J., 56
DOD. See Defense, Dept. of.
Dolgov, Petr Ivanovich, 218
Dollfns, Dr. Audouin, 493
Domestic Kames Committee, 465
Donlaa, Charles J., 365
Donnelly. Paul C., 367,371
Doolittle, Dr. James, 373
Dose, Joseph H ,  . 298
Dossin, Dr. Francois V., 332
Douglas Aircraft Co., 18,191,240,271,280,386,484
      contract, 76,230,242,251,292,458,476
      Missile and Space Systems Div., 98,246,370
      research, 48,246
      rocget,9,410,481
      Saturn IV, 143,297
      studies, 98,257,266,370,383
Donglas, Donald wills, 484
                          -
536                                 INDEX

Douglas Space Center (Calif.), 404
Downey, Calif., 126,382
Downing, Rep. Thomas N., 127
Draper, Dr. Charles Stark, 22,355,359
Draper Medal, 156
Dreher, Robert C., 476
Drewry, Col. I. 0. (USA), 62
Drummond, Roscoe, 408
Dryden, Dr. Hugh L.,  61-62,67,106,129,158-159,284,363,395
   awards, 18,156,243,249,379
   awards from, 365
   engineering and science, 55,178, 288
    international program, 81-82, 89, 100, 249, 285, 303, 314, 318, 325, 336,350,
      375,376,427,493
     space cooperation, 198-199,212
     space program, 5 M , 122-123,185,316
Dryden-Blagonravov agreements, 427,493
DSA. See Defense Supply Agency.
DsIF. see Deep Space Instrumentation Facility.
Dual compensation law, 298
Dual employment law, 298
Dubin, Maurice, 211
Dubna, U.S.S.R., 321
DuBridge, Dr. Lee A., 91,238,321
Dulles International Airport, Washington, D.C., 387
Dulles, John Foster, 418
Dunning, Dr. John R., 204
Dunsmuir House, 110,113
Dust, cosmic, 144, 306,432, 443
Dust, lunar, 308,387,433
Dust, metallic, 455
Dust, meteoritic, 388
Dwight, Capt. Edward J. ( USAF) ,426
Dwoskin, Philip B., 494
DX priority, 89
Dyna Soar. See X-20.
Dyson, Dr. Freeman J., 260
Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip Expedition.         See   EMPIRE,
   Project.
“Early U.S. Satellite Proposals,” 377
Earth
     albedo (whiteness), 342
     atmosphere, 222,331,366,367,388,400,414,498
     horizon scanning, 403
     magnetic
          field, 282, 342,356,445
          pole, 270, 333
     magnetosphere, 356,380
     rock layer, 328
     rotation, effect of,411
     sham. 37.364
     water resources, 328,331
Earthquake, 402
East Berlin Radio-TV, 394
East China, 415
Eastern Air Lines, 20,426
Eastern Hemisphere, 396
Eastern Pyrenees Dept. (France), 8
East Germany, 9,13,252,394
Eastman-Kodak, 489
East-West arms control agreement, 491
Eccentric Geophysical Observatory. See Ego.
Eccentric Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. See Eogo.
E. C. Ernst Go., Inc., 488
ECRO I, 231,297,304,488
ECHO 11,1~,158,304,314,406,426,488
                                                                             537
                                     INDEX

Eclipse, 252
EcIipse, solar, 18-19,257,273,279,332,339
&le Polytechnique (Paris, France), 330
Etonomic Club of New Pork, 435
Economist, need for, 403
Economy in Government, 475,489
ECB. see Environmental control system.
Ecuador, 33
Eden, Prime Minister Sir Anthony,270
Edmondson, Sen.J. Howard, 240
Edmonton, Alberta, 279,342
Education
      astronaut. 136
      engineers,’59,423
      inducements to,287,343
      money for, 26,172,266,318,372,423
      new institutions, 3,9,%
      need for, 24,110,118-119,148,24~250,343,      -70,    378,437,444,450,456
               .-
      Dmemms. 391
      =    ~




      scieme teachers-%, 423,46&?69
Edward R. Sharp Medical Library, 240
Edwards AFB. Calif.,. 114, 146. 148. 186, 203. 207. 237,2    322. 3 6 337.338, 371,
                                                         .%        3.
                                    .             .
                           .             .   .
                                ,
  426,459,475
                                       Sands complex, 296
Edwards-Wendover-Holloman-White
        496
             Fla., 222,499
Eglin
E d i n Gulf Test Ran=. ma.. 16.19.56.87.410
Ego (Eccentric GeoSGsical Observatory’), 36,248,436
Egypt. See United Arab Republic.
E. H.Rietzke Achievement Awards, 128
Einstein, Albert, 360
Eisele, Capt. Donn F ( o m ) ,
                       .        392
Eisely, Dr. Loren C., 408
Eisenhower, President Dwight D., 116,200, , W 253,270,418,4‘7l
      space program
          budget, 112,124,132,485
          manned lunar landine. 239
          need for, 215-216,37K408
          paw, = 166,m 1
                   %
El Centro. Calif. 35,49.1!32.391.482
Elderly, &re for, 450
“Elder Statesman of Aviation,” award, 411,484
ELDO. See European Launcher Development Organization.
Electric current, 488
Electricity, thermal, 342
Electric propulsion, 461
Electrojet, 11, 336
Electromagnet, 428
“Electromagnetic E f c s on World Communications”, 383
                      fet
Electromagnetism, 149
Electron, 23,26,41,86,95,111,156,2’70,308,356
      concentmtion, 477478
      density, 263,273,279,351,357,360,391
      temperature. 283,273,279,325,                 380
                                               %X,
                                      351,356,
Electronic, 272,312,363,391
Electronic Componen&a Conference, 186
Electronic data processing. See Computer.
EeCtrOnic New& 42,237,254
Electronic recovery control center, Sunnyvale, Cali., 296
Electronics Research Center (NASA)
      congressional action, 240,254,283,293,302,310,384,484,493
      location of, 47,97,106,127,178,394,469,483,484-485,4!35
      PIans for, 1662.98, l ,a 129,178,272,311312
Electmoptical Systems, Inc., 437
Electrostatic field, 455
      T91-623 - 4 5
538                              INDEX

Ellington AFB, Tex., 64
Elliott, Rep. Carl, 337
Ellis, Mary Jane, 494
Ellsworth AFB, S.D., 399
Elms, James C., 1,190,420
Ely, Nev., 322
Emme, Dr. Eugene M., 414
EMPIEE, Project (Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip
   Expedition), 232
Employment, 391,450,475
Encephalogram, 161
Endeavour magazine, 37
Energy collecting device, 333
Engine
     development, 267, 492
     electric, 4 9
                4
     ion, 451
     liquid-fuel, 450,451
     ramjet, 427
     solid-propellant rocket, 68,426
    testing, 491-2
Engineering Societies of New England, 62
Engineers
     and scientists, 177,190,214
    challenges, 313
     education, 59
    in space effort, 204,448
     shortage of, 46,48
     use of, 50
Engineers Joint Council, 36,179
England. See United Kingdom.
Engle, S/Sgt. Elvin H. (USAF), 480
Engle, Capt. Joseph H. ( W A F ) , 235,378,431
English Channel, 146,479
Enrico Fermi Award, 130,458
Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, 177,270
Enthoven, Dr. Alain C., 239
Environmental conditions, simulation of, 453,455
Environmental control system (ECS) , 107
Environmental sciences, 287
Eogo (Eccentric Orbiting Geophysical Observatory), 123,288
Equator, 297
Eratosthenes (moon crater), 12
Erickson, Wayne D ,  . 365
Erkin, Feridon Cemal, 25
Escape systems, 264,383
E~BO. See European Space Research Organization.
Essen, West Germany, 140
Estep, Dr. Samuel D., 269
Estes, L/G Howell M., Jr. (USAF), 334
Esther, Hurricane, 293
Europe, 194,196,206,211,213,299,325,342,430,436,4.42,448
European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO),2, 112,133,206, 211,271,
  491
European Postal and Telecommunications Administrations, 197,429
European Space Flight Symposium, 205,211,214
European Space Research Organization (ESBO), 206,271
European Space Vehicle Congress, 212
Eurospace, 133
Eurovision, 241
Evening Moecow, 138
Evans, Albert J., 401
Ewing, Dr. W. Maurice, 214
E W. Muller, Contractor, Inc., 136
 .
Exceptional Bravery Medal (NASA), 186
                                       INDEX

Exceptional Civilian Service Medal (USAF), 476
Executives’ Club, 39
Exercise Big Lf (Don). See Big Lift, Exercise.
               it
Exhaust plume, 4 5 , 4 3 7
Exhibit
    Chicago, 138
    Mercury spacecraft. 95
    NASA program, 315
    World’s Fair, 99
    X-15.95
Exotech, Inc., 3 3
                2
Expenditures, 286,316,325,337
                  364
EXPLOBEB I,
EXPLORER Vm, 367
EXPLORER I ,487
          x
                  95,317,449
EXPLORER XXI,
                   7,252,449
EXPLOBEB IUV,
     failure, 380
     performance, 12,30,295
     results,p95, 182,~,356,380
EXPLOBEB XV, 83,182,449
EXPLORER XVI, 53,341,-
                    119,134,146,182,503,514
EXPLOBEB XVII,
EXPLOBEBx w ( IMP-A ) ,449,462,510,514
EXPLOBEU XIX,      487,495,511,514
Explosion, 318
F-1 (engine)
     combustion instability, 283,438
     development, 6,42, Sa, 97-98.221
     test, 464
F-3B (Demon), 296
F-4B (Phantom II),2l6,442
F-4C (UsAF), 216,442
F-104 (Starfighter), 190,252,426
F-lo8 (Delta Dart), 426
F-111 ( a x ) . See Aircraft, Tactical fighter, experimental.
       See Federal Aviation Agency.
FAA.
FAA Civil Aeronautics Research Institute, 228
Faget, Maxime A., 420,465
FAI. See FM4ration Aeronautique Internationale.
FAI Paul Tissandier Diploma, 2 6    6
Fairbanks, Alaska, 248,341
Fairchild Stratos Carp.,43
Fairhall, Minister of Supply Allen (Australia), 295
FAITH 7 (see also MA-9), 147, 154, 192, 196, 2 5 n ,
                                                  U , 8 238, 386,W, 514
Fallon, Nev., 402
Farnborough, U.K., 1 2    1
Farrell, Richard, 275
“Father of the Common Market”, 270
Faulkner, William, 199
Fayette, Mo., 334
FRM (Fleet Ballistic Missile Submarine), 282
       See Federal Communications Commission.
FCC.
Federal Aviation Act of 1958,314
redera1 Aviation Agency (FAA), 122,256, 271, 279, 299,442, 483,485
     accident investigations, 254
     air carrier operations, 59,471
     aircraft, commercial, 333, 387
     air t r a 5 c control, 377,432,458
     Supersonic Transport Authority, 251,271
     transport, supersonic
          cooperation, international, 410
           U.S., 6,19, 69, 90,9 ,119, 136, 141, 198, 209, 248, 251, 253, 287, 307,312,
                                  4
              314, 320,336,380, 390,398, 408,429,432, 4 9 489
                                                        3,
           U.S.S.R., 47, 492
540                               INDEX

Federal Bar Association, 229
Federal budget. See United States, budget.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 114,151,285,312,372,495
  ComsatCorp, 39,57,114,155,247-248,285,301
Federal Government. See United States, Government.
Federal Personnel Associations of N.Y.and N.J., 213
Federal Radiation Council, 220
Federal Regieter, 2%
Federal Women’s Award, 131,188
Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI), 30, 32,48,341,372,424,469,484
Federation of American Scientists, 152
Fedorenko, Nikolai T ,     . 142,231
Feldman, George, 91,139,229,247
Ferdinand and Isabella, 217
Ferguson, L/G James ( UBAF) ,35,77
Fermi, Enrico, 149
Fiberglass cloth, 287
Field Enterprises Educational Corp., 48,268,269,343
“Financial Protection Against Risks of Major Harm in Government Pro-
  grams”, 141
Finger, Dr. Harold B., 89,137,169,183,233
Finland, 8,197
Finney, John W., 1,19,327,332,374,406,418
Fireball, 426
Fire-fighting equipment, 271
Firefly 111, Project ( USAF), 16,499
First Flight Airport (Kitty Hawk, N.C.), 483
“First Man-Rocket Belt, The,” 104
Fission, 284
Flag, 361
Flagstaff, Aria, 192,396,410
Flanders, Sen. Ralph, 333
Flare, solar, 92,93,263,404,471,494
Fleet Ballistic Missile (FBM) submarine, 111,263
Flies, fruit, 355
Flight dynamics, 327
Flight, hypersonic, 420
Flight, powered, 480
Flight Research Center (FRC), .          .282.322.381
                              I   I



    awards, 360,364,484
    contracts, 17,34,38,190
    flight test, 218,252,282,331,395,433
    models, 170
    sonic boom, 59
    X-15 pilots, 235
Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., 442
Flood, Rep. Daniel J., 168
Florida, 451,452,470,476
Florida Aerospace Industry Seminar, 462
Florida East Coast Railway, 337
Florida Legislature, 476
“Flow separation spike”, 326
Flox (Liquid Fluorine and Liquid Oxygen), 342,379,490
Plugwelt ( A v i a t i o n W o r l d ) ,454
Fluorescent lighting, 385
Fluorine/hydrogen propellant, 277
Fluorine, liquid. See flox.
Fluorine pump, 397
Fluorinefliquid oxygen. See flox.
Fluorine-oxygenfiydrogenpropellant, 277
“Flying carpet” (escape system), 383
Flying Fortress. See B-17.
Flying saucer, 58
Fong, Louis B. C ,102,183,352,491
                   .
                                                                             541
                                      INDEX

Food and Agriculture Organization, 396
Food supply, 273
Ford Co. See Aeronutronics Div.
Ford Foundation, 50,488
Ford, Rep. Gerald R, 315
Fordham Univ., 444
Forecast, Project ( USAF) ,216
Fort Belvoir, Va., 271
Fort Churchill, Canada, 71,88,111,206,208,!278,333
Fort Collins, Colo., 35
Fort Dix, N.J., 349,353
Fort Sill, Okla., 415
Fort Wingate, N.M., 399,442
Fort Worth, Tex., 446
Fortune magazine, 4 6 6
Foster, William C.. 409
Foster, Willis B., 436
Foulois, X/G Benjamin D. (USA, Ret.), 73,257,383
Fowler, Dr. William A.. 155
Fmgmer& 8,60&8,1?5
France
    aircraft, 229,230,234,367
         supersonic transport “Concorde” (Fr.4J.K.). 3 0 379. 390, 398. 406,410
                                                      2.
    communications, 186,189,197,425
    launch, 350,392
    metric system, 37
    nuclear, 176,298,391,438
    sounding rocket, 19,171,212,273,391,410
    spa=
         budget., 362
         cooperation, 7,89,133,443,463
         program, 8,335,438
    tracking, 298
Frankfurt, W. Germany,164
Franklin Institute (Philadelphia), 390,497
Franklin Medal,390,497
Frazitta, Frank M.,  470
FBEEDOM 7 , 238
         (?apt. Theodore C. (USAF),
Freeman_,                                 392
Freeth, Denzil (Parliamentary Secretary for Science, u.K. ) ,276
Free World, 334,337,465
          NASA personnel, 463
FIW~,
Freitag, Capt. Robert F. (USR), 70,181
French Academy of Sciences, 338
F’rench Association Pour l ’ l h d e et la Recherche Astronantique Gold Medal, 330
French Astronautics Society, 205
French National Academy, 36
French National Center for Space Studies ( ~ E s ) . See National Center for
   Space Studies (France).
French Revolution, 36
Frequency, 34,419,425
Freud, Sigmund, 415
Frick, Charles W ,   . 54,125
Friction drag, 281
Friedman, Dr. Howard, 445,493
F ~ N D S E I I P ( 8ee ah0 a - 6 ) ,16,61,67,238,361
                7
Frutkin, Arnold W ,    . ll5,182,211,306,382
Fubini, Dr. Eugene G., 260,265,319,473
Fucino, Italy, 3,5,425
Fuel, 422,427,428,463,490
Fuel cell, 337,386,405,493
Fulbright, Sen. J. William, 179,368,391,439,440
Fulton. Rep. James G., 84,287
Fulton, Rep. Richard, 35
542                               INDEX

 Fundamental Methods Associates, 340
 Funk, M/G Benjamin I. ( USAE), 25,287,301,455,465,487
 Fuqua, Rep. Don, 35
 Fylingdales, U.K., 343
 Gabriel, David S., 472
 Gagarin, L/C Yuri, 12,355,374,471
      appearances, 138,367,390,394
 Galileo, 167,182,191,415
 Gallium, liquid, 129
Gamma rays, 397
        See General Accounting Office.
GAO.
Garbarini, Dr. Robert F., 240,256
 Gardner, John H., 273
 Gardner, Richard N., 147
Gardner, Trevor, 359
Garrett-AiResearch Los Angeles, 107
Garrett Corp., 252
Garrett, J. C., 252
Gauge, pressure, 390
Gault, Dr. Donald E., 144
Gautrand, John A., 61
Gavin, Joseph G., Jr., 100
GD/A. See General Dynamics/Astronautics.
GE. See General Electric Co.
Geiger counter, 273,387
Geissler, Dr. Ernst D., 365
Gelatin, 287
Gell-Mann, Dr. Murray, 142
Geologist, 56
Gemini Program Planning Board ( NASA-USAF), 21,300,352
Gemini, Project, 78,316,353,433
     and X-20,94,114
     astronauts, 4,177, 298,333,340,392
     biomedical support, 393
     facilities, 28, 464
     management, 21,47,87,102,102,190,199,277,301,319,332,424
     plans for, 45,127,174,180,208,252,332,473
     problems, 40,309,405
     progress, 85,164,174, 238
     purpose, 174,181,207,226,254
Gemini (spacecraft)
    booster, 415,487
    engines, 424
    equipment, 162,273,328
    escape system, 127,156, 264
    flight tests, 370471,413
    landing, 297,366
    malfunction detection system, 368
    modified version, 473
    parachute, recovery, 35,49,127,192,302,366
    problems, 406
    production, 119,475
    recovery system, 302
    rendezvous-docking, 334,397
    simulators, mission, 478
    spacesuit, 393
    tracking, 325
    vibration, 431
    vehicles, launch, 320,334,368,400,431,486,488
    waste disposal system, 273
Geneen, Harold S., 247
General Accounting Omce (GAO),116,370,374,376,380
General Atomics Div. (General Dynamics), 420
                                                                     543
                                     INDEX

 General Dynamics/Astronautics (QD/A), 67,455
      Atlas, 12,100,380,490
      Centaur, 315,370,401,410,472,490
      contract, 251,268
      flox oxidizer, 379
      life-support system, 229,230
      Nova, 232
      RL-10 engines, 410
      TFX, 178, 283
 General Dynamics/Convair
      Apollo, 62,273.414
      contract, 62,414
      Little Joe 11,213,414
 General Dynamics/General Atomics Div.. 420
 General Dvnamics/Ft. Worth..~      292.427
        .~
   ~
                             ~   ~




 General E k r i c Co. ( G E ) ,135,287
      contract, 132,142,164,194,345,4l1,490,491,492
      Missile and Space Div., 320
      research, 36,267
      Space T f ~ h n d o g Center, 268
                            y
 General Electric Forum, 363
 Gen. E. E . Arnold, 140,176
 General Henry H. “Hap” Arnold Aviation Gold Medal Award, 324
 General Motors Co. See AC Spark Plug Div. (General Motors).
 General Precision, Inc., 169,221
 General Services Administration (osa), 277,369
 General Telephone and Electronics Corp.,155
 General Thomas D. White USAF Space Trophy, 226
 Generator, nuclear (seealso Snap), 345,357,467
 Geneva, Switzerland, 43,50,58,78,89,90,98,131,164,195,200.314,346,372,379,
   393,416,419,425,440
 Genisco, Inc., 263
 Genoa, Italy, 386
 Geologist, 495
 Geomagnetic, 314,449
 Geophysical Laboratory (Washington, D.C.) ,237
Geophysics, 258,267, *308,411
Geophysics Corp. of America, 19,104,241
Geophysics Research Board of NA%-NBC, 307
Georgetown Univ., 854,493,494
Georgetown Univ. Forum, 267
George Washington Univ., 18
Georgia Tech (Georgia Institute of Technology), 52
Georgia, Univ. of, 313
German American Day, 215
German Ministry of Defense, 322
German Society for Rocket Technology and Space Flight, 205
Germany, 379,398
Geronimo, 345
Gerrity, L/G Thomas P. G. (USAF), 168,188,338
Getting, Ivan A., 99,295
Gifford, Dr. Franklin A., Jr., 56
Gill, Dr. Jocelyn R., 257,280
Gillespie, R. W., 14
Gilpatric, Roswell L., 167,242,319,322,461,462
Gilruth, Dr. Robert R., 47,202,258,291,343,373,420
     awards, 22,465
Gilzin, IC., 417
Gimbaled integral nozzle ( GIN ) ,497
0188. see Goddard Institute of Space Studies.
GIN. See Qimbaled integral nozzle.
Glenn, L/C John H., Jr. (USMC), 12,26,28,86,238,3oc,dg2
     appearances, 61,67,136,153,154,224,342,3f31,480
     awards, 104,330,465
     politics, 286,278,379
Glennan, Dr. T K i h 395
                . et,
544                                  INDEX

Glider, 282, 459,481
Global weather. See Weather, global.
Glushko. Valentin P.. 428
                    I   -



Goddard D a i 41
Goddard Historical Essay Competition, 377
Goddard Historical Prize Essay. 377
Goddard Institute of Space Studies (0188) ( XASA) ,45,149,329,468
Goddard Memorial Scholarship Award, 188
Goddard, Dr. Robert H., 41,462
Goddard, Mrs. Robert H., 104
Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, 92, 92,94-95
Goddard Space Flight Center (QSFC), 32,33,54,185,211,352,388,404
    awards, 76,188,365
    communications, 44, 98
    contracts, 258,345,397,414,443,443,453,472
    experiments, 70,186,195,279,333,351,357,384,388
    organization, 381
    programs, 38,61,70,71,73,119,139,156,184,279,301,478
    radiation, 50, 95
    reports, 2,14,210,220,221,243
    research, 227,241,267,312-313,317
    results, 11,117, 146,308,332,386
    satellite monitoring, 134, 146. 247, 304, 312-313, 339, 353, 380, 381, 402, 475
    studies, 5, 38
Goett, Dr. Harry J., 1 1
                      1
Goland, Martin, 46
Gold, 399, 438
Gold Medal. 18
Gold Medalfor Exceptional Service (Dept. Commerce), 222
Gold-plating, 43s
Gold Star Medals (U.S.S.R.) , 251
Gold, Dr. Thomas, 144.415
Goldstein, Dr. Richard M., 4Fi4
Goldstone Tracking Station, 27,63,69,179
Goldwater, Sen. Barry, 72,279,310
Golobachev, V., 372
Golomb, Dr. Soloman W., 17
Golovin, Dr. Nicholas E., 483
Goodyear Aerospace Corp. (formerly Goodyear Aircraft Corp) ,406
Goodyear Aircraft Corp. (see also Goodyear Aerospace Corp. ; named changed),
  12
Goonhilly Downs, U.K., 3,5,184,235,241,425
Gordon, John A., 186
Gordon, LCdr. Richard F., Jr. ( USN), 392
Gore, Sen. Albert, 99,427
QORID (Ground Optical Recorder for Intercept Determination) telescope, 399
Gorki, U.S.S.R., 88
Gorkin, Jess, 462
Gorman, H. H., 328
Gorshkov, Adm. Sergei, 44
Governors’ Conference (Miami Beach), 282
Grachev, A., 218
Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, 238
Graham, Beardsley, 91
Graham, Gary A., 296
Graham, Philip L., 27
Grand Central Station, N.Y., 196
Grand Kremlin Palace (Moscow), 297
Grand Turk Island AFB, B.W.I., 37
Grants
    Government, 83,286,337,485,486
    non-government, 50,396
Graveline, Dr. D. E ,
                   . 228
Gravelines, France, 140
Gray, Edward Z., 387
                                                                      54-5
                                  INDEX

Gray, Horace M.,86
Great B r i e . See United Kingdom.
Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce. 487
Great Falls Air Route TrafBc Control Center (FAA), 4%
Great Falls, Monk, 432
Great Falla SAQE ( Semi-Automatic Ground Environment) Direction Center, 4 6
                                                                         5
Great Slave Lake (Canada), 280
Greece, 197
Green Bank, W.Va., 131
Green River, Utah, 42
Greenacre, Junes,410
Greenbelt, Md., 247,414
Greenhome effect, 151
Greenstein, Dr. Jesse L., 160
Gregory, Donald T ,. 323
Grifliss ~FB, . . 4 6
             NY, 2
Grillo, Stephen J., 169
Grissom, M j Virgil I. ( USAF), 28,238,465
           a.
Gromyko, Andrei A., 283,297,349,333,365,368
Groton, Corn., 165
G r o r m d ~ w l a ~ ~ ~ ~ f n t P r c e Skmmm~ ~ f ~ r .
                                           pt~
Group Achievement Award (NASA), 76.205
Groves, L/G Leslie R. (USA, Ret), 183,468
Gruening, Sen.Ernest, 256
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., 90,219,257,472,489,492
        See General Services Administration.
QSA.
Gubser, Rep Charles S., 315
Guderley, Dr. Karl G., 368
Guggenheim, Harry F., 74
Guggenheim International Astronautics Award, 262,367
Guidance and control data, 327,350,355
Guinea, 101
Guinea, Gulf of,345
Gnlfport, Miss., 175
Gulliver, 49
Gurney, Rep. Edward J., 35,470,476
Gyro, 244
H-Alpha rays, 494
Haeussermann, Dr. Walter, 365
                     U, UI.. -,
                             -KO 4 7 A
            Tm-.--,. T  T-
Um----CI
YU66"&JJ(uu-w         .   1."

Hahnemann Medical College ( Philadelphia ) ,234
Hailey, Ida., 282
Hailsham, Lord, 79,283
Halaby, Najeeb E., 279,299,442,471,492
     transport., supersonic, 13, 71,78,114,119,141,198,209,248,251,253,287,307,
        312,390,406
Hall, Dr. Albert C., 269,399
Hall-current plasma accelerator, 278
Hall, G. F ,108
           .
Hall, Dr. John A, 410,460
Hall, B Cargill, 104,377
Hall of Science building, 375
Halleek, Rep. Charlee A., 112
Ham (chimpanzee), 128
Hamburg, Germany, 4 8     6
Hamilton Standard Div. (United Aircraft Corp.) . See United Aircraft Corp.
Hammock, D. M ,    . 193
Hampton, Va., 366
"Handbook on Space Radiation Effects to Solar Cell Power Systems", 323
Haney, Paul, 291
Hardtack, Operation, 383
Harriman, W.Averell, 283
Harrington, Dr. John V., 170
Harris, Mrs. Grace M., 265
Harris, Rep. Oren, 247
546                                   INDEX

aarris, Sam, 91
3 arris Survey, 481
   arrison, Dr. George R., 430
   arry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal, 379
   art, Sen. Philip A., 425
   artesbeesthoek, South Africa, 414
   artford, Conn., 197,435
   arvard Business Club, 187
   award Business Review, 332,411
   arvard Business School, 332
 3 arvard College Observatory, 39,72
 3 arvard Univ., 53,228
 3 arwell Nuclear Research Institute (U.K.) ,153
 3 askins, Dr. Caryl P., 470
 3 asson, Dennis F., 214
   attiesburg, Miss., 254
   auty, Dr. George T., 228
   avana, Cuba, 11
   avighurst, Prof. Robert J., 278
 3awaii, 107,492
 a awk (missile), 230
 3awker Aircraft, Ltd., 48
   awkins, G. S., 39
   awkins, Willis M., Jr., 324
   awkinson, John, 62
   ‘aworth, Dr. Leland J., 103,253,258
1 awthorne, Calif., 146
 A
1 [ayden, Stone and Co, Inc., 379
   ayes, L/G Charles H. (USMC) ,361
   ’aywood, Dr. Oliver G., Jr., 278
   eart, mechanical system, 426
   eat exchanger, 437
 A eating, 281, 336,451
Heat resistance, 333
Heat shield, 280
Health, Education, and Welfare, Dept. of ( H E W ) , 212,337
Hearst, William R., Jr., 218
Hebrew Univ., 456
Heidelberg, Univ. of (Germany), 421
Helicopter
      CH-3B, 230
      future, 6
      OH-23G, 424
      s-61,222
      speed records, 424
      use in airplane crash survival, 271
      X H S l A , 179
Helios (see also Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory), 73
Helios, Project (ONE), 30
Helium, 146, 262,325, 367,488
Helium 2,2l3
Helsinki, Finland, 241
Helvey, Dr. William M., 176
Henderson, Arthur, 199
Henry, E. William, 301,312,495
Henry, Thomas R., 6
Heppe, R. R., 179
Herbede, West Germany, 140
Hercules. See C-130.
Hercules Powder Co., 166
Hermann Oberth Medal, 212
Herold, Curt P., 278
“Hero of the Soviet Union”, 218,251
Herzfeld, Charles M., 56
Hess, Dr. H. H., 238
                                                            547
                                   INDEX

 Hess, Robt. V ,278
              .
 Hess, Dr. Wilmot N., 227,308
 H. eutropha microbe, 328
 HEW. See Health, Education, and Welfare, Dept. of.
 Heyden, Rev. Francis J., f34
Heyl, Dr. Paul R, 106
 Hickam AFB, Hawaii, 287,301
Hicks and Greist, Inc., 314
High-altitude research chamber, 465
 “High Range”,322
High Voltage Engineering Corp., 153
Hilburn, Earl D., 256,382,385
Hines, William, 6,132,135,372,376,447
Hirsch, Dr. Jules, 58
Historian, 403
Hitler, Adolf, 205
Hjomevik, Wesley L ,420
                     .
H L l O (liftingbody), 292
HMB Ark Royal, 48
H~hstim,AdolphB,33~        ~   ~




Hodges, Luther H., 24,127,290,480,483
Holifield, Rep. Chet, 131
Holloman AFB, N.M., 69,142,150,237,296,326,393
Holloman, Dr. J. Herbert, 24,385
Hollywood, Calif.,484
Holmes, D. Brainerd, 48,149,190,225,239,281,299
     award, 334
     Gemini, Project, 174
     manned lunar landing
         cost, 111
         importance, 149,165,166
         progrese, 71.86
         Program, 121,188,435
         purpose, 45,65.124,198
    organization, s2, 375
Holy Loch, Scotland,111
Home, Foreign Secretary Lord, 297
Honest John (missile), 230
Hone& John-Nike (rocket),328
Honeycomb materials, 438
Honolulu, Hawaii, 220
Honorary American Fellowship ( u s ) , 22
Hoover, Dr. G. N., 496
HopwnS Marine Station (Stanford Univ.), 479
Hopkins, Philip S ,271
                  .
Hoppe, Arthur, 4 61
Horizon-scanning techniques, 403
Hornbeck, John A., 101
Home, Walter B ,476
                 .
Hornig, Dr. Donald F ,. 424,480
Hospitals, psychiatric, 445
“Hot spot in the sky”,117
Hob, Robert B., 185,204,228,419,429,472
Houbolt, Dr. John C., 365
Bough, A3/C Larry 3 (UBAF) ,186
                     .
Houghton, Prof. Henry, nS
Houghton, Dr. Karl H., 4j!6
Hound Dog (missile), 410
Houston Chronic&, 9
Houston Post, 271,408
Houston, Tex., 94,289,347,351,356,364,371,375,383,442,491
Hovercraft, 275
Howard Univ. (Washington, D.C.), 428
Howe, Dr. John P., 279
548                                   INDEX

 Howlett, Dr. Duncan, 358
 “How to Fly to Mars”, 9
 Hoy, W.,   389
 Hoyle, Dr. Fred., 155
 H. ruhladi microbe, 326
 Hsinhna (press agency). 353
 Hughes Aircraft Co., 101,299,325,362
      contracts, 141, 170
      missiles, 16
Human behavior, 445
Human body, 391
 Human rights, 482
Humanity, 468, 471
 Humphrey, Sen. Hubert H., 344,382
Hungary, 83, 333
 Hungarian Communist Party, 470
 Huntington Beach, Calif., 404
 Hunstville, Ala., 19, 66,83,201,479
 Hurricane, 293,344,401
 Hurricane Arlene, 302, 344
 Hurricane Beulah, 401
 Hurricane Debra, 348
 Hurricane Flora, 360,367
 Hyatt, Abraham, 410
 Hydac (sounding rocket), 481
 Hydraulic press intensifier, 297
 Hydrocarbon, 422,428
 Hydrofoil, patrol craft (PCE-1). See PCH-I.
 Hydrogen
      atmosphere, upper, 367
      atom, 498
      atomic, 14,15,107
      gaseous, 463
      ignition, 143
      J-2, 451
      liquid
           and oxygen, liquid, 450
           radiant heating, 247,336
           SUPPIY, 400
           use of, 428,433,437,451
           zero gravity, 247
      peroxide jets, 304
      rocket-engine chamber cooling, 336
Hyciropianing, pueumatic tire, 476
                          .
 Hydroskimmer ( SKME-1)         SIX S K M E 1 .
Hydroxyl airglow measurements, 15
Hydroxyl radicals (OH), 432
Hygiene, 273
Hyman, William A., 172
Hyperon, 26
“Hypersonic organosynthesis”, 331
HypnOSiS Quarterly, 170
Hypsometer, 390
IAA. S International Academy of Astronautics.
         ee
IAF. See International Astronautical Federation.
         See International Association of Machinists.
IAM.
        See Institute of Aerospace sciences.
IAS.
U T A . See International Air Transportation Association.
         See International Bureau of General Aviation.
-A.
        See International Business Machine Corp.
1BM.
         See International Civil Aviation Organization.
ICAO.
ICBM (intercontinental ballistic missile). See Missile, intercontinental ballistic.
Ice, 344,419
Iceland, 197
                                                                           549
                                     INDEX

        See Institute for Defense Analysis.
IDA.
“If Columbus Had Never Sailed”, 217
rea See Instrument flight rules.
Ignition, 143
Igor I. Sikorsky International Trophy, 222
IOY. See International Geophysical Year.
Ikeda, Prime Minister Hayato, 224
Ikeye (comet ) ,114
Ikeye, Kaom, 114
11-18 (Ilynshin 18) (tramport aircraft), 453
Ile du Levant launch center (France), 273
Illinois, 158
Illinois Institute of Technology, 100.172
Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute, 249
Illinois, Univ. of, 86,114,372
IlyUshin 18 (11-18). See 11-18.
Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, 379
         See Integrated Mission Control Center.
IMCO.
Imirie, Joseph S., 424
Imp (Inflatable Micrometeorite Paraglider) .- -See Paraglider.
Imp. See Inte@Tanetary Monitoring Platform.
I Y F A . 8eeZXPLUJiEBXVIII.
India, 2 0 4 9
         3.2
      cooperation, space, 11,68.336
      defense, 142
      launch, 443
      tracking, 33
Indian Defense Ministry, 4 9 5
Indiana, 4 96
Indianapolia Engineering Societies, 472,473
IndianaDolis. Ind.. 155
Indianapolia’NeuG, 489
Indianapolis Scientific and Engineering Foundation, 472
Indies, 194
Industrial Management Assistance Survey, 189
Industrtal Reuearch,212,260
Industrial Revolution, 472
Industry, 44,108,115,239,491
      and government, 358,472,478,479
      requirements, 4 6 Mi
                       6,
 Inflatable micrometeorite paraglider (Imp). See Paraglider.
Information
    exchange of, 57,58,91,127,328,390,464
    release of, 22,108,304
    reporting,8,15
    retrieval, 154
    sale of, 48
Infrared, 150,342,377,431,448
Ingalls Iron Works. 288
INJUN 1.15
          95,299
INJUR
Innovations, 491
“Inspection System Provisions f o r Suppliers of Space Materials, Parts, C a m p
  nents, and Services” (NASA),
Institute for Advanced Study (Princeton Univ.), 40,130,260,459
Institute for Defense Analysis (IDA), 331
Institute for Elements of Space Travel (Berlin), 7
Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (us) (see also American Institute of Aero-
  nautics and Astronautics), 19,22,23,25,63
Institute of Industrial Science (Tokyo),494
Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics (U.S.S.R.), 495
Institute of Radio Engineers ( IEE), 31
Institute of Strategic Studies (London),422
Institute of Teebnology, M l n Italy, 422
                          ia,
550                                    INDEX

 Instrument
      altitude predictor, 321
      coronagraph, 280
      gauge, pressure, 390
      geiger counter, 273
      ionospheric measuring, m   .
                                 3
      magnetometer, 377
      radiometer, 377
      spectrometer, 280,377
      spectrophotometer, 279
 Instrument flight rules (IFB),377
 Instrumentation, 177,281,379
 Integrated Mission Control Center (IMCC) ( MSC), 272
 Intensifier, hydraulic press, 297
 Inter-American Bar Association, 172
 Inter-Church World Peace Seminar, 375
 Intercontinental ballistic missile. See Missile, intercontinental ballistic.
 Intercontinental television, 287
 Interferometry, 481
 Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, 396
 Interior, Dept. of,212,277,486
 International Academy of Astronautics (IAA), 74,220,262,359
 International Aeronautical Film Festival, First, 32
 International A i r Pageant, Inc., 32
 International Air Show, 234
 International Air Transportation Association ( IATA) ,40
 International Art Show, 434
 International Association o Machinists ( I A M ) , 9, 23, 28, 29, 143, 147, 148, 176,
                               f
   197,375
 International Astronautical Congress, XIVth, 354
 International Astronautical Federation (IAF), 354,355,367
 International Astronomical Union, 396
 International Atomic Energy Agency, 351,396
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 311
International Benjamin Franklin Society, 18
 International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, 14
International Bureau of General Aviation (ILWA), 31
International Business Machine Corp. (IB M), 272,369,475
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) ,31
International Code, 1
International communications, 312,326,390
InternationaI Conference on Atmospheric and Space Electricity, 185
International Congress of Aeronautical and Space Medicine, VIth, 375
International Congress on Electronics, Nuclear Energy, Radio, Television, and
   Cinema, 257
“International Cooperation in Space Research”, 115
Internation cooperation, 45,152,34445,353,396,452,471
      airliner, commercial, 367,410,438,492
     accelerators, 321
     communications satellite network, 10‘7,321,416,425,440
     electrojet program, 336
     IQY, 314
     nuclear test-ban treaty, 298,348,350,389
     rocket, 20,463,497
     supersonic transport, 410
     tracking, 54
International cooperation, space (see also International space programs)
     cooperative programs, 2,20,82, 139,212,269,270,272,274,275,276,279,285,
        314, 317, 319, 329,348,350,364, 3 6 369, 393, 405, 445, 478, 494
                                         6,
     proposals, 162,358,464
International Council of Scientific Unions, 98
International Electronic Circuit Packaging Symposium, Fourth, 311
                                                       W,
International Geophysical Year ( IGY) ,63,68,80,131, 314
International Qaophyeics Bulletin, 35
                                                                           551
International Hydrological Decade, 328
International Latex Gorp., 403
International l w 347
                 a,
International Northwest Aviation Council 342
International ScientiffcRadio Union, 168,341
International sounding rocket facilities, 329,447
International space programs (see also International cooperation, space)
     U.S.-Australia, 82, 139,295,295,464
    U.S.-Canada, 32,61,71,1lS,  279,321,357,410,449
    U.S.-I)enmar& 340
    U.S.-France, 89,335,391,410,487,491
    u.s.-E'rance-India,443
    U.S.-Germany, Ws,454
                     et
    U.S.-India, 11
     u.s.-Italy, 148, 296
    U.S.-Japan, 26'7,351,367,436
    U.S.-Nigeria, 296
     U.S.-NO~WW,340
     U.S.-Scandinavia, 340
    LLs.-sBTeden, 3Ol,340,4la,478
     U.S.-U.A.R., 319
    U.S.-U.K., 112,295,311
    U.S.-U.K.-U.S.S.R.,283,353,388,410
    U.S.-U.S.S.R., 8 , 100, 158, 2 6 303, 306, 313, 314, 3 7 319, 332, 336, 343,
                    9                                     1.
                                  7,
      344, 347, 348, 350, 351, 353,355, 358,365, 366,368,369, 3 3 375, 376,381,
                                                               7.
      386. 389,390,393,394,    413,419.424,425.,434,443,458,  4eo.462,464,482,
      488 493,494
International Space Science Symposium,Fourth, 2 6 2
International Symposium on Gravitational collapse,481
International Symposium on Quantum Electronics, Third, 54
International Symposium on the International Geophysical Year, 3M
International Technical-Scientific Meeting on Space,257
International Telecommunication Union (mu), 329,416,419,425
International Telephone and Telegraph Carp. (mar), 57,87,247.282
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, 252,329
International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, 344
International Year of the Quiet sun (148~) ,! 443
                                            %
     plana for
         Germany. 322.453
         U.S. 8 3 .so.474
               .5
         U.S.-U.S.S.R.,332
     research during, 2 7 3 2
                       2,!8
     rocket t s ,410,476
             et
Inter-Parliamentary Union, 78
Intemlanetary exploration, 153,366
                                                             xw),36395
Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (Imp) (see also EXPWBEB
     launch,428,449
     Performma?, 462
Interplanetary Monitoring Probe. See Interplanetary Monitoring Platform
   (Imp).
Interplanetary travel, 3 6
                        1
ZnteratelZar Commur*cotlon, 280
Intervision. 241
Inventions and inventor% (seealso Patent), 136,174,297,385,438
Inventions and Contributions Board (NASA), 281
Ion
     chamber, 107,273
     concentration, 417,478
     densitp. 87,263,357
     engine, 280,461
     rocket, 437
     spectrometer, 449
     temperature, 283,367
Ionized g%a.488
552                                  INDEX

 Ionosphere, 188,279,332,357,414
      communications, 241
      cosmic noise, 335
      D 6 E layers, measurement of, 87,279,477,478
      flights in, 16,70,87,111,158,2&3
      measurement, 222,273,290,351,357,359
      noise, galactic, 335
      pollution of, 19
      radio wave propagation, 391,409
     research, 415
     results, 92
     storms, effect on, 185
Iowa Bankers Association, 398
Iowa City Daily Press Association, 340
Iowa, State Univ. of., 15
 Iowa Summer Study, 180
 IQSY. See International Year of the Quiet Sun.
Iran. 33~-
    I



 IRE. see Institute of Radio Engineers.
Ireland, 197
Iris (rocket, Franco-Italian), 463
Iron oxide, magnetic, 428
 Isakov, Adm. of the Soviet Fleet Ivan S, ( R e t ) , 140
                                         .
“Is Mercury Program Headed for Disaster?”, 396
Isotopes, radioactive, 351
Israel, 105,105
Italian National Research Council, 295
Italy
     communications, 197,425
     Jupiter missile, 168
     6an Marco Project, 295
     sodium experiments, 212
     space cooperation, 133
     space program, 88,203,483
 IT&T. See International Telephone and Telegraph Corp.
Itokawa, Prof, H., 494
mu. See International Telecommunication Union.
Iven C Kincheloe Award, 359
        .
Izveatia, 20. 32,76,123,140,  193,2l8,401,434,449
5-2 (rocket engine ) ,53,423,451
J57-P-37A (JT3) (letengine), 437
J-60 (jet engine), 371
J75 (jet engine), 437
Jacksonville, Ill., 224
Jackson, John E.,    227
Jackson, Sen. Henry M., 107,114,271
Jacobs, James, 483
Jaffe, Leonard, 70,120,163,285
Jahn, Gunnar, 474
James Forrestal Research Center (Princeton Univ.) ,470
James, Jack Norval, 104,365
Jane’8 A l l the World’8Aircraft, 484
Japan, 447,453
     booster, 436,465
     defense agreement, 164
     launch, 203,476
     probe, radio-frequency resonance, 351
     Relay, use of,227
     rocket, 212,307,436
     satellite, 224,436
     TV transmission, 447
Japanese Space Development Council, 224
Japan’s Radio Research Laboratory, 361
Japan’s Science and Technology Agency, 436
Japan’s Space Communications Laboratory, 447
                                                                     553
Jastrom, Dr. Robert, 149,2l4,291,329,468
Jato ( jet-assisted takeoff) ,185
Javelin (rocket). See Argo D-4.
Jefferson-Jackson D a y Dinner, 2U3
Jefferson, President Thoma%     403
Jekyll Island. Ga., 468
Jensen, Rep. Ben F.. 185
Jensen. Prof. J. Hans D., 421
Jet-assistedtakeoff. See Jato.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JpL),2,5,1€?5,381,472
     awards. 104.385
     contract. 361.490
     Mariner 3.310
     radar experiments, 454
     radarastronomy, 63
     radioastronomy, 6
     Ranger. Project. 87,264,310,399
Jet, rocket (see also Rocket ) ,312
Jet Star. See G14ok
Jirmmnrcnems
Jodrell Bank Experimental Station (U.K.), 130,185,%t3,305
Jodrell Rank Observatory (U.K.), 95,274
Johannesburg, South Africa, 196
John Crerar Library, 172
John F Kennedy Space Center. See Kennedy Space Center.
      .
John F i z Medal, 279
      rt
John J. Montgomery Award, 465
Johns Hopkins Univ., 184,279,308,454
Johnson, Caldwell C.. 54
Johnson, Charles B ,385
                   .
Johnson, Dr. Howard W.,   136
Johnson, President Lyndon B . (see also Johnson, Vice Prea Lyndon B ) 451,
                              .                                    .,
  464
    appointments, 47l,479
    appropriations. 452
    awards, 4.5&468,479
    budget, 475,485
    Cape Canaveral, 451,470
    Cape Kennedv. 451.464
    economy, 475,489
    expenditures. 489
    Federal employment, 475
    Kennedy, John F.450,451
                     .
    Kennedy Space Center. 451,452
    lunar flight program. 458,493
    military in space, 491
    peace,482
    President, 446
    space pmglrams. 447.453.458
    supersonic transport, 458,487
Johnson. Vice President Lyndon B. (see also Johnson, President Lyndon B.),
  n,2 a . 3 4 0
    lunar landing, 359,369
    President. 446
    space cooperation. 349.404
    space impact. 156,171.192
    space oblectives. 33,162,234,382
    space pace, 132.224,282
    space policy. 364
    space promess, 29.58. log, 205,277,2so
    space Program. 400.404
    space understanding, 104,203
Johnston Island, 492
Johnston. Richard S ,498
                    .
Joint Meeting of Service Clubs, 405
      141-4323 G
               -
               3
               6
554                              INDEX

Joint Systems Analysis Group, 136
Jonash, Edmund, 472
Jones, Rep. Robert E., 452
Journal of Aerospace Medicine, 498
Journal-American, N Y ,213,218
                       ..
Journal of Engineering Education, 59
Journal o f Geophysical Research, 39
Journal of the American Nedical Assooiation, 254
Journeyman (sounding rocket). See Argo D-8.
J P - 4 (fuel), 428
JFL. See Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Junin, Argentina, 48
Junior Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C., 56
Jupiter (missile), 25,168
Jupiter (planet), 6,16,52,86,197,414,420,448, 495
Jupiter C (booster), 34
Justice, Dept. of, 28
Kac, Dr. Mark, 279
Kachur, I., 218
Kagoshima, Japan, 203,476
Kagoshima Space Center ( J a p a n ) , 476
Kaiser, Edward P., 91
Kaiser Engineers, 110
Kakunin, Alexander, 171
Kalitinsky, Andrew, 232
Kamanin, Gen. Nicolai Petrovich, 355
Kamchatka (Siberia), 244
Kansas, 86
Kansas City Aero Club, 265
Kansas City, Kan., 256
Kansas City, Mo.,323,432
Kansas State Univ., 86
Kantrowitz, Dr. Arthur R., 142
Kaplan, Dr. Carl, 279
Kaplan, Dr. Joseph, 63,278
Kaplan, Dr. Lewis B., 151
Kappel, Frederick R.,   10,47.98
Kapustin Par, U.S.S.R.,   259
Kardashev, N.S., 40
Karrer, S ,494
           .
Karth, Rep. Joseph E., 324,396,472
Katz, Dr. Ludwig, 130
Kavanau, Dr. LawrenceL., 48,72,206,269
Kazakhstan Academy of Sciences, 193
Kazakhstan, U.S.S.R.,    241,244
Keck, Capt. Louis K. (uam),222
Keeling, B/G Gerald F. (USAF), 38,189
Kefauver, Sen. Estes, 45
Kehlet, Alan B., 214
Keldysh, Prof. Mstislav V., 30,40,42,303,305,427
Kelley, Dr. Albert J, 42,51,62,127,272,311
                     .
Kelley, Dr. Marvin J., 123
Kellog Radiation Laboratory (Cal Tech), 488
Kelly, Gen. Joseph W. (USAF) ,321
Kennedy, David M.,91
Kennedy, Sen. Edward M ,54.
Kennedy, President John F., 27,288,393,447,450,451,452,470
      appointment, 103,287,311,324,424,479
      assassination, 446
      award, 16,205,385,468
      budget, 14,66,252,253,262,316,334,442,485
      burial, 448,449
      communications, 39,199,  229,247,265.296,
                                              321,440
      defense, 116
      education, 109,148
                                                                      555
                                  INDEX

Kennedy, h i d e n t John F.--Continued
   industry, 24,318
   international cooperation. 349,353
   jet transport, 321,434
   lunar flight, manned, joint U.S.-U.S.S.R., 319, 34&34!3, 350-351, 353, 358,
     365. 3 8 3 9 374, 376, 381, 413, 418, 458, 4 2 493
                                                  6,
            6-6.
   missile, U.S.S.R.. 432
   missile program, 294
   nuclear test-ban treaty, 284,348
   patent policy, 384
   peace, 236
   program, space. 10.67, l23-l24,157,191,197,198,201,208,214,217,230,243,
     276, 303, 310. 346, 347, 348, 349, 369, 374, 4 3 409,49,442,447, 458, 462
                                                   0,
   reports, 29,57,82,361
   science in government, 398,402
   strike, 23,28.176
   supersonic transport,209,458
    -.
   technology, e,&,    105
         46
          4
    taw, -433% 4a2
     United Nations, 34% 4 04
Kennedy Space Center. RUA (see also Launch Operations C n e ) 486,492
                                                           etr,
     contracts, 488
     establishment, 851,452,470
Kerner, Gov. Otto, 156
Kernochan, John M ,141
                    .
Kerr, Sen. Robert S., 1,TI
Kerridge, Dr. John F.443
                     .
Kershner, Richard B ,308
                     .
Kettering. Charles, 176
Key West, Fla., 441
Khabakov, Aleksandr, 123
Khrushchev, Premier Nildta, 415
     cooperation, 349
     cosmonauts, 244,351
     manned lunar landing, 303,349,386,401,   402,404,409,4l6,47,418,422,430
     meetings, 66,252
     missile, 462
     nuclear test-ban treaty, 236.264
     spacecraft, 43,422
     space race, 422,439
     supersonic transport, 422
Kid& Charles V , 60
                .
Kidnapped, 98
Kiess, C. C., 494
Kill Devil Hills, N.C., 3 3 bso
                         4,
Kill Devil Hills Memorial Soeiety, 480
Killian, Dr. Jarnee I. 128
                     t,
Killion, George L ,91
                  .
Kimberly Mountains,Australia, 318
Kincheloe Award. See Iven C Kincheloe Award.
                                .
Kincheloe, Yrs. Dorothy, 359
Kindelberger, James, 384
Kinzel, Dr. Augustus B ,62
                        .
Kirk, Richard L,t l1N
               N.M., 176
Kirtland aw,
Kittenger, Capt. Joseph, Jr. ( UBAF) ,108,151
Kitty Haw&.16
Kitty H a w k N C ,481.483
                ..
Kiwi (nuclear reactor), 89,491
Kleinknecht, Kenneth S , . 61,205,465
Enaff', Dr. George M. (-1. WEAF, Bet), 273
Koelle, Dr. Heinz H.. 212, 412
Eokomo, Ind., 460
Kollsman Instrument Corn., 334.392
556                                 INDEX

Komsomolska~a        Pravda, 40,101
Kondrashov, Stanislav, 358
Konecri, Dr. Eugene B., 135, 163,175, 187,233, 246, 354
Koppenhaver, James T., 336
Korolov, Sergei P., 428
Kosciusko, Miss., 448
“Kosmodrom”, 427
Kotelnikov, Vladimir A., 495
Kovach, Dr. Robert L., 44
Kovda, Prof. V ,50.
Kozyrev, Nikolai, 235
Kraft, Christopher C., 200,205,309.420.465
Kraft. JoseDh. 191
Kramer, S. B.,’133
Krasnaym Zvezda (see also Red S t a r ) , 3,44,58,63, 83,111,417,471
Krieger, F. J., 171,259
Krisberg, Dr.-Nathan L., 279
Kronogard Rocket Range (Sweden), 295,301,419
Krylov, Marshal Nikolai I., 141,434
Krypton, 37
Kubesch, Maj. Sidney (USAF), 389
Kubica, Andrew J., 278
Kuchel, Sen. Thomas, 313
Kuiper, Dr. Gerard P., 279,492
Kureweg, Dr. Hermann H., 22
Kusch, Dr. Polycarp, 237
Kwajalein Atoll, 220,242,272,324,327,452,479
Kyoto Univ. (Japan), 494
L 1 9 (USA aircraft), 395
Labor, Dept. of, 338
Laborite, 199
Labor Union Local 872,393
Lagos Harbor. Nigeria.. 55.284.285.296.302.321.339.345.349
                                    ...
                             ,   ,            I    I   ,



LaGuardia Airpok, 153
Lahm, B/G Frank Purdy (usa,’Ret),268,483
Laird. Rep. Melvin R., 298
La Jolla. Calif., 421
Lake Erie, 357
Lakehurst, N.J., 284,296,304,339,345
Lambda-2 (sounding rocket), 476
Lambert Field, Mo., 216
Laminar flow, 146,338
Lamont Geological Observatory, 214
LAMP. See Low Altitude Manned Penetrator.
Lancaster, Calif., 191
Land, Edwin H., 468
Landing gear, 281
Lang, David W., 289
Langley Research Center (LABS), 283, 30‘7, 308,344, 381, 387, 411
      aerodynamics, 94,170
      award, 205,235,338,365,366
      contract, 16,136,158,164,230,255,299,303
      experiment, 195
     hydroplaning, 476
     invention, 242,297
     proposal, 326,403
      research, 51,71,234,297
      Space Radiation Effects Laboratory, 56,163,251,303
      space station, manned, 251
     supersonic transport, 253
Langley, Samuel Pierpont, 483
hngmuir, Dr. David B., 279
h n g m u i r probe, 241,273,357
~ P PDr. Ralph E., 463
         ,
                                                                        557
                                   ‘INDEX

LBBC. See Langley Reeearch Center.
Larsen, F n J., 324
           in
Laser (Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Itadiation)
     application of, 330
     development, 36,48,92,llS,151,292
     patent 362
     use of,44.54,8&101,388,400,419
Las Vegas, Nev., 58
Latin America, 50.353
Launch complex, 307,335
Launch Operations Center (LOC) (see also Kennedy Space Center), 1 , Z l , 2 9
                                                                           0,
                                                                   6
  m 328
      t
     awards, 205
     construction, 29,89
     name change, 451,452,470
     organization, 65,175,252,381,398
     program% 38
Launch Phase Simulatur, 453
Launch tower. 268
Launch v$ici<%7p
Launcher umbilical t o w e , 488
                               ~




“Launching the Moon Rocget”. 115
Lausanne, Switzerland, 78
Lawrence B Sperry Award, 22
              .
Lawrence, David, 361
Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, 141,213,479
Leach, Capt. Bertram G. (USA),424
Lear-Siegler, Inc., 101,252,379
Le Bourget Airport ( Paria), 230,234
Lechtman, Max D., 328
f‘lectnresin Aerospace Medicine”, 4   6
Lederberg, Dr. Joshua,49,214
Lee,Dr. William A., 61,387
Legion of Merit ( USAF), 70,273
Legislative Drafting Besearch Fund, 141
Lehner, Francis E, 4
                   .4
Leicester, Univ. of (U.K.), 478
Le Journal du D i m a c h e , 355
LEY. See Lunar excursion module.
                                   a
’kiiiay, Gen. Curtis E ( n s ~ ~ j , m, nG SiS, ET, m,
                                          m,
                                  S,
                       .                                         47%
Lemke, George, 33
Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman (USA), 3
Leningrad Cosmonaut Club (U.S.S.R.), 298
Leningrad Polar Institute (U.S.S.B.), 453
Lenin Prize, 154
Lenz, Hans,242
Le b’oir. 378
Levy, D J ,438
         ..
Lewis and Clark Expedition, 86
Lewis Research Center ( LBC), 99,381,428
     Centaur
           development, 450,472
           test,257,410
     contract, 110,143,269,340,342,379,401
     experiment, l29,lSO.211,231,247,280,391
     invention, 291
     Plum Brook Station. 20.95
     program, 15,38,95,   io8,’240,325,336,370,382
     studies, 432,441,451
      test. 449,451
Lexington, M s . 51
               as,
Libby, Dr. Willard F.214.498
                      .. ~~




6lTBELL?,238
Library of Congress, 442,486
                                   INDEX

Lick Observatory, 56,73,
Liege, Univ. of (Belgium), 429
Life
     extraterrestrial, 4,16,17,25,40,66,260
     protective measures, 362
     raft, 281
Life magazine, 200, 256, 343,430
Life science (see also Bioscience)
     atmospheric pressures, 393
     bacteria, use of, 326
     bones,46,228
     deceleration effect, 393
     equipment, 162,393
     experiment, 155,176,195,196,225,227,241,~54,275,411
     heart, 50,228,245
     impact velocity effect, 393
     isolation, 80
     nutrition, 393
     optics, 260
     oxygen environment test, 455
     program, 135,225,268
     radiation, 96,204
Life support system, 275,326,332
Light-gas a n exwriment. 497
Light,ht&ity Aeasurement, 278
Lighting, ball, 211
Lilienthal, David E , . 183
Lilienthal Medal. 265
Lilly, William E.;  61
Lincbln Laboratory. See Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Lindberg, Judge William J., 28
Lindbergh, Charles A., 67,196,204,205
Linde Go., 184,400
Lindsay, Dr. John, 93
Lindstrom, Robert E.,     157
                     Jr.,
Lingle, Walter L., 81,175,323,381,468
Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., 36,179,431
     Chance Vought Astronautics Div., 25
Linne (moon crater), 12
Linsley, John, 74,79
Lippmann, Walter, 351,368
Lipschutz, Dr. Michael J., 151
Liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen. See Flox.
Litchfield, Edward H., 9,260
Litschgi, A.Byrne, 91
Little, Col. James W. (USAF), 207
Little Joe 11,514
     contract, 62,414
     flight test, 257,273,426
     launch, 325
Little John (missile), 230
Little Rock AFB, Ark., 499
Little, Stafford, 183
Littlewood, William, 207
Litvin-Sedoi, M., 4 0
                    2
Load, 281
LoDogo magazine, 333
m. See Launch Operations Center.
Locke, John W., 335
Lockheed Aircraft Corp., 12,179,324,481,497
     contract, 16,232,276
     strike, 9,29
Lockheed-California Go., 16,18,119,190,234,266,344,429
Lockheed Electronics Go., 189
Lockheed-Georgia Go., 34
                                                             559
                                       mDEx

L o c M Missile and Space Co., 96,175,1sS,Zol, 438.d
      contract, 1 1 4 , 3 2 0 , ~ ~
      patent, 133
Lockheed Propulsion Co., = , l a 357
Lockheed Solar Observatory, dBrL
" L o c k s p r a y ~ l d " , 938
LoRl na,242,1506
London Timed. 83
London, U.K., 389,422,432,471
     commnnicationa, 86,235,242, !&%.no,    389
     meetinge, 31,91.175,245,248,307,314,387,~
h d 0 4 UdV.Oi (U.K. ) , 3 7 , 4 3
Long, Rep. Clarence D., 483
L w Construction Co., 258,324
 o
Long,Robert W , . 256,323
Long,Sen.Edward V ,229.
Long,Sen.Russell, 174
Lookout, Program (Canada), 437
Lorem, Prof.Edward N., 24
Loa -os      scientific Laboratory, 244,459
h s AivFks. f?rtfli.,3l, 86,1%, 3Bf,433
     meetings 31,9l,  175,245,248,307,314,367,4!55
h s Angeles Times, 73
Louisiana. 318.335
Louisiana'por;thase, 403
Louisville, Ky., 202
Louis W.Hill 8mce TransDortationAward. 22
Louvre (Paris,-hame),4 4    3
Lovelace Foundation for M d c l Education and Research,478
                            eia
Lovelace. Dr. W.  Randolph, 11,478
Lovell, W r . James A ,Jr., (om),
                       .             28
Lovell, Sir Bernard, 128,153,185,!2'74,276,303,306,317
Lovett, Bobert A,,468
Low,George M., 56,61,366,380,382
Low Altitude Manned Penetrator (LAMP), 421
Lowell Observatory, 192.234,596,4lO,    460,495
Lowery, Harold R ,365
                  .
Lowman, Pahl D., Jr., 220
Lowry, B H., 275
         .
m. %?erparis S--+ch CmteF
Lubricant, 216.497
Lubrication, 129,2l6
Luce, Clare B o h 256
              ot,
Ludlum, Dr. David M , 4
                      .2
Lufthansa, 379
Lunar (see ale0 Moon and Lnnar program)
    base. 220.275
    contract, ! J , 4
               U235
    crater. E ,
             ?116,387
    dust, 387
    environment, 387
    exploration, 83,148,194,291,316,392,401,477
    gaees,480
    grafity, 215,387
    landing site 101
    maw, 26,245,488
   materials, research, 3013,396
   orbiter, 275,328,356,477
   Photography, 398
   probe, 165.3%, 339
   rendezvous, 355,365
   scooter, 260
   simulation chamber,308
   spacecraft, 165,339
    surface, 83,85,170,275.306,387.402,489
                                    INDEX

Lunar Excursion Module ( LEM) ,408
   cost, 392
   development, 380,384,387
   environmental control system, 489
   escape system, 25
   guidance and navigation system, 392
   #landing engine, 219
   radar subsystem, 472
Lunar Landing Research Facility ( LBRC) ,387
Lunar Orbiter (spacecraft), 274,326,356,477,489
Lunar program (U.S.) (seealso Moon and Lunar)
   advantage, 362
   comment, 185-186,198,216,237,239,285,290-291,416,417
   criticism, 148, 191, Zl4, 215, 237, 240, 250, 290-291, 331, 397, 452, 468, 470
   funds. 191.215.231.300.376.385.392.468.475
   manned flight ’and’lauding,’ 67, ’71-72, 3b4, 317, 408, 409, 430-431, 4 W ,
     447,458,472,495
        restrictions, 487
   objective, 66,275,337,340,361,461
   pace, 165,250-251,290,304,383,417,418
   priority, 190, 191
   support of, 214,442
Lunar program (joint U.S.-U.S.S.R.)
   Apollo flight, 347-348
   comment, 275-276, 303, 342-343, 344-345, 351, 356, 358, 359, 365, 368, 369
   cooperations, 275, 303, 306,317-318, 319, 336, 344-345, 347, 349-350, 351-352,
      359,36~66,368-369,376,381,390,458,460,482,493
      criticism, 347, 350,351,358,388
      funds for, 384,386,430
      proposal, 347,348,350,351,353,365366,368,381,413,418,460
      restrictions, 487
Lunar Surface Materials Conference, 211
“Lunescape climber”, 260-261
LWNIK I . 130
           n
LUNIK IV,’121,124,132,135,141,1503
      flight, 11~120,123,127,129
     performance, 130
Luster, Project (NASA), 387
Lyman-Alpha rays, 279
Lvnn. Vernon L.. 170
Lion; Curtis c., isS
Lyster Award, 222
M-2 (lifting body), 70,291, 331, 336, 459
M-82 (zalaxyl. 368
MA-6 (‘;lee aiSb’FRIENDSHIP7 ) , 238
MA-7 (see also AUKOBA 7 ), 238
MA-8 (see also SIGMA ‘I), 26,238,245,286
MA-9 (see also FAITH 7),257,504,514
     award. 340
     comments on, 204,208,209,224,22i-2&, 246, XF&XB
     flight, 195-198,202,245
     plans, 43,131-132,200
      preparations. 1-2, 27,29,31,43,51,84,100,136,14&147,153,154,186,192,194
      Droblems. 218.371
      iesults. *8.245
      simulation,’l85, 192
     sketches of, 255
MA-10,202, 208, 238
McAndrew. William R.. 131-132
MacArthur, General of theArmy Douglas (USA), 39
McClellan, Sen. John L., 60,135,212
McConnell, Joseph, 425
McCormack, James, 123
McCormack, Rep. John W., 380381
M a r a c k e n , Curtis W., 211
                                                                   561
                                   INDEX

Mcl)ermott, Dr. Waleh, 43
MacDill bw,ma., 442
McDivitt, a p t . James A (USAF), 28
                         .
MacDonald, Dr. Gordon J. F ,. Zl4.275
MacDonald, Capt. Robert (usar),208
McDonald, R. Rev. William J., 192
            t
McDonnell Aircraft Corp., 328.475,478
    award, 365
    -#
     1)
    strik$14
MbCGill h i V . (mbnada),29
McGlathery, Dave M ,240.
McGraw-Hill.. 1fR
     -
~   ~      .
Mach 2 airliner, no,398
Mach 3 airliner (e Aircraft, supersonic transport),27l, 398
                       also
McIntpre. Sen. Thomas J.. 333
McKay, John, 161,191 .
MacKay Trophy. 209,302
McKee, Col. Daniel D. (USAF) ,331
rnCee, ffen. W  -        F.-W),22X,%
Mackenzie, R/A Hugh S i l n (PR),23
                          trig
McKie, Dr. Douglas,37
McLaughlin, Dr. Merlyn, 22  !3
                             !
M e M a n , Charles H., 365
McMahon, Sen. Brian, 183
McMath Hnlbert Observatory (Univ. of Mich.), 4 3
                                              6
McMillan, Dr. Brockway, Zl,48,127,300,302
Maanillan, Prime Minister Harold, l36,lQQ.
                                         236
McMinnville, !knn., 58
McMnrdo Sound, Antarctica,367
MacMurray College (Ill.),224
McNamara, Robert S,Zl,31, 3 ,84, Sa, 114, 1 1 16B, lOB, 252,401,
                                            5,
                        .      2                                   46
                                                                    6,
  473,475,477,492
MACE. See Medium Altitude Communications Satellite.
MacTaggart, J. A. 12
                . Jr..
Macy, John W , 99
Madey, Jesee M., 885
Ma&. Prof. Kenechi, 494
                       mn --..
-.-.-
 --n.                   ”,
        v..-rli...,.,A
        *
-uugcAL-Y,   ...
             -.
              ..
              I.
              ..
               -,
                .    1.


                             Legal Lodestar, The”, 172
“Magna Carta of Spa-The
Magna Corp., 326
Magnetic, 391,3QB, 493
    disturbances. 310
    Eeld, 95,257,295,356,880,449
    polarity, no,436
Magnetohydrodynamics (XED), 488
Magnetometer, 377
Magnetosphere, 356,880,414
Magnuson, Sen.Warren G .90,107,114,247,211
                            .
Mail, delivery by rocket., 4 3
                            6
Maine, 1,186,189,426
Maine, Univ. of, 396
Mains, Germany,21
Majunta, Madamecar. 488
Malagasy Republic, 488
Malaise, Daniel, 4 9
                   2
                                3Bl
Mali’unction-detmtion
Malina, Dr. Frank J., 220,359
Malinomky, Marshal Rodion, 68
Mallick, Donald L,   23
Malmstrom AFB, M m t , 170,268.399,488
Malone, Lee B ,365
              .
Maltby, Per, 88
Malvern, U.K., 63
Management Servim, Inc., 3 9   .0
562                               INDEX

Manchester, U.K., 116
Manes, T/Sgt. Charles L (UBAF), 186
                          .
Manhattan, Kan., 86
Manhattan Project, 106,210
Man High Project (USAF), 30
Manitowoc, Wis., 3
“Manned aircraft gap”, 338
Manned Flight Mission Control Center ( MFMCC), 29
Manned Orbital Laboratory (MOL) ( UBAF),251,316,458,473,481,490
Manned Orbital Research and Development S p t e m (MOBDS), 315
Manned orbital space station, 251,346,391
Manned Spacecraft Center ( M S C ) , 16,47,78,258,366,371,439,443,492
   Apollo, 497
   astronaut, 28,175,221,238,245,246,273,296,322,340,392
   award, 205,273,281,364,365
   contract, 1 25,51,62,162, 189, 170, 184,213,219, 239, 258,289,292, 334,343,
               ,
       361,366,387,414,495,497
         proposal, 333
   facilities, 30,64,255,272,282.331,333,337,375,425,478,490
    Florida Operations, 420
   Gemini, 94, 292
    Mercury, 200,309,372,382
    organization, 1,70,190,281,290,380,381,398,420,446
    personnel, 125,315,323,375
    report, 425,430,   489
   research, 35
    smcecraft d a n s . 74.193.2.54
    siudies, 9,fOl,l&, 431,498~




    test, 107,170.178,192,264,302,423,455
    visit, 45,48,94,497
Manned space flight
   astronaut-scientist, 180,436
    bioscience program, 411
    centrifuge facility, 271
    cooperation, 139,366
   equipment, 140,239
   funds, 316
    human factors, 180,228
    importance of, 4,67,148,155,’162,164,165,340,398,409
    life support systems, 326
    lunar landing, 14,23, 100,101,119,148, 153,190,274, 303,319,323, 337,365,
       374,384,388,392,402,408,447,451
    Mars landing, 14,21,228,429
   medical, 45,228
    military use, 319,332
   plans, 49,206,276
    program, 71,207,283,307,309,335,375,376,381,398,436,461
   radiation, 41,96
   reentry, 112,228
   reliability requirements, 309
   research and development, 110
   simulator, 44
   tandem, 304, 372
    U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation, 319. 336,343,344,346,347,348, 349,350, 351,353,
       355,358,360,365,366,368,369,376,381,386,390,393
    U.S.S.R.,305,362
   Venus capture, 14,228,429
Manned Space Flight Meeting, Second, 157
Manpower, scientific, 110
Mansfleld, Sen. Mike, 281
Man-spacecraft combination, 354
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, 325
Marconi wireless, 149
Marcotte, Paul G., 12
Marietta, Ga., 321
                                                                    563
                                 INDEX

Marine Corpa Museum,361
Mariner (program), 7,8,58,334
    B,5,422
   -96
   Mars flyby, 137
   R,5
Y [ ~ ~ II, 16.96
          EB
    performance, 2,8,293,341
    results, 47,@, 144,151,310,484
    Venus flyby, 479
Mariner 3, 310
Mariner, Ruth,316
Marinii, Yuri, 36
Marion Power Shovel Co., 51
Mark I (seealso Space station), 46
Mark I1 (see also Space station), 46
Marks, Leonard, 91
Marquanit Corp., 453
Mars, 150
   atmoaphericronditions, 331,492,494
    contamination of, 339,422
    exploration, 232
    flight, criticism of, 331
    flyby mission, 483,484
    landing mission, 339,361,366,494
    life on, 4,49,74,13S,   161,228,246,294,494
    manned flight to, 21,52,56,184,189,193,220,232,237,239,29&
                                                            317,338,354,
       370,420,429,453,471
    study of, 136, 199,246,317,   320
    surface of, 63,80,179,193,228,454,494
    unmanned flight to, 8,248,259,310,422,433,441,498
MABS I
    flight, 9,35,40.63,76,96,411,4&1:
    results, 58,102,199,227,248
Mars excursion module ( MEY ) .239,366
Marshak, Dr. Robert E., 172
Marshall, C. H .
               . 192
Marshall. Mrs. George C .116
                        .
Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC), 45,110,116,143,157,188,240,313,320,384,~
  400,412
    award, 5,212,214
    contract, 258,266,271,292,379,423
    facilities, 115,280,421,479
    meeting, 16
    organization, 115,243,256,327,381,398
    procurement, 4 03
    programs, 115,370,433
    research, 5,71
    studies, 184,232,245,497
    test, 71,91,132,464
    visit, 123,259,499
Martin C . 2.55,269,368,401.487
         o,
Martin-Marietta Corp.,232,466
    contract, 88,162,164
    research, 330,488
Martynov, Prof. A., 74
Marvingt, Marie, 479
Marx, Karl, 415
Maryland, 368
Maryland, Univ. of., 80,143,164,234
Xarymount College (N.Y.),   34
Yaschal, W.E ,  . 386
Mason, Dr. Edward A., 65
.Mason-Rust Co., 387
Massachusetts, 54,65,230,381,462
Massachusetts Associated Industries, 400
564                                   INDEX

Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( M I T ) , 3, 51, 53, 79, 105, 136, 170, 237,
 323,328,359,388,392,421,430,479
   Center for Space Research, 3
   Instrumentation Laboratory, 350,359
   Lincoln Laboratory, 170,180,193,341
   School of Science, 430
Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, 106
Massachusetts, Univ. of, 166
Massena, N.Y., 213
Mass freefall record, 482
Materials, space, 338,342,390,438
   development, 104,155,305,419
   importance of, 226
   re-entry, 280
Mathematical, 287,388
Mathematical Association of America, 27
Mathematicians, 27
Mathews, Charles W., 420
Mathews, T. A., 88
        See Military Air Transport Service.
MATS.
Matter, chemical structure of, 397
Maus, Hans, 328
Max Planck Institute for Carbon Research (Mulheim, Germany), 422
Maxwell AFB, Ala., 279
Maxwell, Jaxpes Clerk, 149
Mayer, Prof. (Mrs.) Maria Goeppert, 421
Mayer, Max, 242
Maynard, Owen E., 54
Mayewells, Wilfred J., 104
Maytag, L. B., Jr., 270
Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement ( N A S A ) , 365
Medal for Outstanding Leadership (NASA), 38, 205,240,365
Medal of Honor (N.Y.C.), 208
Medal of Merit (U.S.), 106
Medicine, aerospace, 41,45,273,442
Mediterranean, 1 11
Medium Altitude Communications Satellite (MAOS) (military), 403
“Megabuck barrier”, 470
Meisinger Award, 24
Melbourne. Australia, 164
Melekess, U.S.S.R., 220
MEM. See Mars excursion module.
Memphis, Tenn., 479
Mendel Medal, 222
Mental illness, 450
Mentzer, W.C., 194
Merck, Sharp and Dohme Research Laboratories, 356
Mercury-Atlas, 238
Mercury Control Center, 30
Mercury (planet), 2, 42, 179, 228,441, 454
Mercury, Project, 174,194,254,281,353,366,433,492
    achievement. 55,61,72,155,195,196,245,309,341,354,484
    astronaut, 257,296,359,385,389
    award, 260,465
    capsule, 58,139,218,366
    completion, 277,284,498
    computer. 116
    history, 205,252,371
    industry workmanship,.371.372,374,376,378,380,382
    launch, 196.24546
    personnel. 393
    Program. 1.15,29,31,77,78,200,208,226,316,396
    progress. 238
    results, 202,245,303,332,340,364
    simulation. 186,189,192
    tracking, 84,443
Mercury. Project, Summary Report Conference, 364,371,372
Mercury-Redstone suborbital flights, 238,365
M e m t t Island hunch Area ( M U ) (NASA) ,21,221,331
     contract, 209,268,371
     construction. 29,319,433
Meteor, 106,314,426
Meteorite, 138,151,331,335
     composition of, 443
     dust, 388
     impact, 39,387
Meteoroid
     detection, 43,54,l20,195
     satellite impact, 153,399
     spacecraft protection, 340,454
Meteoroid detection satellite. See Interplanetary Monitoring Platform.
Meteorological Rocket Network, 20.227
Meteorology, 314,317,477
Metric system, 37
“Metroplanes”, 434
Metropolitan Board of Trade (Washington), 53
MeuiGon, FFance,398
                                     ~




                                    -~
                     ~    ~




Mexico, 372.391
Mexico, Gulf of, 441
Meyer, Andre J., Jr., 77
Meyer, Dr. Peter. 270
MFMCC. See Manned Flight Mission Control Center.
         See Magnetohydrodynamics.
XED.
Miami, F a ,323,432.465
           l.
Miami Beach, Fla., 270,282
Michel, Edward L., 498
Michel, Dr. F. Curtis ( Capt., n - ,
                                e)     267
Michels, Charles, 255
Michigan Industry-University Research Confemce, 398
Michigan State Univ., 2 6 4
Michigan. Univ. of, 235,289,436,449
Michoud operations (NASA),318,335,387,478
Micrometeorite penetration, 240
Micrometeoroid, 241, 489
                ~~~-
Microwave spectrum, 419
                         j ,w ,-jg
                               .&i
         <=te.dite,
Midway Island, 195
Midwest Regional Conference of Society of American Military Engineers, 385
Mid-Winter Conference on Science Teaching, 468
Miezkuc, Bernard, 327
MiG-21,S. 459
Mikhailov. A. A., 56
Mikhaylov, G., 218
                                             .
          see Merritt Island Launch Area ( XAEA)
MILA.
Milan, Italy, 7.422
Military Air Transport Service (MATE), 321,398
Military Factory 333 (Cairo, U.A.R.). 179
Military Orbital Development S y s t e m See MODE.
Military pay increase, 485
Military research and development, 461
Military retired pay, 485
Military Sea Transportation Service-mu, 451,4436
Military Strategy, 232
Milky Way, 6,25,117,160,260,432
Miller, Mm.Betty, 279
Miller, Rep. George P., 43,56,108,245,272,277,322,323,377,424
     Centaur, 457
     education, scientific, 236, 274
     facilities, 127
     science, 424
Miller, Sen. Jack, 288
Miller, Prof. Maynard M., 246
                                       INDEX

Millikan, W. W., 266
Millsaps, Dr. Knox, 9
Miner, Marcia S., 104,188
Miniaturization progress, 363
Ministry of Aviation (U.K.), 63
Minitrack, 32,346
Minneapolis, Minn., 30,161
Minnesota Museum of Natural History, 74
Minnesota, Univ. of, 30,50,177,303,474
Minow, Newton N., 21,154,247
Minuteman, 138,170,266,298,395,399,459,499
     operational, 435
      B&D, 5,25, 62, 188,202, 213,230, 257, 258, 263, 266,271,276,283, 286,298,326,
        416,424,431,451,453,479,480,489
Miracle Mile Association, 91
Mirage I V (flghter aircraft), 54
Mirny. 453
Mironov, Alexandre A., 411
Missile, 164,274,318,367,399,483,492
Missile and Space Systems Div. (Douglas Aircraft Co.) ,98
Missile, air-to-air, 8,16,459
Missile, air-to-surface (CLAM), 488
Missile, antimissile, 266
      development, 310, 380
      program, 18,294,311
      firing, 415, 479
      U.S.S.R., 423,432,470
Missile, antisatellite, 138
Missile, antitank, 8
Missile, ballistic, 437
Missile, intercontinental ballistic (ICBM), 42, 43, 103, 138, 170, 310, 359, 420, 422,
  431,435,452
      U.S.S.R., 434,462
Missile warning system. See Red Mill Project.
 Missiles and Rockets, 5, 12, 49, 59, 89, 90,1&1,193, Zl6, 237, 252, 298, 307, 317, 319,
   324,350,355,361,387,395,396,437,448,458,473,490
 Mississippi Test Operations ( MTO) (NASA), 115, 142, 175, 243, 260, 400, 411, 430,
   486,490,497
Missoula, Mont., 40’7
Missouri, Univ of, 214
“Mr. Space”, 447
         See Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 MIT.
MIT Center for Space Research, 3
MIT Corporation, 479
 MIT Instrumentation Laboratory, 350
 MIT Laboratory for Nuclear Science, 79
 MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 170,180,193,341
 MMM. See Multi-Mission Module.
 MODS (Military Orbital Development Systems), 43,168
 Moeckel, Wolfgang E., 232
Moffett, Alan T., 88
Mohave Desert, 447
 MOL. See Manned Orbital Laboratory.
 Molecular bond, 385
 Molecule, 332
Mona Lisa, 7
 Monkey, 411
 Monnet, Jean, 270
 Monroney, Sen. A. S., 407,483
 Montana, 403, 456
 Montana State Univ., 407
 Montgolfler Award, 265
 Montgomery, J. B., 338
 Montreux, Switzerland, 185
 Moody, Alton B., 126,197
                                                                            567
                                     INDEX

Moon (seealeoLunar)
    atmosphere, 495
    contamination of, 175
   craters, l2,m
    dust, 144,2ll, 0 . 8
                   3637
   effects of, 481
   exploration of, 148,150,275,316,331,439,495
   PraviQ, 275.380
   impacta on, 387
    infrared light, 448
                                              no,
    landing, manned, 45,67,101,1!34,198,2Q%, 2l5,2l7,220,225,245,        !275,276,
      300,3 M 3 9 337, 354, 356, 364, 374, 376, 378, 385, 401, 413,414,4 8 4 2
             t, 2 ,                                                       1, 2,
      458,489,471,474,477,480,498
         U.S. program
              comment, 148, 185, 190, 214, 215, 231, 240. 250, 2s0, 3 1 383, 397,
                                                                     5.
                416, 430
             objective, 267,340,361,452,453,461
             priority, 190,231
   laser impact, 419
   life on, 4,165
   Ittepe,392ia48      ~




   military use of,3,140
   origin, 104
   photos, 18,E , @328
   shape,19
   soft landing, M, 305
   space station, 481
                                                                    433,460,479,
    d a c e of,l2,44,83,85, 91,l70,220,228,245,2V5,326,4lO,
                              SS,
      480
   unmanned flight to, 119,130,310,392,433,440,498
   volcanic plwcesws, 235
   water on, 131,425,495
MOBD~. See Manned Orbital Research and Development System.
Moreton, Dr. G E., 494
               .
Morrow,Dr. W. E., Jr., 22,341
Morse, Sen. Wayne, 92
Moscow-New Pork air agreement, 492
Moscow Mining Institute, 11
Moscow, U.S.S.R., 164,202,205,20fJ, 220,236,251,252,254,283, 324,376,394,4!23.
  428.4-32- 453.4’11
    air roites,’ 11
    communications. 129,327
    meeting, 417,492
Moss, Sen. Frank E,353
                    .
Moss,John E,211
             .
Motion generator, 263
Motorola, Inc., 490
Mob,Prof. Lloyd, 25
Mt. Everest, 246
Mt. Palomar Observatory, 144,160,229,388
Mt. Wilson Observatory, 95,1lfJ,lSO,229
Moyer, Xopher W.,   365
Mramk, Dr. William k,    386 .
mc. See Manned SpacecraftCenter.
Ysm. See Marshall Space Flight Center.
YTO. See Mississippi Test Operations.
“Mu” (Japanese rocket),494
Muchea, Australia, 484
Mud Lake, Nev., 1 ’77
Mueller, Dr. George E., 281,381,382,406,478
    Apollo, 496
    lunar program, 348,392
    space program, 4 32
Mulheim, Germany, 422
Multer, Rep. A J #)I
                 .
                 ,
568                                   INDEX

Multi-Mission Module ( M M M ),410
Multivator, 49
Mundelein College (Ill.), 230
Municipal aerospace park, 366
MUB (Mock-up Reactor). See Plum Brook Station.
Murphy, Dr. Thomas P., 278
Murray, Dr. Bruce, 144
Nururoa Atoll, 176
Muscle Shoals, Ala., 201
Museum, 61
“Museums Without Walls”, 434
Mylar, 304
Myoelectric, 376
“Myopia in Space”, 260
NAA. See National Aeronautic Association.
HAA. See North American Aviation, Inc.
         See National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
NACA.
Nags Head, N.C., 480
Nagy, Dr. Bartholomew, 444
Nairobi, Kenya, 164
           See National Amateur Missile Analysis Center.
NAYAC.
NANA. See North American Newspaper Alliance.
Nance, Hershel M., 365
Nancy, France, 479
       See National Academy of Sciences.
NAB.
NASA. See National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
NASA-DOD Contractor Performance Rating System, 49
NASA-DOD Gemini Program Planning Board, 102
NASA Fifth Anniversary Banquet, 364
NASA Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony, 384
NASA Industrial Applications Advisory Committee, 62
NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference, 51, 52,54
NASA Intercenter Conference on Plasma Physics, 459
NASA Management Advisory Committee on Manned Space Flight, 1 3      2
NASA-Mi1ihr.V Sea Transportation Service, 451, 486
NASA Research Advisory Committee on Missile and Space Vehicle Structures, 361
NASA Space Vehicle Review Board, 16
KASA-USAF Gemini Program Planning Board,’86,102,3.92
         See National Aeronaiitics and Space Council.
NASC.
Nashville, Tenn., 47,201
Nassau, B.W.I., 23,136
Nasser, President Gama1 A., 274
Natal, Brazil, 177
National Academy of Engineering, 179
Piational Academy of Neurology, 161
National Academy of Sciences ( V A S ) , 3, 80,179, 226, 238, 252, 310, 372, 395, 402
     award, 156
     code, space, 1
     fellowship, 332
     hearing, 388
     meeting, 73,161,162,168,307,398,397
     Space Science Board, 275,339
     studies, 50,435,442
 National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), 73, 240, 253, 37b, 411,479,
   481
     history, 197,394
     research, 19,207,333
 National Aero Clubs, 31
 National Aeronautic Association ( N A A ) , 32,184,231,265,302,411,484
 Pu’ational Aeronautics and Space Act, 108,174,447
 National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( N A S A ) , 294,382,462,493
      accomplishments, 39,352,373
      aeronautics, 19,94,207,283
      agreements, 11,21,89,102,127,177,212,314,391,411,451,485
      anniversary, 364,373
                                                                             569
                                     INDEX

National Aeronautics and Space Administration-Continued
    Apollo, 471,472,497
    appointments, 40,62,70,278,281,336,398
    appropriations, 16,81,82,83.90,98,112,172,210,215, 222,273,283,286, 293,
      300, 301, 302, 316, 322, 3 3 325, 334, 351, 373, 374, 376, 3 4 391, 392, 407,
                                                                  8,
                                2,
      430’ 440’464,474
    astronauts, 259,269,278,340,361,389,392,478
    awards, 17.56,90,104,136,186,191,245,278,334,338,365.379,465
    bioscience program, 411
    budget, 231,254,255,258,262,260,283,323,383,395,421,463
    comment re, 300,305
    conference, 54,84,131,136,283,368,399,838
    consultant, 268,478
    contracts, 49,59,73,99.153,178.258,289,305,435,485.490,492,498
        boosters, 68,76,197,271,305,475,476
             engine,221,320
        facilities, 51,56,136,175,213
        fuel, 277,4QO
        ground systems,27,30,105,272,345,379,397
        management, 87,142,210
             manned, 90,120,343,392
             unmanned, 43,52,141,235,264,304,320,489
         space eauipment. 229,272.361.392
         skdiec4-132.143,219, 230,!52,2ez, 263,281,346
    criticism, 288,370,380,421
    DOWlVAW
         applications, 87,300
         Atlas-Agena, 252,334
         contracting, 49
         Gemini, 12,102,199,277,319
         space station, 277,315,391,400
         Titan 111,436
         X-20 ( Dyna-Soar ) ,319,474
    educational program, 216,255,290,402
    equipment, electronic data processing, 277,369
    exhibit program, 315,357
    facilities
         communication system, 371
         construction. 98.175.337.387
         liquid hydrogen, 400
         loeation, 47,106,118,l27,297,302,394,469,483,484,488
         tracking, 402
    funds, 222,316
    @ant 143,236,272,278,382,396,488
    international programs,152,211,295,308
         Australia, 464
         Canada, 321
         France,391,409,487,497
         Japan, 351,357
         West Germany. 454
    laser, use of, 400
    launches, 182,313,318.325,352.399,449,497,498
         manned, 364
         satellite,54,184,357,436,459,489
         Bounding rocket, 14,30,50.58,60,63, 70, 71,87,88,95,107,110,134,168,
            184.186, 188,212,241,247,263,268,295,336, 351,366, 388,391,409,
            4lO. 429,434,469
         test, 110,132,280,476
    lunar orbiter, 275,489
    management, 272,289,390,424,486,498
    meeting, 356,462
    organization, 34,61,65,81,102,175,283,287,291,324.380,381,401,410,414,
      424,452,455,482,496
    patent, 59,m an* 237,428
     R41-623 -7
570                              INDEX

National Aeronautics and Space Administratlon-Continued
    personnel
          legislation, 298
          recruitment, 163,259,463
          requirements, 99
          risk, 140,444
          training course, 204
    procurement, 175,430,493
    program, interplanetary, 5,8,90,428,477
    program, solar, 8
    programe, study
          lunar base, 178,262
          lunar program, 290
          Luster, Project, 387
          space environment simulation, 385
    report, 41,68,287,296,323,341,353,356,376,390,391,392,404,408,
                                                                 433,439,
       463,465,476,490,493
    r e a r c h , electronic, 312
    research philosophy, 19
    research momam. 92,109,337,436,447,448,486
    rocket, n i c l e k , 153 .
    satellite program, 45,395
    Satellite situation Report, 2,14,210,243,267
    scientists and engineers, 210,436
    space cooperation, 198
    spacecraft, 173,339,355
    sponsorship, 76,404,463
    studies, 3,271,278,315,379,448
    support of, 197,290
    training program, graduate, 372,444
    universities, 3,210,274,293,372,456
    USAF-NASA, 78,129,131,145,168,428,455,491
       EOHO I ,
             IB
        Gemini, Project, 47,332,487
        MOL, 481
    USN-NASA. .~ , ~~,
               216.428.454
National Aeronautics and-Space Council (nnsc),13,318,414,471
    budget, 20,249,407
    chairman, 106,277,291,35!3,362,414,471
    manned lunar landing, 267,363
    meeting, 277,290
    space competition, 259,337,359,402
    space program, 373,441
National Aerospace Education Council, 270
National Airlines, 270
National Air Museum, 16,288,277
National Amateur Missile Analysis Center ( NAMAC) , 155
National Association of Business Economists, 354
National Association of Counties, 291
National Association of Manufacturers' 68th Congress of American Industry,
 466, 468
National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center (FAA), 94
National Aviation Hl of Fame, 484
                    al
National Broadcasting CQ. ( NBC) ,98, 131,186,342,418,434,447
National Bureau of Standards, 9,35,108,212,234,331
National Business Publications, 47
National Capital Section of A=, 343
National Center for Atmospheric Research, 323,328
National Center for Space Studies ( CNEB) (France), 19,89,350,362,391
National Commission for Scientific and Technical Investigation, 425
National Conference on Citizenship, 342
National Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space, Third, 84
National Defense Education Act, 236
National Editorial Association, 306
                                                                             571
                                     INDEX

National BMucation Association (NU), 118,463
National Engineering Co., 48
National Engineers Week, 48
National Federation of Business and ProiesSional Women’s Clubs, 277
National Flight Forum Symposium, 191
National Frank G. Brewer Trophy, 231
National Gallery of Art (Washington, D.C.) ,434
National Geographic Society. 228,257,280,317
National Industrial Conference Board,316
National Information Center, 154
National Institutes of H a t ( RIH) ,50,212,2’72
                        elh
National Inventors Council, 385
National Launch Vehicle program, 40’7
National Medal of Science, 185,479
National Meteorological Center, 118
N a t W Observer,The, 49,155
National Oceanographic Data Center (aonc) (Washbgtm, D.C.), 3!     45
National Ofece of Space Research (French Army), 335
National Orbital Space Station NOS^), 400
National Park Service, 483
National Pilots Association,465
National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 131
National Research Council, 50, SO,3 ’
                                   07
National Research Data Processing and Information Retrieval Center. 239
National Rocket Club, 13,lOa, 188,%6,274,319,343,377,439
National Rocket Club Award, 104
National Science Foundation (nsr),6,103,109,253,301,32!2,337,448
    data systems, 234
    funds,15,172,377,421,435
    grant,236,474
    personnel, 258
    Project, 76,332,442,448,496
National Science Teachers Association, 171,388,404,463
National Science Youth Congress, 404
National Scientific Balloon Flight Station, 76
National Security Industrial Association, 92,141
National Security Industrial Forum, 8
Natbncrl Beourity P o Z i t W , AfEilitary, and EcxncomiC Btrategy i the D a w d e
                                                                    n
  Ahead, 289
Ntitionai Severe Storma Project, 2Gi
National Society of Aerospace Professionals, San Diego Chapter, 465
National Space Research Committee, of the Royal Society of New Zealand. 209
National Space Club, 483
“National survival industry”, 379
National Transporation Institute, 31
National Weather Council, 145
National Weather Satellite Center, 53,247,330,341,344
National Youth Science Congress, 463
National Zoological Park (Washington, D.C.) ,128
Nationalist China, 194
Nation’s Engheertng Reseatwh Needs, 1965-85, The, 36
Nativitas (meteorite), 151
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization), 25,185,252,348,459
Natta, Prof. Guilo, 422
Natural Eietoru, 74
Nature, 56,235
Naugle, John E,182
              .
Naval Gun Factory, 154
Naval Missile Facility (Pt.    Arguello, Calif.), 441
Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif., 264
Naval Research U b o r a t o r y (ma), 6,86,498
Naval Weather Service, 293
Navigation, 310
Nazi, 205
XBO. See National Broadcasting Co.
572                                  INDEX

       See National Bureau of Standards.
NBS.
       See National Education Association.
NEA.
Nebular spectra experiment, 384
Neiss, M/G 0 K.(U.S. Surgeon General), 273
                .
Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award, 104
NEO. See North Eastern Ofice (NASA)
Neon gas, 292
Neporozhni, Pyotr, 52
Nepsza badsag, 470
Neptune (planet), 6,432
Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application), 115,401
Netherlands, 33,133,197,389
Nettles, Cary, 472
Neuman, Temple, 366
Neutrino, 154
Keutron, 149,276,285,455
Nevada, 134
Nevada Test Site, 393,476
New Delhi, India, 164,246,429,492
New England, 465
New Hampshire, Univ. of, 11,380
New Haven, Conn., 125
New Jersey, 1,55,97,143,368,425
New Jersey Society of Professional Engineers,178
New Mexico, 65,74
New Mexico State Univ., 478
New Orleans, La., 478
New South Wales, Australia, 175
New Pork, 3,106,311,495
New Pork Academy of Sciences, 443
New York Herald Tribune, 290,386
New Pork International Airport, 153
New York Journal-American, 218
New Pork, N.Y.. 164,208
    a i r route, 20,153,196,204, 492
    communications, 86,106,137,186,241,389
    meeting, 19,21, 26, 45, 58, 98,124,152, 194,204, 379, 390, 395,441, 442,443,
       456,461,466,489
New Pork Society of Security Analysts, 379
New Pork, State Univ. of., 445
New Pork Timee, 19,48,128,129,175,187,214,216,244,258,275,285,288,299,  296,
  303,327,332, 346,374, 375,378,380,386, 394,402,405, 418, 428, 430,462, 475,
  486,492
New Y w k Times Magazine, 153,427
New Pork Univ., 408, 414
New Pork World's Fair, 375
New Zealand, 209,453
Newark Airport, N.J., 153
Newell, Dr. Homer E., 76,158,381
    budget. 111,111
    moon. f6.291
            , --,
              ~~




    space, peaceful uses of, 219
    space programs, scientific, 83,152,159,200,307,329,334,411,477
Newfoundland, 247
Newman, James B., 365
Newmann, Dr. William F., 228
Newport News,.Va., 56,63,136,242,255,288,309
Newton, Sir Isaac, 11
Ney, Dr. Edward P., 303
NF-101 ( V O ~ ~ O O )
                    ,19
NF-10.4 (Starfighter), 426,475
Niagara Falls, Ontario, 12
Nice, France, 32
Nicholson, Dr. Seth B., 264
Nicks, Oran W., 52
                                                                          573
                                      INDEX

Nicolet, Prof. Marcel 2sz,367
Nields, James, 480
Nigeria, 33,296,321
BIH. See National Institutes of Health.
Nike (missile), 87
Nike-Ajax (missile), 88
Nike-Apache (sounding rocket), 11
                                                           n,7,3&
                                                            3 2 8 3 ‘382,383,
     launch, 60, 70,87,1IO,% ISS,203,206,X@,
                            1.
         443,449,477
Nike-Asp (sounding rocket)
     launch, 58
Nike-Cajun (soundingrocket)
     launch, 14,15, 7l,88,24l,
                    60,          295,301,449
Nike-Hercules (missile), 230
Nike X (missile), l8,161,302,380,4l5
Nike-Zeus (missile), 14, 57,62,138,147,161,1%, 2 2 0 , 2 3 0 , ~283,266,n2, 285,
                                                                .
   302,310,324,327,415,452,479
Nikolayev, Maj. Andrian G., 306
     appearance, 88
     condition of, 20,45,355      ~




     marriag&376,4€7       ~




Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Valentina V., 429,489
Nimbus, Project, 77,125,131,371,488
Nimbus (satellite), 248,306,345,436,488
N i m , 226
Nirenberg, Dr. Marshall, 65
“Nitrogen and oxygen indicator-controller assembly”, 460
Nitrogen dioxide gas,494
Nobel Prize, 185,444
     Chemistry, 422
     Peace, 385,397,474,475
     Physics, 421,422
NOW. See National Oceanographic Data Center.
mise, 288,281,414,453,490
Nomenclature, 35
           See North American Defense Command.
HW.
Nordberg, Dr. William, 117
Nored. Donald L ,143
                 .
Norfolk, Va., 90 ; .m,
         hHim 2
North American Aviation, Im.( NAA), 53,77,384,496
    contract, 114,119,221,%51,342,379,387,404,427
    program, Apollo, 382,492
    Space and Information Systems Div., 92,126,169,260,366,378,497
North American Defense Command (NOJLAD), 210,428,469
North American Newspaper Alliance ( NAXTA), 379
North Atlantic, 217
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. See HATO.
North Bergen, N. 215
                  J.,
North Carolina, 108,483
North Carolina Citizens Association, 111
North Carolina Press Association, 18
North Dakota, 456
North Eastern Ofece (HEO) (NASA), 484
North Pole, 231
Northrop Corp., 87,146,178,183,203,266,320
Northrop, John K ,. 484
NorthrogNortronics, 453
Northrop Space Laboratories, 460
Northrop Ventura, 178
North, Warren J., 156
Northwestern Univ., 243,327
Norton AFB, Calif., 176,263,499
Norway, 133,197,340
Norwood, Joseph, Jr., 245
574                                   INDEX

NOSS. See National Orbital Space Station.
Notre Dame, Univ. of, 469
Nova (booster), 67,157,188,266,365
Nowitsky, A. M.,175,204
Noyes, W.Albert, 26
Nozzle, gimbaled integral ( G I N ) . See Gimbaled integral nozzle.
NBDS. See Nuclear Reactor Development Station.
NBL. See Naval Research Laboratory.
NSF. See National Science Foundation.
Nuclear, 328,422,441,459
    detonation detection systems, 286,299,389
    detonations, high-altitude, 89,285,286,308
    economic impact, 438,441
    forces, U S ,435
             ..
         fleet, 459
    generator, 345,357
    industries, 318
    peaceful uses, 143,471
    propulsion, 103,115,137,266,370,401,420
    reactor, 52,89,137,140,168,343,367
    rocket, 153,486
    test-ban treaty, 58, 264, 283, 284, 298, 322, 326, 337, 338, 347, 348, 350, 365,
      367,368.383.393,394,409.420.440,474
     test, 312,385,402,487
    test stand, rocket, 269
    underground test, 353,393,402
    war, 379,397,462
    warhead, 78,105,285,344,486
    weapon, 333,351,365, 368, 375,381,388, 389, 462, 463, 474. 475. 482
Nuclear powered ballistic missile submarine. See SSBN.
Nuclear Reactor Development Station ( NBDB),32
Nutley, N. J., 3,5,15,87,339,425
Oakland, Calif., 107,110,113,193
Oakland Corp., 260
Oak Ridge, Tenn., 56
Oao. See Orbiting Astronomical Observatory.
OAR Reaearch Reaiew, 306,377
 Oberth, Prof. Hermann, 7
Observatories, 274,402,494
Ocean, 396
Oceanographic data, 345
Odlum, Floyd B.,  484
Omce of Naval Research (ONR) ,76,435,448
Omce of Scientific Research and Development ( OSBD) ,430,479
Ogo. See Orbiting Geophysical Observatory.
 (OH) hydroxyl radicals, 432
OH-23G (helicopter), 424
O’Hara, Rep. Barrett, 253
O’Hare International Airport, 105
Ohio, 65
Ohio State Univ. 190
OKeefe, Dr. John A., 104,386
Oklahoma City, Okla., 118,203
Oklahoma, Univ. of, 247,249,250,409
O h Mathieson Chemical Corp., 311
Olivine, 131
Olympic Games, 227
Olympics of the Air, 32
Omaha,Neb.,385
O’Neill, Eugene S., 2
ONE. see Omce of Naval Research.
“Open skies” policy, 334
“Operation Halo” (High Altitude/Low Opening), 482
Ophiuchus (constellation), 145
Oppenheimer, Dr. J. Robert, 130,458
Optical communications,
                                                                           575
                                    INDEX

Optical systems, 398
Optical tracking, 44
Optics, 355
Orbital scientific research stations, 427
Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) ,12,248,328,43(1,404
Orbiting Geophysical Observatory ( O g o ) ,12,326,464,488
Orbiting Solar Observatory (Om), 38,298, Wl, 395,464
Order of Lenin, 130,251
Order of Railroad Telegraphers, 337
Ordnance, 25    .9
Organic molecular compounds, 331
“Origins of Space Telemetry”, 104
Orion, Project ( A R P A ) , ~ 367.4#)
                               ~~,
Orlando, Fla., 330,462
Orleans, France, 54
Oaborne, Stanley d e J., 311,481
Oslo, Norway, 474
Oslo. Univ. of (Norway ).475
                     _   .   I



Osmium-1~,155
Osmium-187,155
Oso. See Orbiting Solar Observatory.
080 I, 85,93,182,2$8
060-B 250,258
osm. See Omce of Scientific Research and Development.
Ostrander, M/G Don R. ( USAF), 27,279
Otis am,Mass., 230
Outstanding Unit Award (USAF),287,443
Owens Valley, Calif., 95
Oxygen
      atomic, 429
      environment tests. 455,482,498
      in stratosphere, 323
       liquid (lox), 68,143
      supply, 326,367,498
Oyster Point, Newport News, Va., 164,303
Omne, 14,143,342,419
P 1 2 (aircraft), 48
 -17
Pace, Dr. Nello, 288
            See Pre-Flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment.
PA=
F i i ~ i f iCeuirai, 2iE
             ~,
Pacific Launch Operations Ofece (PLOO), 381
Pacific Missile Range (PMB),57,105,163,188,193,298,479,481,486
       launch, 57,239,266,291, 299,323,326,327,334,344,351,427,486,487,489
      test, sounding rocket, 410
      transfer of, 307
Pacific Ocean, 57, 176,193,195,220, 224,242,244,272,279,285, 298,312, 314, 32‘7,
       344,428.434.447.452 460.479. 4 W
Paciec Science Center, 448
Pacific Science Center Foundation, 448
Packard, Robert F., 249
Pakistan, 212
Palestine, Tex., 65.76. SO, 314,323,328,331,448
Palewski, Gaston, 8 171  .
Palm Beach, Fla., 433
Palomar Observatory;%, 116,264
Pan American World Airways, 229,253
Panama, 172
Paoli, Pa., 352
Papago Indian Reservation, Arb., 6
Papell, 5. Stephen, 428
Parachute, 77,87,170,178,477
      jumping. 218,287,482
      landing, 268,340,492
       recovery system, 302,332
       test, 35,49, 74.192. .a7
Parade magazine (WashingtonPost), 179,359,462
576                               INDEX

Paraglider, 49,214
Parin, Vasily V , 130,375
                  .
Paris, France, 434,471
     a i r route, 196,204, 2 0
                            3
    communications, 86,106,137
     meeting, 54,355,362,367,416,469
Paris Observatory (France), 493
Parks Air College (Univ. of St. Louis), 281
Parks, Robert J., 47,165,365
Pasadena, Calif., 6,488
Paso Robles, Calif., 302
Pastore, Sen. Jahn 0 .  .69
Patent (see also Inventions), 36,77,214,260,296
    legislation, 174
     policies, 86,92,93,135,207,384-385
     regulations, 45,59
Paterson, N.J., 114,151
Patrick AFB, Fla., 78,263
Patten, Rep. Richard J., 35
Patterson, Eugene, 452
Pauling, Dr. Linus C., 385,397,418,474,475
Paul Smith Construction Co., 488
Paul Tissandier Diploma (FAI), 266
Pawtucket, R.I., 289
PCH-I (hydrofoil), 419
Peace Corps, 450
Peace, world, 40,236,482
Pearson, Drew, 216
Pecos. Tex.. 314
Peewee, Project (us-), 371
Peking, China, 353
Pelly, Rep. Thomas M .369,373,430
                        .
Penetrometer, 84
Peninsula Engineers Club, 63
Pennington, Jack E ,  . 13
Pennsylvania, 368
Pennsylvania, Univ. of, 375,408,470,494
Pensacola, Fla., 74
Pentagon, 14,219
Peoria, Ill., 65
Perkins, Prof. Courtland D., 348
Perkins Observatory (Ohio State Univ.), 480
Pershing (missile), 430
Perth, Australia, 492
Peru, 33
Petersen, Norman V.,119
Petrone, Rocco A., 98
Petrosyants, Andronik M.,143,206
Petterssen, Dr. Sverre, 162
PFBT (Preliminary Flight Rating Tests), 9 7
Phantom 11. See F 4 B .
Philadelphia, Pa., 56,171,226,234,390
Philco Corp., 29,164,193,366
Philippine Islands, 302
Phillips, Franklyn W.,    178,481
Phillips, B/G Samuel C. ( USAF), 176,496
Phi-meson, 141
Phoenix (missile), 16
Photoelectric measurement, 206
Photography, 56,162,206,396,429
Photometer, 14,15,107
Photon, 95
Photospectrometer, 429
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 323
Phouma, Prince Souvanna, 413
Physical Review Letters, 74,79,86,141,317
                                                                           577
                                    INDEX

Physical sciences, 390
Physics, 11,435,458
Physicists, role of, 288
Piccard, Auguste, 30
Piccard, Doaald L., 140,285
Piccard, Jean Felix, 30
Pic du Mkli, France,234
Pickering, Dr. William H., 16.38
Pierre, Dr. Jahn R., 10,172,429
PierrelatteNuclear Center (France),438
Piland, Robert O., 22,54,125
Pilot-Astronaut citation (U.S.S.R. ) ,251
Pilot license, 419
Pilot of the Year Award, 466
Pilot, space. 114,471
Piloting techniques, 281
Pi-meson. 28
Ping P m g (short-range   reconnaissance missile concept), 429
Pinta, 226
                    295
Pioneer (rocket),
Pioneer (spaceprobe), 1,8,14l,235
PIOXEEB v, 2
Pittendrigh, Dr. Colin 5.. 161,237
Pi ttman, Dr. Frank K., 169
Pitteburgh, 57
Pittsburgh, Pa., 122,280
Pittsburgh, Univ. of,9, m,260
Pitzer, Kenneth 5. 2,268
                   .
Planetary research materials, 396
Plants. 411
Plasma gun, coaxial. 255
Plasma propulsion devices, 211
Plasma shield, 51,M
Plasma streams, solar, 317,317
Plastic fllm, 4 6
               0
Plastic laser, 116
Plastics, 422
Platform, jet-propelled, 260
Plato (moon crater), 12
Pleasant Pond, Me.. 280.332
Pleumeur-Bodon, France, 189,270,425
moo. See Paciflc Launch Operations OBce.
Plowshare, Project, 103
Plum Brook Station (NASA Lewis Research Center), 20,95,269,275,296,299,303
Plum Brook Research Beactor (NASA), 153,276,299
Pluto (planet), 52,432
Pluto, Project ( USAF) ,367
PMF-PAC. See Polaris MSSile Facility-Paciilc.
PMK See Pactftc Missile Range.
Pocibo. Project (Polar Circling Balloon Observatory) (NBF), 474
Pogo (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory), 36, 248
“Pogo-Stick” action, 487
Point Arguello, Calif., 307,441
     launch, 38, 50, 59, 91, 129, 163, 189,201, 239, 242,272. 279, 3 5 342, 481
                                                                    3,
Point Barrow, Alaska, 414
P t Mum& c l f ,296.307.341
             ai.
Polar Circling Balloon Observatory. See Pocibo, Project.
Polar Ionosphere Beacon Satellite (NABA) (%66), 54,177
Polar Orbiting Geophyeical Observatory. See Pogo.
Polar orbiting satellites, 308,487,496
Polaris, 78,124,138,263,423,433
     launch
          A-2,367
          A-3,10,46,50,59,134,    137,201,230,231,245,251,    266,278,318,327,354,
           ‘ 429.450
           m
    operational. 435
    use Of, 32,23,25,136
                                     INDEX

                                              ,a
Polaris M h U e Fadlity-WiIk      (PMW-PAC)
p o r n I 516
         ,
    launch, U S , 4 7 4 8
         -.
    m.
     -              417. us,4 s
                           = 2
    -,          rzz, (m,
Polhemus, Edward C., 277
Poljethylene ahieldiBg materinl, 4 n
Poljmers, 386
Polyoti. aeeFmlmI.
Ponnemperarrm, Dr. QHl, 315
Pontecorvo. Bruno,153
Pope John XXIII,46    6
Pope Paul VI,21m 5. 354,375
Popovieh, L/C Pave1 a,    501
    appearances, 88,101,   Iss,gga
    condition of, 2 , 366
                    0  e
Porfirov, Boris, 101
Port Canaveml, Fla., 140
Port of New Yo& Authority, 163
Porter, Dr. Richard W ,. 226
Positron, 26, 270
Possony, D .Stefan T.. 103
           r
Post-Echo passive communications satellite, 406
Potter, Andrew E,Jr., 139
                  .
Power, Gen. Thomas 9. (mu),      161
Power system. 346,355,405
Powers, Francis Gary, 437
Powers, L/C John A. ( u e m ) ,29,136,2&1,291,315,465
Prague, Czechoslovakia, 303,459
Pratt and Whitney Aircraft Co., 277,320,336,437,493
Prauda, 11, 12,35,88,259,300,305,368, 372,495
Pre-Flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment (PACE), 492
Preliminary Plight Rating Teets. See mm.
“Prelude to Independence”, 2 42
Presentations, 16,116
Presidential Boeing 70’7,202,  #)6
Presidential Medal of Freedom, 468
President’s Award for Distinguished Civilian Service, 239
President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, 411
President’s Science Advisory Committee (PSAO), 8 57, 73, 78, 109,213, 236, 424,
                                                   ,
  479
President’s Scientific Advisor, 93,152,234,390, 430,440,444,479
                                                421,
Press and Union League Club (San Rancisco), 111
Press conferences, 15.69
“Press Conference USA”, 385
Pressly, Eleanor C., 188
Pressure, air, 20,60,2@,301,306,469
Pressure suit, 360
Preston, G. Merritt, 205
Price, Rep. Melvin, 421
Price, Nathan, 2 0
                 6
Prince Motors Ltd., of Tokyo,307
Princeton, N.J., 260, 459
Princeton Univ., 40,53,76,130,161,164,183,214,237,238,421,424,470,479
Printing p m , 2 l
Probes, 110
    deep space, 274
    Langmuir, 273,357
    lunar. 339
    Lunaiirbiter, 326
    Mars. 339,494
    space, 271,308,335,365,366.4W
    three-axis stabilized, 489
    traversing, 369
Processed foods from space research, 494
                                                                            579
                                      INDEX

    Proctor, Charles, 215
    Procurement policy, 430,493
    Project Stabilization Agreement, 411
    Propellant, 277,333,490,498
    Propulsion, 232,279.363,428
    Propulsion, space
        atomic propulsion, 367
        chemical, 129,154,286
        control data, 327
        nuclear reactor, 367
        nuclear system, 286
        technology, 419-20
    Propulsion system, 281,338,381
    Proton, 26.356
    Proxmire, Sen. William F ,48,421,440
                                .
    Pruss, Judge Thaddeus, 59
    Psychopathology, 445
    Public Health Service, 105
    Public Relations Society of America, 136
    Public Service Award (NASA), 365
    Public Works Administration, 164
    Pucinski, Rep. Roman C.. 239,314
    Puerto Rico, 37
    Pngwash Conference, l l t h , 353
    Pulaski. Tenn., 78
    Pulkovo Observatory (U.S.S.R.), 56,197,235
    Pnrr‘ue Univ., 136,469
    “Pygmy” satellite, 389
    Pyrennees, k e n c h , 234
    Quality control standards, 376
    “Quality Program Provisions for Space Systems Contractors” (aasa),382
    Queens College ( N.C. ) ,463
    Quesada, E R., 253,253
               .
    Quilon. India, 68
    Rabinowitz, Dr. Samuel, 173
    Radar, 3,54,63,162,330,406,411,4-54,472
    Radarteleacope, 9,42,170,387
    urn. See Rome Air Development Center.
    m Passive Satellite Research Terminal, 428
                       President Barvepaiii, a
    i%iciiaicrishnan,
    Radiant heating, 338
    Radiation, 320,403,441
        alpha, 107
        detectors, 256,357
        galactic. 335,415,449
         measurement, 489,498
         shielding. 471
    Radiation Air Borne Measurement Program ( WYP), 437
    Radiation belts, 45,227,263,308,312.346,364,389,391
         and ionosphere, 92
         Saturn, 88
         study of, 50,58
    Radiation, corpuscular, 2B9
    Radiation, cosmic, 355
    Radiation damage, lm,      279,346,357
    Radiation effects, 244.355.41
                           (satellite), 256,283,281,507
    RAD~ION     XLO~ITOB
’
    Radiation, nuclear, 23,137,140,220
    Radiation particles, 281
    Radiation, solar
         effects of, 305,456
         measurement, 87,242,     279,487
         study o . 258,388,449
                 f
                                     INDEX

Radiation, space, 303,343
    artiflcial, 41
    damage, 306,346
    effect on satellites, 12,96
    Mars, 138
    measurement, 111,432
    simulated, 56
Radiation, ultraviolet, 258,287,296,634
Radiative material, 388
Radio Corp. of America ( B C A ) , 98, 116, 170, 216, 247, 257, 287,299,456,472,489
    Astro-Electronics Div., 25,52,219
    Data Systems Div., 305
    Electron Tube and Semiconductor Div., 345
    Services Co., 1
    Victor Co., 449
Radio, development of, 162
Radio energy, 481
Radio frequencies, 379,414
Radio monitoring network, 414
Radio Moscow. 5,196,369,417,486
Radio Research Laboratory ( J a p a n ) , 351,357
Radio-Television Industry, 104
Radio tracking, 54
Radio waves, 265,304,341
Radioactive material, 387
Radioastronomy, 88,88,151,154,190,372,495
Radiometer, 377,437
Radiosonde transmitter, 290,497
Radiotelescope, 6,40,86,114,415
Radnofsky, Matthew I., 281
Rainfall, effect of moon phases on. 481
Raisting, West Germany, 425
Raleigh, N.C., 111
Ramey AFB, Puerto Rico, 37
Ramiah, K.Raghu, 142
Ramo, Dr. Simon, 138,237,329
RAMP. See Radiation Air Borne Measurement Program.
Ramsey, Dr. Norman F., 213
BAND Corp., 171,259,    263. 377
Randolf AFB, Tex., 222
Ranger (program), 5,83,87,204,275,326,334,489
    decontamination procedure, 339
    follow-on flight, 477
    sterilizstion, 339
BANGEB V, 284,364
Ranger 6,165,310,399
Raven Industries, 265
Rayle, Warren, 211
Raymond, Dr. Arthur E., 123
Raytheon Co.,51,292,299,375,392,411
RB-57F (Canberra), 371
BCA. see Radio Gorp. of America.
BCA Astro-Electronics. See Radio Corp. of America.
BCA Data Systems Div. See Radio Corp. of America.
RCA Electron Tube and Semiconductor Div. See Radio Corp. of America.
BCA Service Co. See Radio Corp. o America.
                                     f
BCA Victor Co. see Radio Corp. of America.
Reactor-in-flight-test. See Rift.
Reactor, nuclear, 20,343,455,491
Reader’s Digest, 288
Ream, Harold E ,  . 23
Rebound, Project ( N A S A ) , 67
Rechtin, Dr. Eberhardt, 2,6,70,278
Record, aircraft, 101
Record, space, 96
Recorder, magnetic tape,177
                                 INDEX

Recovery s - 296
           i,
Recovery systems, 302
Red Mill, Project (BSAI), 343,411
Red 8tar (e KrcMmaya Zoezdu) ,453,471
                also
Redstone Areeml, Ala., 201
Redstone (missile), 318,430
Reedy,R/A James R. (neN),361
Re-entry, 112,386,384
    communications, 55
    material, 280,403,498
    research, 311
    simulation, 4 62
    test, 4,23,168,295,345,418,447
    vehicle, 287,336
Rees, Dr. Eberhard, 328
Reeves, Bfaj. J L (uaap), 0
               ..         4
“Reexamining the Soviet Scientific Challenge”. 172
Reformation, 166
Reichelderfer, Dr. Francis w., 287,290,380
Reid, D .Henry J. E 411
                     .
                     ,
        r
Reiffel, Dr. Leonard, 1-
Reinhart, Dr. Bruce I*,65
Reinhardt, G. Frederick, 3 6
                          8
Relative ionospheric opacity meter. See Riometer.
Relativity, 26
BELaY I, 60
    performance, 1,3,5,6,86,91,98,103,264,287,300,339,34!2
     transcaribbean, 15,161
    transatlantic, 7,86,106,134,137,143,194,196,229,235,2.51,434,448
    transpacitlc, 447,448
Relay (program ), 227.496
Reliability, 42,52,99,280,361
“Reliability Program Provisions for Space System Contractors” (NASA), 361
Religion and science, 432
Renaissance, 168
Rendezvous
    and docking,334,355,420
    choice of. 36.2lO
    earthmbit. 36,484
    Iunar-omit, 366
    problems, 355
    technique, 27.72,355.362,431
Republic Aviation Gorp., 38,176,253,264,397,398
Republican Conference (House), 315
Republican Party, 2.203
Rescue. 390,443
Research Advisory Committee on Biotechnology and Human Research ( m a ) ,
  163.
Research and development
    Armed services. 326
    DOD, 14
    engineering, 473
    Federal, 302,360,434,445,496
    industry. 1. 327
                %
    information distribntion, 308
    management, 36, 151,421,444,461
    planning, long-range, 3 2 470
                           4,
“Research and Development and the Federal Budget”, 360
Research and Technology Div. ( RTD) (msc),176,263
Research, basic, 28.31,110.370,4&0
Research Institute for Physics of Jet Propulsion (Stuttgart, Germany), 7
Research InPtitute of America. 363
Research Triangle Institute, Durham, N C ,281
                                        ..
Reston, James, 128,488
Reusable Orbital Modtlle-Booster and Utility Shuttle. See mxme.
Review or 8 p m e Research, 3
Revolution of Science, 472
Revolution, acientiflc, 167,472
Reynolds Electrical and Engineering Co., 3 2 , m
Reynolds Metal Co., 425
BFD-1 (re-entry flight demonstration-1) ,208,514
Rhode Island State Dept. of Public Instruction, 290
Rice, Theron J., 323
Rice Institute, 2,288,289
Richard Prentice Ettinger Medal, 408
Richard Prentice Ettinger Program for Creative Writing, 408
Rift (Reactor-in-Flight-Test) ,491
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 15.88,143,235,339,425
Riometer (relative ionospheric opacity meter), 335
Ritland, M/G 0 J. (UBAF) ,43,48
                 .
RLlO (rocket engine), 5,297,315,320,336,410
Roadman, B/G Charles ( u a m - M c ) , 61,180
Roanoke, Va., 285
Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award, 104
Robert H Goddard Memorial Dinner, 104
          .
Robert H.   Goddard Memorial Trophy, 104
Robert H. Goddard Scholarship, 104
Roberts, Dr. James E., 46
Roberts, Dr. Leonard, 23
Roberta, Walter Orr, 154
Robinson, Marvin W.,     326
Rochen. Herbert D.,   53
Rochester, N.Y.,200
Rochester, Univ. of, 26,172,213,228
Rockefeller Institute, The, 408
Rockefeller, Nelson, 3
Rocket, 271,273,362,387,405
    booster, 271
    engine, 267
          liquid-propellant, 185,320,336,448,453,462
          solid-propellant, 231,271,280,322
    ion, 437
    launch from aircraft, 335
    liquid hydrogen-oxygen, 450
     meteorological, 20,307,436
    nuclear, 461,486
    sled, 326
    aolar-powered, 36
     solid-propellant, 395, 407, 466
    sounding rocket, 72,222,263,273
     test stand, nuclear, 269
Rocket Center, W.Va., 1 5 :
                          6.
Rocket engine, solar hydrogen ( SOHB), 437
Rocketdyne Div. ( NAA),379,387
     F-1 (engine),6,42,97
    J-2 (engine), 53,423
     X-8 (engine), 428
    X-12 (engine), 428
Rockoon (balloon-launched sounding rocket), 30
Rogallo, Francis M.,  278
Rogallo, Gertrude S ,278
                     .
Rogers, Rep. Paul G., 367
Rohr Corp., 27
Roksonde (sounding rocket), 453
Rolls Royce, Ltd., 433
Roman, Dr. Nancy C ,  . 34,188
BOMBUS (Reusable Orbital Module-Booster and Utility Shuttle), 246
Rome Air Development Center (RADC) ,426
Rome, Italy, 16,86,89,100,257,375,389
Rome, Univ. of (Italy), 171
                                                                      583
Roosevelt, President Franklin D., 2 %
Roosevelt war years, 485
Rose, Dr. Frank A., 83
Rose Knot, 84
Rosen, Milton, 61.70
Rosetta Stone of the solar system, 150
Rosman. N.C., 248,402
Rotary Club, 156
Rothrock, Addison M , . 225,340,468
€totocraft (wealso Helicopter), 424
Roudebush, Rep. Richard L ,293
                             .
Roush, Rep. J Edward, 405
               .
Rovenger, Ronald, 472
Rover, Project (NASA), 89,485,486,488,4991
Rowe, Dr. Lynn B. ( Capt., USAF) ,186
Roy, Maurice M.,   330
Royal Aircraft Establishment, 112
Royal New Zealand Air Force, 209
Royal Radar Establishment, 63
Royal Society of New Zealand. 209
Royal Society (U.K.), 63
RS-70 (Valkyrie). 27.68, 84,380
                                            .
BTD. See Research and Technology Div. (AFSC)
Rubel, John H., 49,133,234,280
Ruina, Dr. J. P., 275
Rumsfeld, Rep. Donald, 35,298
Ruppe, Dr. H. 0 ..232
Rural Electric Cooperatives Association, 58
Rushworth, Maj. Robert (mu),                                     423,480,485
                                  137,189,194,246,256,277,283,387,
Rusk,Dean, 32,33,297,388
Russell, Sen.Richard B., 332,493
Ryan Aeronautical CQ.,220
Rye. U K ,140
       ..
S-IV (Saturn I stage) (eeealw Saturn I)
     delivery, 348,476
     engine, 320,336,475
     test, 297.304
     transportation, 18,143,324,451,486
S-6 (atmospheric structure satellite) (seealso EXPLOBEB xvn),110
S 1 (satellite). SeeOso-B.
 -7
553 (satellite). See UK-3.
S-61 (helicopter), 222
5-68 (Polar Ionosphere Beacon Satellite). See Polar Ionosphere Beacon Satel-
  lite.
S A 4 (see also Saturn I ) , 1 0
                              1
S A 4 (see ala0 Saturn I)
     launch, 476,477
     stage, 297,304,320,348
     teat, n,91,304
        See Strategic Air Command.
SAO.
Sacramento. Calif., 281,297,451
Saenger, Prof. Eugen, 7,140
Sagan, Dr. Carl, 228,315
Sage (5emi-Automatic around Environment), 42
Sahara, 350
St. Clair, Wade, 216
St. Louis Citizen’s Committee for Nuclear Information. 73
                e
St. Louis, Mo., 25, 234,345,366,432,475,478
St. Louie, univ. of., 281.345
St.Petemburg, ma., 434
Saint (program), 3 W
Sakurai, Dr. Jnn John, 142
Salinger, Pierre,460
Salisbury, Dr. John W , . 130,306407
Sallebert, Jacques, 137
                                INDEX

Salto di Quirra Test Range (Sardinia ) ,453
Salton Sea, Calif., 302
Saltonstall, Sen. Leverett, 41,482-3
Salzberg Lecturer, 379
SAM. See USAF School of Aerospace Medicine.
Samos (satellite), 471
Sampler, 328
Sampling Aerospace Nuclear Debris. See Sand, Project.
San Angelo, Tex., 323
San Antonio, Tex., 41,46,442,482
San Diego, Calif., 465
San Francisco Bay, 426
San Francisco, Calif., 56,107,111,321
San Jose, Cali., 104
San Jose dos Campos, Brazil, 177
San Marco floating launch facility, 68,148
San Marco, Project (Italy), 295
Sand, Project (Sampling Aempace Nuclear Debris), 328
Sanders, John C., 36
Sandford, John W.,    260
Sandia Corp., 23,328
Sandusky, Ohio, 95.153
Sanford, Terry, 483
Nmta Maria, 226
Santa Monica, Calif., 143
Santa Rosa Island, Fla., 499
Siio Paulo, Brazil, 95,140
Sardinia, Italy, 203,453
S m o f f , David, 10,216,247-248,262, 342,456
Saskatchewan, 282
Satar ( Satellite-Aerospace Research), 455
Satellite, 310,377
    artificial, 307,308
     defense, 394
     recovery, 287,465
    systems,222
    use3 of, 74,97,290,473
SatelliteAerospace Research. See Satar.
Sateliite, applications, 120,197,334435,473
Satellite, atmospheric density, 486-7
Satellite, balloon (see also EXPLOILEUXIX) ,486-487
Satellite, communications, 365,406,467,490
     cooperation, international, 107,416,493
    design, 362
    frequency allocation, 419
     future of, 10,47,91, 133, 139,171,227,247,285,267,312,446
    military use of, 426
    performance and durability, 287
     program, 120,171,214,282,304,340
    EBtD, @,67,90, 110,163,164,247,365,420,431
     results, 45,70,229,235,241,251,264,267,302,325,426,434,447,499
     systems, ll2,197,216-!2l7,247,269,271,299,417,440
     testing, 274,321
Satellite communications network, 358,425;   490
Satellite, geodetic, 308
Satellite, inflatable, 297,299,304
Satellite, ionosphere, 115
Satellite, Medium Altitude Communications ( MACS) . See Medium Altitude
    Communications Satellite.
Satellite, meteoroid detection, 43
Satellite, meteorological, 111,219,242,247,306
Satellite, military, 463
Satellite, navigational, 97, 126,224,280, 319-20,365,436
Satellite, nuclear detection, 299
Satellite, nuclear powered, 467
                                                                    585
                                   INDEX

Satellite, observatory, 4 6
                          3
Satellite, polar orbiting, 306
Satellite, radiation monitor, 256,283,281
Satellite, reconnaissance ,471
“Satellite Sanity-Lunar Lunacy”, 468
satellite Bituution R p r ,
                      e o t 2,14,ZlO,243,267
Satellite stabilization, 280
Satellite Test Center (Sunnyvale, Calif.), 237,307
Satellite, Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (ETADAX) (NASA), 402,475
Satellite, unidentified
    U.S., 283, 282
          launch vehicle
               Atlas-PLgena, 189,272,279,334,400,488,499
               Blue Scout,129.485
               scout. 258.267
               Thor-Able-Star, 357,464
               Thor-Age-, 5,14,118,163,202,239,242.256,279, 323,326,349,
                                                             292,
                 351,426,451,489,499
               mor-Agena (TAT), B,    406
          UEFi, 311, 357
    U S S B , 31
      ....
Satellite, weather, 156,344,365
    data exchange, 314
    future of, 53.112,219,365,43l, 448
    requirement, 24,420
    rewlta, 45,365
    use of, 100,107,282,319,361
“Satmos” satellite (France), 335
Naturduy Even- Poet, 201,243
saturduy Reuiero, 10
Saturn (planet), 52.86.114
Saturn (program), 72,182,320,324,366,400,451
Saturn, Advanced (a).        See Saturn V.
Saturn I, 514
    booster, 143,406,451,478,498
    capability, 110,408,433
    facilitiea, 335
    m h t , 4 3 475
             3,
    lamdl vehicle, 439
    aiage, 5243
    test, 7al.32
    UM! of, 4 , 4
             343
Saturn IB
    Lwoeter, 406,4ll, 486
    engine, 451
    equipment, 306
    facilities, 335
    launch vehicle, 439
Saturn V, 411,451
    booster, 271
    development, 405
    engines, 6,451
    equipment, 305,319,478
    facilities, 51,98,289,319,335,371,433,488
    stage, 68,131,335,411,486
    u8e of, 2 , 6 ,
              22 6w
Saturn C-1. See Saturn I.
Saturn C-1B. See Saturn IB.
Saudi Arabia, 344
Saundera, Joseph F ,. 58
Scandinavia, W
Scandinavian Committee for Satellite Telecommunication, 340
Scanner, Project ( RABA), 403
SCAT. see Aircraft, supersonic commercial air transport.
Scheer, Julian, 40,102,315,370,382,474
      R41-623 -
              3
              8
586                              INDEX

Scherer, Paul A., 448
Schieff, Prof. Leonard, ! 7
                         29
Schirra, LCdr. Walter M., 3r. (uSN),28,140,     228,238
    appearances, 32,33
    award, 465
    condition, 245,298
    flight, space, 26,344
Schjeldahl, G. C. Co., 304
Schlesinger, Arthur, 366
School of Aerospace Medicine (SAM). see USAF School of Aerospace Medicine.
School of Aviation Medicine (USN) (Pensacola, Fla.), 74
Schrader, James H.,   365
Schriever, Gen. Bernard A. ( USAF) ,296,487
    aeronautical systems, future, 338,479
    award, 324
    instrumentation, 176
    manned space flight, 98
    space, importance o f , 31,168,187,202
     Support Of NASA, 84
Schurmann, Carl W. A., 389
Schwartz, Dr. Sidney, 155
Schwarzchild, Dr. Martin, 76,78,160, 238,448
Schweickart, Russell L ,. 392
Science, 172,408,411,425,432,466
Science, 138,148,149,164,259,331,440,    454
Science and technology
    and study of humanities, 468
    future of, 456,470
    Government support of, 85,86,388,390,392.396,441
     national policy and goals, 332,424
    need for, 110,250
     plans and programs, 152,332,382
     requirements, 4 6 470
                     6,
Science and Technology Agency ( J a p a n ) , 436
Science and technology institutions
     Astroscience Center, 100
    New York, 3
    Pittsburgh, Univ. of,9
     Tennessee Space Research Institute, 95
Science DQeet, 260
Science, ffovemzment,       Ircformation, 8
Science Information Exchange, 382
Scientific Advisory Group (USAF o m ) ,278
Scientific Research Society, 352
Scientist
    and Congress, 463
    and engineers, 177,214,465
    as astronaut, 4,2 6
                      4
    challenge, 313
    emigration of, 50,63,79
     importance of, 290,250,402,444,468
     medical, 55
    quality, 162
    shortage of, 26,46,437
    use of, 50,105,159
    woman, 34
Scientists Institute for Public Information, 58
Scorpius (constellation), 493
Scott, Capt. David R. ( u ~ A F392
                                 ),
Scout, 89,168,182,197,297,324,335,407,428,454
    failure, 280,352
     launch, 208,258,280,299,357,486,507,511.514
    problems, 483
Screech, rocket engine, 448
Screvane, Paul R., 99
                                                               587
                                    INDEX

Seahorg,Dr. Glenn T ,
                   . 143,166,169,202,205,~,
                                         230,237,253,351,390,470,
                                                                47%
  4w
seagull,410
Seal, 397
Seamans, Dr. Robert C., Jr., 2l, 48,120,158,202,433
     award, l ,  a 365
     budget, 6 7 , s
     contracting, 134
     facilities. 118
     launch program, 436
     launch vehicle, 76,334
     personnel, 99,266,323,381
     program, lunar, 392
     program, space, 8.102
     programs, space, 8,15,245,347,369,439
Seattle Poet-Intelligencer, 114
Seattle, Wash., 59,94,324,448
Security, 334,375,381,461
Sedov, Prof. Leonid I., 378,481
See. Elliott M., Jr-28
seeds, 355
Seiff, Alvin, 497
Seismic data transmission, 353,465
Seismography, 465
Seitz, Dr. Frederick, 50,238,279,372,388,435
Self-hypnosis, 170
Seliger, Berthold, 177
Sellers, Robert C., and Associates, 311
Sembawang Xaval Air Station, Singapore, 4 2 3
Semi-Automatic Ground Environment. See Sage.
Semiannual Report to Congrem,Eighth ( HAEA), 82
Sentiannual Report to Congre88, Seventh (NASA), 465
Senegal, West Africa, 19
Sensor, !ZM, 310,341
Serebreynnikov. Lt. COL,453
Sergeant (missile), 230
Serpukhov, U.S.S.R., 220
Sert (Space Electric Rocket Test), 449
Sevareid, Eric, 217
Shabad, Theodore. 494
Shafer, Edward M ,  . 482
Shanghai, China, 415
Sharnov, V. V ,228
                .
Sharp, Dr. Edward R., 240
Sharp, Dr. Richard, 49%
Shawnee, Okla., 257
Shcheglov, Pyoter, 114
Shea, Dr. Joseph F .61,W.156,181,251,380,420,439
                     .
Shepard, Cdr. Alan B., Jr. (nsn),28,238,4BFi
Shepherd, Dr. L. R., 206
Shewmake, Glenn A, 281.
Sheilding, 471
Shiner, A. James, 233
Shklovskiy, I. S., 40
Shoal, Project (AEC),402
Shockley, William Bradford, 150
Shock waves, 494
Short takeoff and landing (Stol) See Stol.
Shotput (sounding rocket), 295
Rhrirer, Rep. Garner E., 306
Shternherg State Astronomical Institute (V.S.S.R.) ,40
Sidwell Friends School Forum (Washington, D.C.) ,45
Siepert, Albert F ,65
                   .
SIGMA 7 (see also MA&), 140,238
Sigma Xi, 125
588                                INDEX

Signals Research Development Establishment, 112
Silicate powders, 308
Silo launch, 283
Silver iodide, use of, 293,401
Silver Quill Award, 47
Silverstein, Dr. Abe, 7,99,100,450
Simons, Howard, 6,286,347,471,479,493
Simpson, Dr. George L., Jr., 40,92;102, 126,161,210, 278,382
Simulator, rendezvous-docking, 334
Simulator, space orbital, 171
Simulator, spaceship, 338
Singapore, 432
Singer, Dr. 5. Fred, 53,107,146,330
Sinton, Dr. W. M., 234
Sioux Falls, S.D., 140
S.I.P., Inc., 495
Siri, William F., 246
Sirons, Janis A , 362
                 .
Six, Robert F.,  367,410
Skifter, Dr. Hector R., 123
8KMB-1 (Hydroskimmer), 357
Skybolt (missile), 1,32,41,136,240
Skyhook, Project ( USAF), 30
Skylark (rocket), 77
Skywatch, Project (Weather Bureau), 226
Slayton, Maj. Donald K. (IJSAF), 28,389,420,446,465
Sled, rocket, 326
Sloan, James E., 61
Sloanaker, Russell M., 86
Slobodrian, Dr. Rodolf'o J., 213
Sloop, John L.,   129,154
Smith, C. R., 397
Smith, Ernie, 107
Smith, Dr. George B., Jr., 45,70,498
Smith, Madison B., 213
Smith, Sen. Margaret Chase, 18,159,173,188,191,231
Smith, Sheldon, 280
Smith, Wendell, 117
 Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, 32, 315, 399, 432,487,495
 Smithsonian Institution, 16,61,67,191,364
Smokey Joe, Project ( USAF) ,437
SMS. See Synchronous Meteorological Satellite.
 Smull, Dr. Thomas L K.,. 313
 Snap (Space Nuclear Auxiliary Power), 169,343,357,    455,467
Snap8,53,340
Snap-SA,360,437
Snap-50, 53
Snow,Sir Charles (C. P . ) , 250,403
Soaring Society of America, 481
Social science and scientists, 402
 Society of Aerospace Material and Process Engineers, 226, 438
Society of American Military Engineers, 122,385
 Society of American Travel Writers, 489
Society of Chemical Industry, American Section, 356
Society of Experimental Test Pilots, 359
 Society of Professional Engineers, 66
Sociologist, need for, 402
 Sodium airglow, 15
 Sodium-vapor experiment, 206,212, 222,443
 Sohier, Walter D., 452
 Sohigian, M. D., 170
 Sohio Research Center, 375
 SOHB. See Rocket engine, solar hydrogen.
 SOLABAD IV, 242,505
                                                                           589
                                        INDEX

Solar cell, 323,345,,346,432
    radiation damaigq 189, ZQ
    radiation edeecte, 455
Solar concentmtor, 437
Solarcorm. SeecOnnra.
Solar cyde, 436
Solar &pee, 18,273,nS,     332,339
Solar e-
       n,      437
Solar Hare. See Flare, solar.
sdar hydrugw rocket engine ( W E B ) .     (%e Rocket engine, solar hydrogen.)
Solar plasma h-eam,317,449
solar radiation, see Radiatioa, edsr.
BOIAB BADIATION I 87
                 ,
Solar 8irnulaaion. 180
Solar 8sseem, history of,149,355
Solaxwind. k W i n d , W a r .
Solid propellant, 34
    devdopment, 13, 14S
    rocket motor, 5,271,280,357,496
Solid Propellant Rockbt Confereace, 34
“Some Intenmtional aspects o Comrmonicatims Satdlite Systems”,
                               f
Sonic boom, 59,140,Zn,314,390
        see specinc opemtianal lvqui-
EoK
Sounding rocket
      experiment, 419
   -1
          Japan, 203,476
                                             8l8
                                              7 8,
                                               ,
                              60,63,70,  ? , 95, 107,110,111, 134, 168, 184,
          F T A ~ A14,30,50,58,
                   ,
                                       268, 3 6 %l,
                                             3,    388,388,391,410,429,434,469
            186, 188. 212,241,2-17,2fS,
                       286
          NAEA-IW~,
          New z€dan&#)9
          Sweden, 301
          URAF, 57
sooth America, 360.466
south Paciflq 44
South hint, Hawaii,414
Southern California, 32
Southern Governors’ Conference, 318
Southern Hemisphere, 495
          Inteastate Nnclear Board, 318
Souklmn~
Southern Mississippi, Univ. of, 254
Southern S t a b Work Conferw~ce,   ZZ5
Southwest Center for Advanced stndiea, 481
Sonthwest Community Hospital, 240
           C o n f ~ c on Arms cimt.roA 4 X
south*                  e                 4J
Southweat Research Institute, 4  6
Soviet Academy of M d c l Sciences, 130
                     eia
Sori& Academy of %ienaq 2,30,42,2l2,274,303,305,314,427,428
Soviet Air Force, 356
%vi& Armed Forces Day. 66,m
         hm,
Soviet            411
Soviet Millistry of commnnicatiq 245
Soviet Navy, 44
“Soviet Space Technology”, 116
Sowers, Maj. Robert S. (UBAF) ,209
swce (medium), 334
     exploration of, 45, 61, 117, ~32,264, 288, 305, 313, 328, 329, 3 2 346, 3.,
                                                                     4,       55
        359,388,379,413,446,452,464,470,477,482,486
      impedencei 342
           of, 314
    Ponution of, 19
    Study of, 476
    waker in, 432
        a  162,371,396,414,453,472,483
Space
Space and Information Systems Div. (Raytheon Co.) ,51
590                               INDEX

Space Business Daily, 84,368,383,399, 420,431
                                        400,
Space capability, 17,40,308,352,383,445,   461,462
Space capsule, 287,460
Space, challenge of, 153, 156, 160. 224,329, 354,358,363,421,460, 462.468
Space chamber, 1,110,275,280
Space, economic impact,438
    fallout, 169
    investment, 62,329,352,398, 455
                                  415,
    leverage, 111,356,
Space Electric Rocket Test (Sert). See Sert.
Space environmental conditions, 1,333,385,495
Space failures, 30,31,130,135,175,248
Space flight, 263,268,350,453
Space Flight Testing Conference (AIM), 98
Spaxte, impact. of, 87,11O,ll3,156,204,274,  414
Space Industry aagiStauce Symposium, Second, 289
Space, interplanetary, 293
Space law
    agreement on, 78,424,434,443
    and U.N.,142,145,177,464,477,482
    nature o , 427
              f
    need for, 40
    questions, 52
    ruling, 59
Space medicine. See Life ecience ; Bioscibnce.
Smce. militarv me of. ! 7 29
    manned fl&ht, 39,'114, 319,332
    ned for, 2 3,@, lsS, 221, 243,254,307,338,    363,418,430,
                                                             4.45,455,461
                ,
    objedivss, 25.35.63.64.71.79.254.287
    patrol, 77
    satellite, 137
    space station, 43,46,348
Space news, 272, 27  '8
Space N c e r Auxiliary Power. See Snap.
         ula
Space observatories, 365
Space Orientation Center, MEW, 115,499
Space, peaceful u k s of, 40,172,205, 219,349, 404
Space platfomq 305,355,421
Space, politics in, 355,358,374,389,400,416,417,418,427,455
Space, possibilities, 147,224,307,329,461
Space program, nati~ntil
    accompliphment, 4 4 47, 58,9 ,226, 249, 282,289,291, 319,321,345,352, 362,
                        .,        1
       373,446,453,473,484,498
    civilian, 302,301
    & of, 131, 142, 157,n5, 300,329, 335,3 9 360,363, 373, 374,383, 384, 422,
                                          6,
      423,430
    criticism, 19l,195,240,275,279,288,302,360, 396,403,421,442,445,470
                                                380,
   education, 290,372
    industry in, 289,372,373,435,446,466
    manpower, 237, 457
    m l t r ,39,72,l , a222,232,302,338,363,374,455,474
     iiay
    need, 18,46,125.128,191.206. 235.236.249.329.377.409.466
                                    85,142,149,159, k7,
    objectives, 8,13,14,65,66,78,79,                g4,     274,285,334,340,
      345,348,404,408,430,443,450
    pace of, 17,29,44,112,121,132,282,291,324, 383,416
   policy, 249,363.369,404.408,419
    prospects for, 18,52,224,232,234,316,329,379
    requirements, 46,267,395, 419,441
    support of, 262,269,368, 373,391,3M, 407,411,415, 458,4 5
                                                            8
   women in, 34,225,273
S a e race, 38,201,279,288,304,411,422,427,439,462,480
 pc
    meaning, 187,200,258
   moon landing, 6,274,302,402,401,~,    409,416,418
    need for, 48,200, 215,258,269
    rate of progress, 29,141,352,396,484
                                                                           591
"Space Race with U.S.S.R.", 141,276
Space Radiation Eff& Laboratory (NASA), 56,136,164,288,3a4,368
Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery Symposium,336,137
Space research, 162,484
s a e lwults
 pc
    artillcial radiation. 130
    flareq solar, 92,B
    medical, 20
    plasma. d r , 69
    proton, 95
    radiation bel@ 5 , 8w
    temperature, 47
    Venw, 69
    wind, 11
Space ecience, 67,159,302,381,484
Space, Science, and Urban Life Conference, 110.113
Space Science Board ( NAB-NE), 275,339
Space science building (Univ. of Calif.), 222
Space Science Summer Group, 234
Space Science Summer Study, 3
Space scooter,280
space station
    agreement, RASA--DOD, 391
    auxiliary m e r , 9
    designs, 22,43,46, T7,gS. 158,170,288,346
    development, 458
    escape ssstem, 383
    patent, 133
    plans, 82,239
    possibilities, 1% 481
    Program, 300
    leaearch, 74,288
space suit, 12,198,399,403
Space systems, 483
Space technology, 110,302,355,466
Space Technology Laboratories (STL), 184, 193,Zl9, 235, 237, 288, 275, 2'77, 281
Space travel
    equipment W n g , 268,337
    future, 316. 412
    nh&Brlea   tn,
     women in, 244,254.256
Space vehicle orientation, 278
 spaoecratt. 4 460   %
     contaminakq 173
      developmeat o , 365,361
                        f
     'envinrrrmemtal teee, 385
     lQzist&% study oc 292
     Protection, 340,34& 4 45
     U.S.S.R., 413,417, 418
Spacecraft Control Technology Laboratory       ( M W ) ,490
Spacecraft Research OBee and 1,aboratory               490
S p m f l i g h t , 116
Spaceship, 338,413
Spain, 33,191,197
Spanish Inquisition, 449
Sparkman, Sen. John, 323
Sparmir (reeearch rocket), 296
Specific operational requirement ( m u ) , 4
                                           %
                                           .
Spectrometer, 2'79,377,437,449
Spectrophotometer. photoelectric, 278
Spectrophotometric instrument, 2'79
spectroscopic techniques, 494
Speed brakes, 321
592                                INDEX

Sperry Gyroscope Go., 256,376,392
Sperry Rand Corp., 317,443
Sperry Utah Go., 353
Sphere, inflatable, 469
Spin-off from space research, 491
Spinrad, Bernard I., 179
R p i r i t of S t . Louis, 16,67
Spitzer, Dr. Lyman, Jr., Z14
Sporadic-E disturbances, 241
Sproul Observatory, 145
SPUTNIK I, 112,197,313,369,371,377,404,425,447,480,491
SPUTNIK IV, 59
SBI. See Stanford Research Institute.
SSBN (nuclear powered ballistic missile submarine), 263
866s. See Standardized Space Guidance System.
SST. See Aircraft, Supersonic Transport.
Stability and control, 244,321
Sta’bilization, attitude, 311
Stack, John, 2 3 3 W   5,
Staebler, Rep. Neil, 35
Stafford, Capt. Thomas E. ( USAF) ,28
Stagg Field (Chicago), 149
Stamp, postage, on space frogram, 353,486
STANDAN. see Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network.
Standard Oil Go. of New Jersey, 72
Standard Oil of Ohio, 84
Standardized Space Guidance System (886s) ,350
Stanford, Neal, 162
Stanford Research Institute ( SRI) ,123,143,218
Stanford Univ., 49,214,334,479
Star, %,E%,          116,151,160,278,281,317,448,481,493
STABAD, 130
Starfighter. See F-104.
Staffish Prime, 383
Staffish, Project, 106
 Stargazer, Project ( W A F ) , 130,142,150,154
Starlifter. See C-141A.
 Stasser, Bruce, 71
 State Astronomical Institute (U.S.S.R.),74,119
 State, Dept. ai,3,31,91,205,249,397
 State of the Union, 10
 “Statement of Purpose”, 496
 States-General (France), 37
 Statler, W.H.,         179
 Stead AFB, Nev., 298
 Steam-diffusion chamber, 315
 Stedman Hall of Science, Central Methodist College (Mo.), 334
 Steel, 4 1  9
 Steele, Lindell E., 65
 Stellar photography, 56
 Stellenwerf, Col. William A. ( USAF), 292
 Sterilization, space vehicle, 161,165,339
 Sternglas, Ernest J., 26
 Stevenson, Adlai E ,231,458,460
                            .
 Stevenson, Dr. Earl P., 491
 Stiff, Ray C.,Jr., 424
            See Space Technology Laboratories.
 STL.
 Stockholm, Sweden, 421
 Stockholm, Uciv. of (Sweden), 301. 419
 Stoddard, Dr. David H., 181
 Stoddard, Laurence, 18
 Stol (Short Take-Off and Landing), 6
 Stoller, Morton J., 38, 240
 Stone, John W., 157
 Stoney, William E., Jr.. 282
                                                                     593
                                      INDEX

storm,25,344,381,401
Storm Radar Data Procesor (Stradap),%
                                 Bureau). 293,401
Stormfurg, Project (Weather
s t o m Harrison, 378
Stradap. See Starm Radar Data Processor.
Strand,Kaj A . 327  a,
Strategic Air Command (SAC), 307,435,480
       award. 3M
       A l s l a w , 28.161, ! W 323,325
         ta,                  2,
       Minuteman, 3 9 -9,
       launch, 188, % 286,328
                        ,
       n nI, lannch, 30,314
          t
          a
strato-I&, Project, 30
S t r a t o c d m r . &eGQ".
Stratoliftm. SeeGW.
                             76,78, a, 8
Stratoecope I1 (balloon),            44
StlutmMLel%323
Strattw, Julius k,       3
streea, 4 01
Strikee
      Cape W a v e r a l , 147
      McDonnell Aircraft Carp., 14
      Memitt Island, 337
      Mississippi Test Operations,labor agreement, 411
      NASA Wallops Stintion, 325
      Nevada ' h m t Site,398
structures, 281,281,356,361,498
Struve, Dr. Otto, 131
stuttgart,   Germany,7,205,2ll, , n 4
                                 m
Submarine, 44,402,dl. 422
Submarine cable, 37
Submarine, Fleet Wallistic Missile. Bee FBN.
Submarine, Nudear Powered Ballistic Midle. See BSBA.
Subm (submarine rocket) (anti-submarine missile), 463
Sud-Aviation, 140,229
sueq U.&B, 1 7   3
Snitland, Md., %7,34l
SU
 Il
      corolla, 219,339,366
                 m,4
      iIliiu-          4
      v
      -,        388
                      m
      Pobmom,
      Wd-% 16&
      &tion,  397,406,419
    epota, 4 8
            3
     structure, 314,488,494
     temperatnre,488
Sundlun, Brace G., 91
Sunflower turboalternator unit,339
Sunnyvale, CXlii., 44IT
Supernovae, 155
Supersonic transpok see Aircraft, supersonic transport ( 8 S T ) .
Supersonic Transport Advisory Group (FAA), 253,211
Surge acceleratioq 487
Surgeon, flight, 56
Surgeon General, 466
fh4rUey Of Bu&?U?88 Plan8 for New Plant8 and Equipment, 1 1
                                                         8
Surveyor (program), 5,7,83,215,328,477,489
survival, m.   298,332
Swansan, Andrew G ,1 .%
Swarthmore aolIege (Pa1.145
Sweden, 133,197,295,301,340
     laMc4 388,477
Swedish Committee for space Reeearch, 478
Sweeney, Gen. Walter G., Jr. ( WSAF) ,483
594                                       INDEX

Sweet, Floyd, 481
Swift Current, Saskatchewan, 282
Swindal, Col. James B. (USAF), 202
Switzerland, 133,185
Sycamore Oanyon, Calif., 410
Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., 219
Sylvanus Atbert Reed Award, 22
Symington, Sen. Stuart,165,302,475
Symposium on Applications of the Theory of Functions in Continuum Mechanics,
  344
Symposium on “open space and peace”, 334
Symposium on the Physics of Solar Flares, 404
Symposium on Space Rendmvous, Rescue and Recovery, 336,337
Symposium on the Explomtion of Mars, 232
Synchrocyclotron, 56, 303
Synchronization system, 271
Synchronous Meteorological Satellite ( s ~ s )38                   ,
Synchrotron, 463,470
Syncom. (program), 60,171,362,459
SYNCOM I, 502,514
     launch, 54
     photos of, 72,79
      status, 57,60,341,495
SYNCOM 11,508,514
     control of, 284,297,312
     lam.&, 2 4      8
     performance,284,287,304,3l2,33.3,339,340,451,455
     transmission, 298,303,321,342,345,349,353,425
Syncom 0,455
Synon, a p t . Ceorge D. (nsco),220
Syracuse, N.Y., 187
Syracuse Univ., 379,445
Systems Program Management Survey, 1 9                         8
Syvertson, Olamce A., 336
Tabstone, Project ( ILBPA), 437
TAC. see Tactical Air Command.
Tactical A i r Command (TAC), 483
                                         .
Tactical fighter, experimental (TFX) See Aircraft, tactical fighter, experimental.
T a c t i c a l - s t r i k e - r e c o n ~ n ~ / s t r a t e gnuclear bomber. See T S R - ~ .
                                                               ic
TAD. See Delta, Thrust-Augmented.
Taft-Hartley Act, 23
Tahiti, 176
Takeuchi, Ambassador Ryuji, 447
Talaat, Dr. Mostafa, 488
Tallahassee, ma., 465
Tampa, ma., 434
Tape, Dr. Gerald F., 253
Tarrytown-on-the-Hudson, N.Y., 34
Tart, James J., 128
Taw
     spaceflight, 369,441,469
            COSMOS, 101,140,154,209,212,477,478
            LUNIE IV, 127,128,130
            MARS I, 40,58,63,96,192
            POLET, 420
            VOSTOK, 244
     space science, 114,153
     test, 271,452
        See Thor, Thrust-Augmented.
TAT.
Tawes, J. Millard, 273
Taylor, Prof. George W., 375
Taylor, Hal, 458
Taylor. John W. - ,484    R.. ~-~
Taylor; Gen. Maxwell D. (USA), 84
Tbilisi, U.S.S.R., 344
Teachers’ workshop, 325
                                                                  595
                                       INDEX

Teague, Rep. Olin E ,  . 350
Technology, 42.5,472,473
Technology Audit Corp., 473
Technology U t i l i i t i m and Policy Planning            278
                                                   (RAU),
!relKtite, s,104,365
Telecommunication systems, 355
Telecomputing Services, 387
Telephone, 162,447
Telemetry, ZSS, 274,281,297,380,409,443
     facilities, 308,355
Telescope, 274,395,399
     balloon-borne, 76,78,106,448
     monocular, 395
     radar-radio, 415,432
     useof, 274,305,388,405,410,493,494
Telespazio, 5
Television, 21,448
     channels, 114,151,154,372
     color, 98,131
     development, 162
     laser, 92
     manned space flight, 44,131
     moon, 129
     satellite, via, 354,447
Television Shares Management Corp., 62
Teller, Dr. Edward, 3,334,392,425
Telstar (program), 10, 22,4 5    9
             80,
TELBTAB I,
     development, 104
     performance, 1,2
     radiation, 23,41
     resultc.l, 1%47
TEIATAB II, !274,283,503,614
     launch, 184
     plans for, 98
     transmission, 186,189,241,267,270,304,325.354,389,447,449
Temperature measurement
     atmosphere, 20,61,71,208,208,489
     electron, 325
                     iuakritli, 3 X
                                 i
     ktiiiii ~tiifii~e
Tennessee, 95
Tennessee Space Research Institute, 95
Tennessee, Univ. of,95,423
Tennessee Valley Authority ( TVA) ,201
Tenney Engineering, Inc., 171
Tepper, Dr. Morris, 71,125
Tereselic, Richard, 297
Tereshkova, Valentina V.
     appearances, %2?,254,303,374,390,394
     award, 251
     flight, 241,244,246,256,259,268,372,484
     marriage, 376,417
     (SeeNikolayeva, Valentina V.)
Terhune, Robert W ,  . 157
“Test Ban, The”, 103
Test chamber, 453
Test stand, nuclear rocket, 271
TeterboroAirport ,N.J., 153
Tetrahedral Besearch Satellite (TBS) ,189,279,348,391,504. 509
                                                        .5M.
Texas, 381,426
“Texas and Telstar”,449
Texas A&M Oollege, 47
Texas Associated Press Managing Editors Association, 29
Texas Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association. 351
Texas, Univ. of, 234,481
       See Tactical fighter, experimental.
TFX.
                                    INDEX

“The Bug”, 176
“The Christian Revolution”, 389
The Ecomrniat (London ), 224
“The Mastery of S~ace”.’&tI
“The Practical and Impractical Uses of Space”, 425
Thermal electricity, 342
Thermal Radiation Airborne Program. See T r a p 111.
Thermochemical test, 333,495
Thermoelectric conversion technique, 455
“Thermonuclear converter”, 57
Thermonuclear research, 325
Thermonuclear world, future in, 409
“The X-15 Story”, 341
Thiokol Chemical Corp., 145,175,322,407,496
Thiry, Gen. Jean (France), 176
This Week, 89
Thom, Herbert C. S., 25
m o m , Dr. Karlheinz, 245
Thomas, Rep. Albert, 349,353,384
Thomas, David D., 239
Thomas D. White National Defense Award, 107
Thomas, N. E., 242
Thomas, Richard N., 222
Thompson, Dr. Floyd L., 90,163,2@5,235,251,308,366
Thompwn, Milton O., 235,331,4@4,450
Thompson Ram0 Wooldridge, 138,219,237,329,339
Thompson, Robert F., 254
mor (missile), 9,103,168,176,258,324,334,345
Thor-Able (booster ) ,258
 Thor-Able-Star (booster), 258,357,360,454,464,467,509,510,511
Thor-Agena (booster), 502,505,501,508,509,510,511,512
       launch
             a, 98,163,258,263,342,349,426,489
             D, 5,14,118,202,239,242,257,279,292,323,326,351,408,451,489,499
       use of by NASA, 334
 Thor-Delta (seealso Delta), 182,385,502,503,508,508,512,514
       launch, 54,119,184,247,258,284,449,489
 mor, Thrust-Augmented (TAT) (booster) (see also Thor-Agena), 395, 407
       launch, 72,124,406
 Thornton, A/2C Frank 0. (USAF) ,460
 Thrust vector control data, 327
 Thule, Greenland, 343
 Thumba, India, 11,443
 Thundenbird. 410
 Thurmond, Sen. Strom, 138
 T i b e 227
 Tidewater Science Congress. 90
                          -    ,
 Tikhov, G. A., 74
 Timerbaev, Roland M., 177
 mmers Aero Club ( NAA) ,484
 Times Herald (Newport New4 Va.), 242
 Tiros (program), 125,170,226,341,395
       contract, 52,219
       research, ZL9
       results, 72, 229,360
       value of, 367
 TIROS I, 118,150
 T I M 8 11, 147
TIROS V
 ~~ .     ..
    launch, 297
    perforiiiance, 72,118, 147,179,297, 344
TIROS VI. 344
    launch, 297
    performance, 72,118,242,297,302,391
    results, 344
                                                                          597
                                    INDEX

TIBoe VLI, 508,514
     launch, 297
     performance, 247,297,302,348
     use o ,371
           f
     8 m,489,512,514
m
Tischler, A. O ,262
               .
Tishler, Dr. Max, 356
Titan I (missile), 435
     iaunch, 30,57,175,220,276,314,324,344,433,452
Titan I1 (missile and booster), 9,40,164,286,491,495,499
     booster, 48
     Gemini launch vehicle, Z91,320,3Ss.  386,401,431,487
     instrumentation pod, 377
     launch, 4 , 57,59, 147, 1 188, 1W,
                              %            213, n ,
                                                 9 250,320,350, 415,427,476,481
                4
     performance, 377
     problems, 174,219,309
     propulsion system, 486
Titan 1 1 (booster), 46,57,68,16Z,
        1                            262,311
     booster, 66,436,490
     contract, 262
     W t , DOD,468
     launch, 473
     rocket engine, liquid,281,493
     rocket motor, solid-propellant, 280
Titov, L/C Gherman 8., 138,300
     award, 136
     condition of,365
Titov, Tamara, 350
Titov, Tanya, 350
TNT manufacturing facilities, 303
M a g o , 367
‘Today”, 7
TokaQ, Dr. G. A., 116
Tokyo,Japan, 164,194,227,287,341,389,447
Tokyo’s Institute o Industrial Science, 494
                     f
Tokyo Univ. Industrial Engineering Research Center (Japan), 476
Toll, Thomas A., 278
Tolabko, Col. Gen. Vladimir Fedorovich, 63
Tonopah, Nev., 23
Tonopah Test Rang-: Nev., 3  %
Toong, Dr. Tau-Pi, 50
Topeka,Kan., 86
Topographic data, 328
Top Rung 11, Exercise, 4 96
Torrey, Ray, 280
Tonsey, Dr. Richard, 156
“Toward the Or(bita1Launrh Facility”, 115
Town Meeting of the WorlC, 270,389
Toynbee, Arnold, 229
Tracking, 487
     Australian station, 325,464
     Ball Broe, -tern,   244
     deep space, m 4 3 ,e,rn
     Egyptian station, 319
     facilities, 308,335,426,475
     French network,298
     international network, 32
     Malagasy Republic station, 488
     optical, 4 , W 3
               46
     “Unified !+Band” method, 472,490
     U.S. station, 414,441,443
     U.S.S.R.moperation. 390
“Trackless Void: The U.S. Space Program Had Better Come Down To Earth”,
  193
TratEc control system, 377
598                               INDEX

Transistor, 150, 162, 357, 385
Transit (program), 87,115,129,428,454
TRANSIT 11, 87
TEANSIT V-B, 357
Transmitter, 35
Transonic flow theory, 368
Transonic wind tunnel, 297
Transpolar flight, 367
Transportation, 378,387,451,486
Transport, jet, 321
Trans-World Airlines (TWA) ,480
Trap 111 (Thermal Radiation Airborne Program), 498
Travelers Research Center, Inc., 287
Treaty, 297
Tregaron, 17
Trendex survey, 314
“Trends in Earth-tc+Orbit Transportation Systems”, 412
Treshnokov, A., 453
Trimpi, Robert L., 365
Trinidad, 367
Trippe, J u a n T., 299
TEE. See Tetrahedral Research Satellite.
Truman, President Harry S., 106,198,485
Truszynski, Gerald M., 309
Tsarapkin, Semyon K., 90
                                              nuclear bomber) (U.K.) ,462
      (tactical-strike-recr-naissance/strategic
~m-2
Tu-104 (aircraft), 417
Tu-124 (aircraft), 459
Tufts Univ., 179
Tullahoma, Tenn., 95, 341
Tungsten disenlenide, 216
‘Pupolev and Ilywhin teams, 379
Turboalternator (see also Sunflower), 339
Turbofan engine, 420,438
Turbulence, 222, 428
Turkey, 25, 168, 19’7
Tucson,Aria, 145
TV channel 3, 7, 372
TVA. See Tennessee Valley Authority.
TWA. See Trans-World Airlines.
Two-step Formal Advertising System, 430
Tymczyszym, Joseph J., 442
Typhon (missile), 427
Typhoon, 344
Typhoon Bess, 302
Typhoon Carman, 302
Tyuratam, U.S.S.R., 259
U-2 (aircraft), 74,194,371,415,418,437,441
U.A.R. See United Arab Republic.
ucu. See Calif., Univ. of (Los Angeles) .
Udall, Stewart L., 192
 UHF (ultra-high frequency), 490
U.K. See United Kingdom.
UK-3 ( S 5 3 ) ,231
Ulam, Dr. Stanislaw, 367
Ultra-high frequency. See UHF.
Ultrasonics, 32
Ultraviolet, 87, 280, 366
    light emission, 429
    radiation, 287,296,339,406,419,434,477
U.N. See United Nations.
UNOAST (United Nations Conference on Applications of Science and Technology),
  43.50
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientiflc and Cultural Organization),
  50,329
                                                                                 599
                                       INDEX

“Unified %Band”, 472
Union Carbide Gorp.. 62
Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics. See U.S.SX
Unitarian minister,358
united Airerait corp., 222 239,442
    Hamilton Standnrd Div., 387,408,489
    Pratt & Whitney Div., 320
United A.ir Lines, 194
United Arab Republic (U.A.R), 105,137,156,274,295,319
United Auto Workers Union,374
United Kingdom ( U.K.) ,143
    aircraft
         commercial jet,397
         Concorde, 3 320.367,379,ssO, 3 8 m
                                          9 ,410
                     %
         man-powered, 378
    astronomer, 481
    communications network, 425
    communications, s t l i e 107,122,197,235,416
                       aelt,
    cooperation, defense, a23
    moperation, space,5, 7 133, 295, 348
                            ,
    cosmic dnst, 443
    fright, 369
    House of Commons, 199,205,275
    Labor Party, 4 28
    launching, 487
    missile program, 311
    nnclear test-ban treaty,284,297; 350,388
    Parliament, 37,‘B3
    Polaris, 136
    satellite, 197,231
    satelliteobservation station, 433
                 m5
    scientist,
    meProgram. 91,112433
    Thor, 188
    threat to,m
                 33
    m-g,
United Nations (U.N. ,43,321,348,471,475
                    )
    and space,40,63,366,440
    charter, 347, 440
    Cornmitt* nn the Pesee@-l nee: & k t e r Sme
        Scientific and Technological S u b r n m i t t e e , 68,W, 112,145,159,
                                                                              172,177,
          195,200,219,221,328,329,424,434,443,457,464
    General Assembly, 162,342351,368,     369,381, 389,390,391,447,482
       Disarmament Committee, 388
       Political Committee, 388, 389,457,464
United Nations Conference on Applications of Science and Technology. See
  UNCABT.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization        See   UIPESCO.
United Press International (m),     144
United States (U.8.) (seealso appropriate agencies)
    award, 341
    budget, 3 0 373,390
               6,
    defense
         budget, 475, 485
        economy,485,486
         aort, 2E% 397,461,475
         installations, 477
    foreign policy, 394
    Government, 111,358
         criticism of,4 93
        research and development, 325,496
         sciencre and technology, 390,393,3%
    military, 475
    nuclear test-ban treaty, 284,337,338,350,389
    peace,381,394
600                                        INDEX

United States-Continued
      preparedness, 446
      security, national, 190, 215,216,221,237,334,356,375,404,409,466
       space capability, 352
       weapons ban, nuclear, 388
United States Information Agency (USIA),321
United Technology Center, 5,66,280,496
United Technology Corp., 68
Univac Div. ( Sperry Rand Corp.) ,317,443
Universe, 155,314
Universities, 272,273,274,278,456
       and space effort, 372
       importance of, 444
UPI. See United Press International.
Upper atmosphere, 282,301
Upper Mantle Project, 328
Upper Volta, 138
Uranus (planet) , 6
Urban renewal, 195,485
Urey, Dr. Harold C., 26,162,214,237,495
U.S. See United States.
USA. See U.S. Army.
U . 8 . Ammutics and gpace Activities, 29
           See U.S. Air Force.
USAF.
WSAF Aeronautical Chart & Information Center, 25,460
WSAF Aerospace Research Laboratories, 368,476
USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School, 426
USAF Ballistic Systems Div., 428,496
USAF OAR. sf~3      USAF office O Aerospace Research.
                                  f
WSAF Office of Aerospace Research ( USAF OAR), 278
WSAF School of Aerwpace Medicine (Brooks AFB, Tex.), 40,41, 42, 43, 44,45, 46,
  47,398,443,482
USAF School of Aviation Medicine (Brooks AFB, Tex.), 41, 46, 55, 361
U.S.Air Corps Training Center, Randolph Field, Tex., 268
U.S. Air Force (USAF) (see also Defense, Department of), 232,482,483,484
      AB’-Army-Navy program, 282
      abcraft, 321,438,44!2,492
      astronaut, 136,243,388
      award, 205,286,443
      biomedical support, 393
      budget, 499
       contract, 68,107,251,253,259,322,357,404,406,427,486,490,496
      exmriment. 16.56.332
      facilities, &&, 57,3(yI, 341,441, 467
       flight, 389, 427
      launch, 59,154,163,239
            missiles, operational, 28,30,53,72, 89,105,188,263,266,272,285,286,290,
              298.314.323.325.327.337.431.451.489
            probes, 38,91, &,418
                                       I    I    I   -




            R&D, 9, 25, 44, 57, 59, 62, 72, 77, 105, 148, 161, 163, 164, 173, 176, 181, 193,
              201, 202, Zl3, 220, 230, 239, 251, 257, 258, 276, 282, 320, 344, 345, 350,
              357,373,416,424,427,431,453,479,481,485,486
            satellite, 5, 14, 98,118, 129, 163, 189, 242, 258, 267, 272, 279, 282, 292, 323.
              326,335,346,349,406,426,451,464,486,489
            sounding rocket, 56,222
      management, 415,441
      NASA-USAF, 64,78,90,1%, 131,428,454,481
           ECHO 11,426
            Gemini, Project, 47,252,292,368,401
      nuclear test-ban treaty, 388
      pilot, space, 114
      report, 68,335,340
      research, 31,78,130,154,216,437
      rocket engine, 13,145,437
      satellite communications 133,180,185,187,193,212,406
     space,bcuster, 129,168
                                                                                  601
                                        INDEX

U.S. Air Force-Continued
     space effort, 39,167,199
      space station, manned orbital, 346
     spacecraft protection, 453
     telescope, radar, 415,431
     test, 216,222,337
     Thor, 9, 407
     Titan Tli, 451,466
     X-20,107,311
     X-21A, 203
U.S. Air Force Academy, 136,230
U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, 409
U.S. Army ( U S A ) , 29,88, i, 133,179,220, 430, 482, 483
                            !X
     contract, 380,429,478
     launch, missile, 57, 62, 70, 147, 161, 242, 263, 266, 272, 285, 318, 324, 351,
        399,415,442
     rotocraft, 424
     test, 220,399,483
U S . Army Satellite Communications Agency, 285
V.S. Board of Geographic Names. 4.    65
TTBCR. See U.S. Coast Guard.
C.S. Civil Service Commission, 100
U.S. Coast Guard (nsco),220,483
T.S.Congress, 419,445,475
     action, prior, 253,384, 401,407, 417
     criticism, 381,403,416,487
     Joint Committee on Atomic Energy
           Subcommittee on Research & Development, 421
     Joint Committee on Economics, 36
     joint session, 205,321,464
     opinion, 402
     report to, 222,272, 394,440
     science t technology, 441,466
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, 259, 277, 311, 315, 386, 404, 405, 464,
  478
     bills introduced, 239, 314
     bills passed, 255,277,325,337,474
     Committee on Appropriations, 168,376,377,384, 430
          Subcommittee on DOD Appropriations, 168
          Subcommittee on 1ndep.ndent QBces, $16, 171, Z??, 3 , 4%. 4-3,          474
                                                                    %
     Committee on Armed Services, 31, 63, 64, 68,83,286, 326,421
          Subcommittee on Military Appropriations, 242
     Committee on Government Operations, 337,434,435
          Subcommittee on Foreign Operations & Government Information, 210,
             301
     Committee on Interstate & Foreign Commerce, 247
     Committee on the Judiciary, 208
     Committee on Post Office and Civil Service, 298,401
     Committee on Rules, 286,298,325
     Committee on Science and Astronautics, 35, 43,48, 168, 245, 269, 272, 274,
        283, 286, 315, 322, 323, 370, 373, 377, 395, 445, 457, 462, 485, 497
          bills approved, 293.325
          bills introduced, 288
           hearings, 22, 26, 67, 70, 71, 77, 81, 82. 84,97, 99, 100, 101, 110, 118, 119,
             120, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 129, 133, 134, 137, 154, 169, 174, 178, 180,
             193,223,255,298
          Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition, 99,
             120,125,126,133,134,169,178,269
          Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, 97, 101, 110, 119, 121, 154, 174,
             180
          Subcommittee on NASA Legislative Oversight, 382
          Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, 322, 332, 388, m.
             424,496
          Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Terh-
             nology, 99, 100. 109, 118, 121, 122, 129, 133, 137, 240. 390. 392
     Seleet Committee on Government Research, 41-1
      741-623
602                                  INDEX

U.S. Congress, Senate, 77,266,311,337,379,464
     bills introduced, 41,60,135,174,229,310,425
     bills passed, 87, 257,302,325, 350,351,440,467, 474
     Commission on t h e Application of Technology to Community and Manpower
        Needs, 425
     Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 1 90, 99,158, 159, 161, 163,
                                                         ,
        167, 169, 173, 191, 209,231, 236, 27, 244, 283, 291, 293, 300, 319,322, 325,
                                           .8
        367,372,395,422,441, 444, 447, 466,485,490
     committee on Appropriations, 388,392,430,474
           Subcommittee on DOD Appropriations, 319
     Committee on Armed Services, 135,322,     493
           Subcommittee on Preparedness, 240,242,   247,491
     Committee on Commerce, 90,91,247,262
           Subcommittee on Aviation, 390,394,397,406,407
           Subcommittee on Communications, 59
     Committeeon Foreign Relations, 326,368,391
     Committee on Government Operations, 369,382
           Subcommittee on Investigations, 178,283
     Committee on the Judiciary, 135,174
           Antitrust Subcommittee, 45
     Committee on Rules and Administration, 310
     Committee on Small Business, 86
           Subcommittee on Monopoly, 92,93
           Subcommittee on Retailing, Distribution & Marketing Practices, 486
     confirmation, 161,253
     debate, 138,281,289,302,378,421,439,482
     Republican Policy Committee, 190,215,288
     resolutions, 198,467
      Select Committee on Technological Developments, 294,421
U.S. Geological Survey, 138,192,245
         See United States Information Agency.
USIA.
U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) ,483
          See U.S. Marine Corps.
USMC.
         See U.S. Navy.
USN.
U.S. Naval Academy, 197
U.S. Naval-Air Force Parachute Facility, 397
U.S. Naval Observatory, 327,436
U.S. Navy ( U S N ) ,lo, 367,483
     aircraft, 179,216,433
     aircraft carrier, 401
     cooperative program
           Army-Navy-Air Force, 282
           NASA-USN, 192,216,428
     launch
           missile, operational, 318
           missile, R&D, 46,50,59,134,137,a01,230,231,245,251,296,327,354,367,
             429,450
           satellite, 357
           sounding rocket, 481
     Pacific Missile Range transfer, 307
     reports, 401,463
      satellite, navigational, Transit, 87,115,129,454
     satellite stabilization, 280
     test, 419
     tracking stations (Pacific), transfer of. 441
1J.S. News & World Report, 142,253,298,305
USNS Eingsport, 60,80,284,296,302,321,339,345,349
usws Point Barrow, 486
USNS Tattriis, 486
U.S. Post Office, 485
U.S.S. Andrew Jackson, 367,402,429,433
U.S.S. Daniel Webster, 165
U.S.S. Kearsarge, 195,198
U.S.S.Nathan Hale, 10
U.S.S. Observation Island, 137,245,251,354,450
                                                                               603
                                      INDEX

U.S. Space Recovery Center, 296
U.S.S.R. (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), 111, 321,348,3 9 361, 362,374,
                                                                    5,
  418,423,448,459,486
    aircraft, supersonic transport, 379,417,422,492
     armament, 5,44,63,65,66,393,435,459
    award, 341
     bioastronautics, 355
    booster, space,9,157,181,452
    communications, 327,4 9    1
    cooperation, defense, 8, 142
     cooperation, space,89, 100,196,198,     205,212,227, 303,306,317,319,348.   358
         361,366,369,374,381,390,393,404,445,462,482,486,493
     cosmonaut, 172,218,     296, 303,347, 367.374,376,390,  394,417,469,471
    electronics equipment, 237
     I Q B Y , 332
    laser, 419
    launch
            co8~os,140,154.166, 298,392,427,433,477,487
                                  ZOS,
            LUHIK, 119.
            POLET, 413
            tegt,20% 21%   492
            VOBTOK, 241,244
     lunar
            exploration timetable, 333
            flight, manned, 374,378,389,401,            405,408. 417,418
                                              402,404,
            joint U.S.-U.S.S.R., 319, 336, 343, 344, 347,348, 350,351, 353, 354, 355,
                        365,366,368,369,376,381,386,390,393, 418,422,458,460
                358,3W,
    military installations, 464
     missile, antimissile, 423,432,470
    missile program, 294,310,400,422,434,435,462
    nuclear, 143
    nuclear test, 231,264,284,294,402
    nuclear test-ban treaty, 283,284,298,350,389
    nuclear test, effect of, 23,288
    observations by, 192,215
    parachutist, 267
    radioastronomy, 495
    record, air, 101
    rendezvous program, 324,355,358,413
    M3-Th. - ,2m. 4%
                   w
    reaourcea, 36
    rocket, 405,478
    satellite, 171,306,375,416,417,420,427,498
    Science, 172,389
    security, 334,375,376
    spa=
          craft, 428,429
           effort, 191, 2l5, 231, 243, 245, 254, 259, 408, 409,412, 461
          failures, 31,130,135,248,498
          flight, manned, 304,362,372,407,486,498
           law, 145,219,4 4 434, 443,464
                           2,
          plans. 83,107,138,141,171,232,246,254,276,337,439,        441,481
     space politics, 172,389,424,453
     space program, 116, 119, 124, 184, 197,221,227,234,246, 254, 286, 2&3,303,
        304,305,317,319,375,411,413,428,462,484
          results, 58,74,88,244,256,259,282,362,409,433,484
          tracking observatory, 274
     test, 192,202,214,453
     weapons ban, atomic orbital, 353,381,    388
7r.S. Standard Atm8phere, 1962.62
U.S. Steel Corp. See American Bridge Dir.
U.S.S. Thresher, 137,140
U.S. Weather Bureau,201,226,242,290,293,307,330,360,367
     facilities, 77, 341
     funds,B&D, 15,371
     reports, 68,' 041
604                                  INDEX

U Thant, U.N. Secretary Gen., 231,328,379
V-1 (missile), 177
V-2 (missile), 154,176,177
VAB. See Vertical Assembly Building.
Vacuum chamber, 333
Valley Forge Space Technology Center (GE),90
Van Allen radiation belt, 45,227,263,308,312,346,364,389,391
Van Allen, Dr. James A., 22,30,73,94,130,214,364
Van de Camp, Dr. Peter, 145
Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 307,441
    launch
        booster, 72,357
        missile
             B&D
                     Titan II,9,57,164,193,213,250,427,481
                operational, 325, 327, 337
                     Atlas, 28, 53, 72, 89,105,242,266,285,290,323
                     Atlas D, 239,379,431,486
                     Atlas E,  161,229
                     Atlas F. 105. 373.486
                     ~ - . - - , - -,
                          . ,~
                       -

                     Minuteman, 188,258,266,286,416,451,453,479
                     Titan I , 30,175,276,314,324,327,344,433,452
           satellite, 464,467, 486,489
                Atlas-Agena D, 486
                Blue Scout, 129
                scout, 258
                TAT, 98,406
                Thor-Able-Star. 357
                Thor-Agena B, 258
                Thor-Agena D, 5,14,256,326,349,426,451,489
           test, 389
Vanderbilt Univ., 47
VANGUARD I, 32,96,364,441
Van Niel, Dr. Cornelius B., 479
Van Nuys, Calif., 28, 453
          See Virginia Associated Research Center.
VAEO.
Variable thrust, 5
Vatican, 264
Vehicle, crawler-transport, 51,338
“Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit to Mars Orbit & Return”, 232
Vela (program), 299,389
“Velocities that a r e Possible in the Universe”, 192
Venus, 42,150,293,365,453,479
     knowledge of, 96,144,228
      landing, 361
      life on, 4,151,481
     manned flight to, 52,317,420,429,471
      surface, 9,179,454,479
      temperature, 69,75,144
      unmanned flight to, 8,259,441,498
Verification Instruction Program (VIP), 424
Vernov, S. V.,227
Veronique (rocket) (France), 392
Vershinin, Chief Marshal of Aviation Konstantin, 5
Vertical Assembly Building (VAB),        51,319
Vertical takeoff and landing (Vtol) aircraft, 282
Very low frequency. See VLF.
Veterans of Foreign Wars, 324
Vibration, 415,431,453,490
Vibration Test Laboratory ( M S C ) , 425
 Tictor, Walter K., 227
Vienna, Austria, 348,351
Villanova Univ.., 222
                    ---
Vilter, H. A G
             :.
        See Verification Instruction Program.
VIP.
Virginia Associated Research Center (VABC),        288.309
Virginia Engineering & Technical Societies,-251
                                                                             605
                                     mEX

Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI), 127,288,307
Virginia, Univ. of, 164,288
Viscount (aircraft), 397
Vishniac, Dr. Wolf. 49
Visibility, 395
Visscher, E. H., 133
Visual performance in space, 36
Vitro Laboratories, 76
FLF (very low frequency), 388,391,409,495
Voice of America, 15,21,321,365
Voinova, T ,. 267
Volcano Ranch, N.M.,79
“Volga” (balloon), 218
Von Beckh, Dr. Harold J., 50
Von Braun, Dr. Wernher, 7,313,432,433,478
     award, 6,214
     space benefits, 45
     space future, 188,452
     space program, 384,392,395,421
     space progress, 33,97
     U.S.S.R. space program, 6,157,478
Von Brentano, Dr. Heinrich, 270
Von Brmfin, Dr. Theodore, 107,176,185,220
Von Kfirmh Memorial Citation, 249
Von Tiesenhausen, Georg E”., 22,115
Voodoo. See NF-101,
Voronezh, U.S.S.R., 52
“Vostapollo”, 358
Vostok (program), 259,324,333,362
VOSTOK l ,300,350
         I
VOSTOK III & IV,9,119,304
VOSTOK V 241,243,244,245,372,505
          ,
                            506
VOSTOK VI, 241,244,3n,
Voyager (program), 5, 90, 132
      See Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
VPI.
V/Stol, 198,328,   338,419
Vtol (vertical t a k e d f and landing), 282,315
Vyenikov, V., 88
W.A. Benjamin, Inc., 260
won-me- 0 4
         .A, vr
*. UL”, *=.
Wagner, Robert, 208
Walker, Dr. Eric, 179
Walker, Joseph A.
   award, 281,393,465,484
    flight, 14,146,177,218,254,269,278,299,320,360
Wallops Station, Va. (NASA), 50,89,117,215,247,341,359,364
    launch, 280,352
         reactor, 168,208
         BFD-1 192, 208
         satellite, 258,267
         sounding rocket
              Aerobee, 95,156,247,409
              Aerobee 1508, 30, 123, 139, 184, 188, 268, 278, 280, 336, 351, 357,
                 391,429,434
              Aerobee 300A,146,280
              Argo D-4 (Javelin), 357,359
              Astrobee, 132
              Hopi-Dart, 7 1
              Nike-Apache, 60, 70, 87, 110, 134, 186, 208, 212, 272, 336, 382, 387,
                410.444.469
                     ,
              Nike-Asp, 58
              Nike-Cajun, 14,15,60,71,88,295,449,469
              ShotDut. 148.295
                          .~
    organization, 38i
    strikes, 325
Wall Street, 417
Wall B r e Journal, 47,162,378
       tet
                                       INDEX

Walton, Capt. John T. ( u a m ) , 209
Ward, Barbara, 224
Ward, Dr. Fred, 481
Warhead, 406,486,495
Warner, Dr. Dwain W., 74
Warren, Chief Justice Earl, 52
Warren, Dr. Charles R., 138
Warren, L/C Robert E. (USA), 60.80
Warsaw, Poland, 32,100,226,294
Washington, D.C., 1, 128, 186, 188, 194, 201, 202,206, Zl9, 226, 243, 278, 289, 321,
 358,361,368,402,434,448
    agreement, 136
    air route, 20
    communications, 327
    meeting, 6, 8, 13, 18, 24, 28, 45, 51, 53, 56, 64, 92, 99, 104, 136, 144, 147, 149,
      152, 155, 161, 164, 168, 175, 179, 186, 189, 192, 199, 207, 213, 229, 239, 245,
      249, 319, 324, 337, 338, 342, 343, 364, 369, 373, 377, 395, 396, 399, 404, 407,
      414,426,439,463,494
Washington (D.C.) Academy of Sciences, 64
Washington Daily News, 369,379,383
Washington Evening Star, 6,135,163,195,216,217,245,271,305,          372,376, 415, 417
Washington Post, 1, 66, 114, 179, 185, 216, 351, 359, 374, 376, 419, 471, 479, 493
Washington Sunday Star, 447
Washington Univ. (St. Louis), 171,234
Washington, Univ. of, 59,305
Wasielewski, Eugene, 352
Waste disposal system, 272
Water, 130,425,432
Waterman, Dr. Alan T., 468
Watson, Clarence E., 423
Watson, Mark S., 468
Watson, Thomas J., 369
Waves, electromagnetic, 89
WB-66 (Destroyer) (aircraft), 146
Weapons
    ban, nuclear orbital, 353,368,381, 388,389,391,482
         multi-megaton, 365
    biological, 475
    chemical, 475
    ground-to-space, 394
    military, 390
Weapons and Aviation Armament Corp. of Hamburg, 466
Weather
    action of, 150
    data exchange with U.S.S.R., 319
    forecasting, 147, 201, 481
    global, 390,461
    international exchange, 347,493
    systems, 290
Weather Bureau. See U.S. Weather Bureau.
Weatherwise,24
Weaver, Rep. James D., 35
Weaver, Rep. Phil, 404
Webb, James E., 131,188,222,448,493,498
    Apollo, Project, 386,407,433
    astronaut-scientist, 180
    award from, 16,38,334,365
    award to, 208
    budget, 15,67,81,215,316,374,376
    contract, 73,313
    Government research, 435
    industry and Government, 107,373,466
    lunar flight, joint U.S.-U.S.S.R., 365,402
    lunar program, national, 392,398
    Mercury Project, 372
    NASA-DOD, Gemini, 199,252
                                                                              607
                                     INDEX

Webb, James E.-Continued
   RASA Electronics Research Center, 106,272,484,495
   patent, 92
   regional development, 88,107,277
   science and Government, 85,86,113,298
   science education, 118
   space achievements, 3,426
   space cooperation, 16,303,305,413,460
   space, military role in, 31
   space program
        nature of, 144,149
        pace, 112,164,225,235,238,245,291
        support of, 158, 197, 240, 262. 269,300. 345, 3x3. 3R;s. 398, 404,405, 461.
           466,468
   supersonic transport, 284,394
   technology effects, 486
   Titan 111,436
    tracking, 32
   TV transmissions, 447
   university activities, 372
   Toice of America, 365
   World‘s Fair exhibit, 99
Weidner, Hermann, 328
Weightlessness, 41,49,50,355,386,411
Weinberg, Sidney J , 91
                     .
Weiss, Howard M., 96
Welch, B. E.,=
Welch, Leo D., 72,91,169,213,216,247,285,301,429
Welch, Nat, 318
Welch, W.    Va.,216
“Welding Tips”, 203
Wells College (N.Y.)   ,225
Welsh, Dr. Edward C., 471
    space race, 124,141,259
          lunar landing, 337,362,402
    U.S. space program, 13,159,267,373,414,441
          budget, 249,407
Wendorer AFB, Utah, 237,296
“We’re Ruuning the Wrong Race with Russia”, 288
..
Tp-• n . . : * rn--L-_.--
       ,.,-- I c L ~ ~ ~ ~ d‘u’iiiversiiy (see ais0 Beriin‘s institute for Elements
      yc.llLl
 of Space Travel), 6,7
West Coast, 374,416
West Ford, Project ( U S A F ) , 231,341,504
    interference with astronomy, 185. 187, 199,219
   launch, 189
    life, orbital, 73
   plans, 180
   results, 192,212
    secrecy,146
    test, 22
West German Bundestag, 270
West German Cabinet, 271
West Germany, 105,133,177,197,214,252,270,388,425,454,466
West Point Corps of Cadets, 39
Western Electric Corp., 380
Western Electronic Show and Convention, 321
Western Europe, 184
Western European Union, 459
Western Hemisphere Center, 396
Western Operations Office (woo)( N A B A ) ,258
Western Test Station, Ida., 343
Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory, 345
Westinghouse Defense Center, 309
Westinghouse Electric Corp., 2B, 213,216
Westinghouse Research Laboratories, 26
Westlake, Maj. Edward ( UEAF) ,275
                                       INDEX

Westland Co., 275
Wexler, Dr. Harry, 24
Wheat, surplus to U.S.S.R., 393
Whipple, Elden C., Jr., 185,367
Whipple, Dr. Fred L., 239,399,432
Whirlpool Corp., 273,361
White, Edward H., 11,28
White House, 8,19,72,134,205,321, 348,366,385,421,458,468,475
White House Office of Science and Technology, 21,388,400,424.442.444.483
White., M/G M. 8. (USAF). 222
   - - --,
White, Dr. M. Sarnuel,299  ~-

White, Maj. Robert M. (USAF) ,66,148,236
   award, 148,222,226
White, Robert M., 287,360
White Sands Missile Range ( WSMR) ,62,273,296,415,442
   flight test, 195,250,325
    launch
         missile, 57, 62,107, 147,161, 192, 230, 244, 258. 263, 266, 280, 285, 302,318,
            351, 366, 388, 477
         test, 257,399,414,423,431,479
White Sands, N.M., 42,107
White, L/C Stanley C. (UBAF), 45,139
White, William, 93
White, William C., 106,151
White, William S., 195,415
Whitehead, J. D., 241
Whitford, Dr. Albert E., 73
Whittaker three-axis gyro, 244
“Why Land on the Moon?”, 329
Wichita, Kan., 88
Wichita, Univ. of, 88
Wiener, Dr. Norbert, 479
Wiesner, Dr. Jerome B., n,73,234,388,421,424,430,440,444
    education, 108, 152
     Federal role in science and technology, 390
    Mars program, 21
    NASA-DOD, 93, 400
Wigner, Prof. Eugene Paul, 421
William and Mary, College of (Va.) ,235,288
William F. Patterson Memorial Award, 338
William L. Clayton Lecture, 179
Williams, Capt. Clifton C. ( USMG) ,392
Williams, Thomas, 59
Williams, Walter C., 1,22, 51,190, 245, 382, 398, 465
Williamsburg, Va., 224
Williamson, Capt. Gerald R. ( USAF) ,389
Wilson, Rep. Charles H., 240
Wilson, Dr. Glen, 490
Wilson, Dr. Raymond H., Jr., 191
Wilson, Rep. Bob, 2,478
Wind, 117
     measurement of, 11,20,60,71,212,301,469
     solar, SO, 310,406
     upper atmosphere, 206,208,222,443
Wind tunnel, 170,297,497
Wing, delta, 344,345
Wing, variable-sweep, 278,344,379
Wings Club (N.Y.), 194,442
Winter Conference on Military Electronics, 31
Wire grid, use of, 406
Wirth, Conrad L., 483
Witkin, Richard, 394
WMO. See World Meteorological Organization.
Wolf Trap, 49
Women, 34,279
                                                                            609
                                     INDEX

“Women in Aviation Week”, 273
Women’s National Democratic Club, 395
woo. See Western Operations Oftice (NASA).
Woodcock, Leonard, 91
Wood, Lysle A ,147
              .
Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, 295,311
Woomera, Australia, 77,112,497
World Affairs Council, 455
World arms race, 482
World Bank, 487
“World-Circling SpaceshipsSatellite Studies in the C.S. During the 1940’s’’.  104
World Conference on Space Communications (see also Conference on Com-
  munications Frequency Allocation (mu)) , 372.379,393,416
World Conference on World Peace Through Law, First, 265
World Federation o Scientific Workers &enter, 453
                      f
World Festival of Aeronautic and Space Films, 341
World Food Congress, 229
World Health Organization, 3 %
World Magnetic Survey (1965),   314
World Neteorological Organization ( W M O ) , 131,162,164,329,396
World’s Fair, 99
World W a r I, 257,396
World War 11, 303,396, 459,479,480
World weather watch, 164,396
World Woman’s Congress, 252
Wright brothers, 343,481,483,484
“Wright Brothers Day”, 467,482,483
Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet, 484
Wright Brothers Nemorial Trophy, 484
Wright Brothers National Memorial, 480
Wright Flyer, 480,483
Wright, Harold W., 286
Wright Memorial Museum, 343,481
Wright, OrvWe, 436,481,484
Wright-Patterson ~ F BOhio, 28,222,263,360,368,393,455,460,483
                        ,
Wright, Wilbur, 73, 225, 268,467, 481,484
WBMB. S e White Sands Missile Range.
          e
w w m and W W V L transmitting stations ( N B S ) . See Sational Bureau of
  Standards.
w&?tt,E. E., : : 214,332
              E ,
Wpdler, Rep. John W., 35,293,311
X-8 (engine), 428
X-12 (engine), 428
X-15 (rocket research aircraft), 122,364,384,404
    accident, 186
    air pressure measurement, 269
    altitude density measurement, 278
    award, 148,222,226
    climb angle measurement, 320
    computer, 38
    flight
         canceled, 189,381,485
         successful
              No. 1,137,161,196,254,269,277,374     404,431
              No. 3 14, 146, 177, 194, 218, 246. 2ri6, 278, 299, 320,360, 423, 450
                     ,
    Follow+m program, 161
    heat transfer, 146,281
    “High Range” proposal, 322
    inertial guidance system, 387
    modification, 404,427,480
    pilot, 235,281,283,386,480,484
    research, 137,189,237,281,328
    rocket engine energy measurement, 320
    stability test, ”7
    test, planned, 252
610                                          INDEX

X-19 ( V W ) , 282, 315, 499
X-20 (Dyna Soar), 19,31.90,94,107,114,255,404,126
    cancellation, 473,475
    pressure suit, 360
    recovery, 237
X-21A (aircraft), 146,183,203
X-22 V/Stol. 240
X-22A .(Vtol) ,242,315
X-258 (rocket stage), 486
XC142A (Vtol) ,315
XH-51A (helicopter), 179
Xenon gas, 293
X-ray, 87,92,388,397,478,493
Pagoda, Herman, 138
Yak-18P (aircraft), 101
Yale Univ., 125,414
Yardley, John F., 365
Yeager, Col. Charles E. ( USAF) ,66,186,459,475
Yeshiva Univ. (N.Y.), 481
Yomiuri, 224
Yorty, Samuel, 301
Yost, Ed, 140
Young, John D., 65,382
Young, LCdr. John W. ( USN), 28
Young, R. S., 228,294
Young, Robert B., 313,328
Young, Sen. Stephen M., 301,379
Youth Science Congress, 368
                      65
Youth Science Fair,
Youth Seminar on Flight, 480
Zander, Friedrich, 428
Za Rubezhom (Soviet magazine), 358
Zenoff,Judge David, 134
Zero gravity, 336
Zhukovsky Academy (U.S.S.R.) ,116
Ziegler, Prof. Carl, 422
Zimmerman, Charles H., 6,122,328
Zodiacal light, 257
Zonshayn, Prof. S., 192
Zuckert, Eugene M., 148,200,216,226
    NASA-DOD, 63,78,131
    nuclear test-ban treaty, 338
    space, 232,233,474
           283
    TFx,

      U. S G OV ER NM E NT PRINITNG OFFICE : 1964 0 - 741-623